                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   DYNAMIC DEBT MATURITY

                                              Zhiguo He
                                          Konstantin Milbradt

                                         Working Paper 21919
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21919


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2016




We thank Guido Lorenzoni, Mike Fishman, Kerry Back, Vojislav Maksimovic, Martin Oehmke, and
seminar audiences at the Kellogg Lunch workshop, EPFL Lausanne, SITE Stanford, LSE, INSEAD,
Toulouse, University of Illinois Urbana- Champaign, Ohio State Corporate Finance Conference 2015,
WFA Seattle 2015, and the Texas Finance Festival 2015 for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Zhiguo He and Konstantin Milbradt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Dynamic Debt Maturity
Zhiguo He and Konstantin Milbradt
NBER Working Paper No. 21919
January 2016
JEL No. G0,G01,G3,G30,G32,G33

                                               ABSTRACT

A firm chooses its debt maturity structure and default timing dynamically, both without commitment.
Via the fraction of newly issued short-term bonds, equity holders control the maturity structure, which
affects their endogenous default decision. A shortening equilibrium with accelerated default emerges
when cash-flows deteriorate over time so that debt recovery is higher if default occurs earlier. Self-enforcing
shortening and lengthening equilibria may co-exist, with the latter possibly Pareto-dominating the
former. The inability to commit to issuance policies can worsen the Leland-problem of the inability
to commit to a default policy—a self-fulfilling shortening spiral and adverse default policy may arise.


Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu

Konstantin Milbradt
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Rd #401
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
milbradt@northwestern.edu
1        Introduction

The 2007/08 financial crisis has put debt maturity structure and its implications squarely in the

focus of both policy discussions as well as the popular press. However, dynamic models of debt

maturity choice are difficult to analyze, and hence academics are lagging behind in offering tractable

frameworks in which a firm’s debt maturity structure follows some endogenous dynamics. In fact,

a widely used framework for debt maturity structure is based on Leland [1994b, 1998] and Leland

and Toft [1996] who, for tractability’s sake, take the frequency of refinancing/rollover as a fixed

parameter. Essentially, equity holders are able to commit to a policy of constant debt maturity

structure.

        This stringent assumption is at odds with mounting empirical evidence that non-financial firms

in aggregate tend to have pro-cyclical debt maturity structure (Chen et al. [2013]). What is more

relevant to our paper is the evidence on active management of firms’ debt maturity structure. In

a comprehensive survey by Graham and Harvey [2001], company CFOs claim that they manage

debt maturity to “reduce risk of having to borrow in bad times.” Indeed, a recent paper by Xu

[2014] shows that speculative-grade firms are actively lengthening their debt maturity structure—

especially in good times—via early refinancing. On the other hand, Brunnermeier [2009], Krish-

namurthy [2010], Gorton et al. [2015] document that financial firms were shortening their debt

maturity structure during the 2007/08 crisis. Our paper not only provides the first dynamic model

to investigate this question, but also delivers predictions that are consistent with these empirical

patterns.

        We remove the equity holders’ ability to commit to a debt maturity structure ex-ante, allowing

us to analyze how equity holders adjust the firm’s debt maturity structure facing time-varying firm

fundamentals and endogenous bond prices. To focus on endogenous debt maturity dynamics only,

we fix the firm’s book leverage policy, by following the Leland-type model assumption that the firm

commits to maintaining a constant aggregate face-value of outstanding debt. As explained later,

this treatment rules out direct dilution and gives the sharpest contrast of our paper to Brunnermeier

and Oehmke [2013].1

        In our model with a flat term structure of the risk-free rate, a firm has two kinds of debt,
    1
    This assumption is also consistent with the fact that in practice, most bond covenants put restrictions on the
firm’s future leverage policies, but rarely on the firm’s future debt maturity structure.


                                                        1
long and short term bonds. Equity holders control the firm’s debt maturity structure by changing

the maturity composition of new debt issuances: if just-matured long-term bonds are replaced by

short-term bonds, then the firm’s debt maturity structure shortens. In refinancing their maturing

bonds, equity holders absorb the cash shortfall between the face value of matured bonds and the

proceeds from selling newly issued bonds at market prices. If default is imminent, bond prices will

be low and hence so-called rollover losses arise for equity holders. These rollover losses feed back

to the default decision by equity holders, leading to even earlier default.2

    Endogenous default in the Leland tradition—ex-post equity holders are more likely to default

when facing low cash-flows—is widely accepted as an important mechanism to understand firm

default and credit risk.3 In our paper, it is the endogenous default that makes the endogenous debt

maturity structure relevant. If the default decision were exogenously given, then a Modigliani-

Miller argument would imply irrelevance of the debt maturity structure (Section 3.2). However,

equity holders are more likely to default if the firm has a shorter debt maturity structure and thus

needs to refinance more maturing bonds, as shown by He and Xiong [2012b] and Diamond and He

[2014] in a setting where the firm can precommit to its debt maturity structure. Intuitively, the

more debt has to be rolled over, the heavier the rollover losses are for the firm when fundamentals

deteriorate, thereby pushing the firm closer to default.

    As the equity holders’ endogenous default decision is affected by the firm’s debt maturity struc-

ture due to the aforementioned rollover concerns, debt maturity structure matters for both total

firm value as well as how this total firm value gets split among different stakeholders including

equity, short-term debt, and long-term debt. Because equity holders are choosing the fraction of

newly issued short-term bonds when refinancing the firm’s maturing bonds, bond valuations in turn

affect the equity’s endogenous choice of the firm’s debt maturity structure over time in response to

observable firm fundamentals. At the heart of our model is the analysis of the joint determination

of endogenous default, endogenous dynamic maturity structure and bond prices in equilibrium.

    We first focus on equilibrium behavior in the situation of imminent default. We show that, right

before default, equity holders are choosing an issuance strategy that maximizes the total proceeds
   2
     This rollover channel emerges in a variant of the classic Leland [1994a] model that involves finite maturity debt
(Leland and Toft [1996] and Leland [1994b]).
   3
     For example, the fact that firms default more often in recessions given worse economic outlooks goes a long way
toward explaining the credit spreads puzzle (Huang and Huang [2012], Chen [2010], Bhamra et al. [2010]).



                                                          2
of newly issued bonds, knowing that their issuance strategy will delay or hasten the endogenous

default timing slightly. Hence, in any conjectured shortening equilibrium in which the firm keeps

issuing short-term bonds and then defaults, it must be that hastening default marginally improves

the value of short-term bonds when default is imminent. As a result, when the debt recovery

value in default is independent of the endogenous default timing (e.g. if the firm’s cash-flows

are constant), then shortening equilibria are impossible—this is because fixing the recovery value,

defaulting marginally earlier always hurts bond values as we assume a coupon rate commensurate

with the discount rate.

       When cash-flows deteriorate over time and the debt recovery value is an increasing function

of the current cash-flows, then the endogenous default timing will affect the debt recovery value.

Consequently, a shortening equilibrium with earlier default can emerge. The earlier the default, the

higher the defaulting cash-flows, the higher the debt recovery value. In a shortening equilibrium,

right before default the value of short-term bonds gets maximized by maturity shortening, i.e., the

benefit of a more favorable recovery value by taking the firm over earlier outweighs the increased

expected default risk due to earlier default. Further, the equilibrium shortening strategy is indeed

welfare-maximizing in our special setting if only local deviations, i.e. delaying or hastening default

slightly, are considered.4 This seems to be an empirical relevant force in 2007/08 crisis during which

we observed debt maturity shortening together with earlier default. There, the fundamental value

of collateral assets deteriorated rapidly over time, and if default was going to occur in the near

term anyway, then bond holders gained significantly by taking possession of the collateral sooner.

       In terms of the general statement regarding welfare, the equity holders’ issuance decision in the

vicinity of default only maximizes the proceeds of newly issued bonds, but not the total value of

the firm. As a result, our equilibria in general feature a conflict of interest, which is best illustrated

when the equilibrium issuance strategy takes some interior value (as opposed to a cornered issuance

strategy in the above shortening equilibrium). In this situation, we show that short-term debt

holders prefer a marginal lengthening of the maturity structure, whereas long-term debt holders
   4
    In our stylized model with equal coupons for both long-term and short-term bonds, we show that in the vicinity
of default the equity’s shortening strategy indeed maximizes the value of the firm, in the “local” sense that delaying
default a bit by slightly lengthening the maturity structure hurts the firm value slightly. However, the firm value
typically is non-monotone in its survival time, so that a sufficiently long delay of default may lead to a higher firm
value. This explains why the lengthening equilibrium may Pareto dominate the shortening equilibrium when we are
away from default boundary. For details, see Section 6.1.



                                                          3
prefer a marginal shortening.

   Away from imminent default, starting at some initial state, i.e., today’s cash flows and debt

maturity structure, there often exist two equilibrium paths toward default. One is with maturity

shortening and the other with lengthening, in which the firm keeps issuing long-term bonds so its

debt maturity structure grows longer and longer over time. We highlight that these two equilibria

can often be even Pareto ranked: In our example, the lengthening equilibrium with a longer time

to default has a higher overall welfare and Pareto dominates the shortening equilibrium. The

multiplicity of equilibria emerges in our model without much surprise. If bond investors expect

equity holders to keep shortening the firm’s maturity structure in the future, then bond prices

reflect this expectation, self-enforcing the optimality of issuing short-term bonds only. Similarly,

the belief of always issuing long-term bonds can be self-enforcing as well.

   We compare these two equilibria with the equilibrium that would result from the traditional

Leland setup, in which the firm commits to an issuance strategy that keeps its debt maturity

structure constant over time. A flexible issuance policy should help equity holders avoid inefficient

(i.e., too early) default due to rollover pressure. However, the presence of the shortening equilibrium

shows the downside of such flexibility—as equity holders cannot commit to neither any particular

future issuance strategy nor default policy, equilibria can arise in which a self-fulfilling shortening

spiral hurts equity holders and may even lead to the shortening equilibrium being Pareto-dominated

by the Leland equilibrium.

   Our results are in sharp contrast to Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013] who show that equity

holders might want to privately renegotiate the bond maturity down (toward zero) with each

individual bond investor. The key difference is on who bears the rollover losses in case of unfa-

vorable (cash-flow) news in any interim period. In Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013], there are no

covenants about the firm’s aggregate face value of outstanding bonds, so that the rollover losses

when refinancing the maturing short-term bonds are absorbed by promising a sufficiently high new

face-value to new bond investors. This directly dilutes the (non-renegotiating) existing long-term

bond holders, i.e., their claim on the bankruptcy recovery value of the firm is diminished. In con-

trast, in our model equity holders are absorbing rollover losses through their own deep pockets (or

equivalently through equity issuance), while existing long-term bond holders remain undiluted in

default. Nevertheless, equity holders who are protected via limited liability will refuse to absorb

                                                  4
these losses at some point, leading to endogenous default of the firm. By shutting down the direct

dilution channel that drives Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013], our paper highlights a different and

empirically relevant mechanism: the interaction between the endogenous debt maturity structure

and endogenous default decisions which leads to what we term indirect dilution via the timing of

default and level of recovery.

       According to our model, debt maturity shortening is more likely to be observed in response to

deteriorating economic conditions. This prediction is consistent with the empirical findings cited

above: Xu [2014] shows that speculative-grade firms are actively lengthening their debt maturity

structure in good times, and Krishnamurthy [2010] shows that financial firms are shortening their

debt maturity right before 2007/08 crisis. We also show that shortening equilibria exist only

when the existing debt maturity is sufficiently short and/or the debt burden is sufficiently high.

Hence, our model suggests that conditional on deteriorating economic conditions, debt maturity

shortening is more likely to be observed in firms with already short maturity structures and/or

large debt burdens, straightforward empirical predictions that are readily tested.5

       We make two key simplifying assumptions which render the tractability of our model. First,

unlike typical Leland-type models, we rule out Brownian cash-flow shocks and assume a deter-

ministically decreasing cash-flow with a possible terminal large upwards jump. In Section 6 we

discuss how cash-flow volatility affects our results. Second, the firm commits to a constant ag-

gregate amount of face-value outstanding, which rules out directly diluting existing bond holders

by promising higher face value to new incoming bond holders following unfavorable news. As we

discussed, we rule out direct dilution to purposefully contrast our effect to that of Brunnermeier

and Oehmke [2013].6

       Debt maturity is an active research area in corporate finance. The repricing of short-term

debt given interim news in Flannery [1986], Diamond [1991] and Flannery [1994] is related to the
   5
     There is no obvious reasoning to think that these predictions are implied by the mechanism in Brunnermeier and
Oehmke [2013].
   6
     Dynamic models of endogenous leverage decisions over time are challenging by themselves. The literature usually
take the tractable framework of Fischer et al. [1989], Goldstein et al. [2001] so that the firm needs to buy back all
outstanding debt if it decides to adjust aggregate debt face value. This assumption requires a strong commitment
ability on the side of equity holders. Recently, Dangl and Zechner [2006] allow equity holders to adjust the firm’s
debt fact value downwards by issuing less bonds than the amount of bonds that are maturing, and equity holders in
DeMarzo and He [2014] may either repurchase or issue more at any point of time. In contrast to our paper in which
the firm commits to a constant aggregate face value but can freely adjust debt maturity structure over time, Dangl
and Zechner [2006] and DeMarzo and He [2014] instead assume that the firm can commit to certain debt maturity
structure but not its book leverage.


                                                         5
endogenous rollover losses of our paper. For dynamic corporate finance models with finite debt

maturity, almost the entire existing literature is based on a Leland-type framework in which a firm

commits to a constant debt maturity structure.7 To the best of our knowledge, our model is the

first that investigates endogenous debt maturity dynamics.8

       We abstract from various mechanisms that may favor short-term debt. For instance, Calomiris

and Kahn [1991] and Diamond and Rajan [2001] emphasize the disciplinary role played by short-

term debt, a force not present in our model. At a higher level, this economic force originates

from the firm side—rather than the investor side—just like in our model. This is because our

analysis is based on the underlying debt-equity conflict of endogenous default when absorbing the

firm’s rollover losses. In practice, debt maturity shortening can also originate from concerns on

the investor side, which is another highly relevant economic force. The best example is Diamond

and Dybvig [1983] in which debt investors who suffer idiosyncratic liquidity shocks demand early

consumption; He and Milbradt [2014] study its implications in a Leland framework with over-the-

counter secondary bond markets.9 Another related paper is Milbradt and Oehmke [2015] which

shows how adverse on the funding side impacts a firm’s debt and asset maturity choice.

       Admati et al. [2015] and DeMarzo and He [2014] are two recent papers that concern themselves

with the inability of a firm to commit to any future leverage policies. They show that there is a

leverage ratchet effect: as the firm cares about current bond proceeds, but not about the value

of bonds issued some time ago, the firm’s incentives are tilted towards issuing more current debt.

In equilibrium, the firm always keeps issuing more debt, thereby increasing potential bankruptcy

costs. In the dynamic setting of DeMarzo and He [2014], (exogenous) debt maturity plays a role

in that shorter maturity disciplines this behavior by reducing the mass of old bond holders each

period.

       Our paper is also related to the study of debt maturity and multiplicity of equilibria in the
   7
      For more recent development, see He and Xiong [2012b], Diamond and He [2014], Chen et al. [2014], He and
Milbradt [2014], and McQuade [2013]. For another closely related literature on dynamic debt runs, see He and Xiong
[2012a], Cheng and Milbradt [2012], Suarez et al. [2014].
    8
      Our model nests the Leland framework (without Brownian shocks) if we assume that both long-term bonds and
short-term bonds have the same maturity. In Leland [1994a] the firm is unable to commit not to default. Introducing
a fixed rollover term in Leland [1994b] with finite debt maturity makes the outcome of this inability to commit worse
as default occurs earlier the higher the rollover. We show that introducing a flexible maturity structure with an
inability to commit might further worsen this default channel, even though a priori the added flexibility would seem
work in equity holder’s favor to move closer to the first-best welfare maximizing strategy.
    9
      Often, these models with investors’ liquidity needs only establish the advantage of short-term debt unconditionally,
while our model emphasizes the endogenous preference of short-term debt when closer to default.


                                                            6
sovereign debt literature, in which models are typically cast in a dynamic setting (e.g., Cole and

Kehoe [2000]; Arellano and Ramanarayanan [2012]; Dovis [2012]; Lorenzoni and Werning [2014]).10

Like us, Aguiar and Amador [2013] provide a transparent and tractable framework for analyzing

maturity choice in a dynamic framework without commitment. They study a drastically different

economic question, however: there, a sovereign needs to reduce its debt and the debt maturity

choices matter for the endogenous speed of deleveraging. By making a zero-recovery in default

assumption, that paper also excludes a direction dilution channel. In contrast, in our model the

total face value of debt is fixed at a constant, and the maturity choice trades off rollover losses

today versus higher rollover frequencies tomorrow.

    Due to challenging identification issues, there are very few empirical papers documenting en-

dogenous debt maturity management in a systematic way. On the bank loan market, Mian and

Santos [2011] show that creditworthy firms actively manage the maturity of their syndicated loans

in normal times. As a result, the liquidity demand from these creditworthy firms becomes counter-

cyclical, as they choose not to refinance when liquidity costs rise. Xu [2014] instead focuses on the

public corporate bond market, a market that our paper more readily applies to. Xu [2014] shows

that speculative-grade firms are those that display a pro-cyclical pattern in early refinancing and

maturity extension, which complements the findings in Mian and Santos [2011].

    After laying out our model in Section 2, we study the key incentive compatibility condition

and preview the economic mechanism in Section 3. We solve the model by working backwards:

Section 4 characterizes the equilibria in the neighborhood of the default boundary, and discusses

when shortening can arise. Section 5 characterizes the equilibria that arise further away from the

default boundary. Section 6 covers welfare and provides further results, and we discuss empirical

predictions and provide concluding remarks in Section 7. All proofs are in Appendix A.
   10
      Arellano and Ramanarayanan [2012] provide a quantitative model where the sovereign country can actively
manage its debt maturity structure and leverage, and show that maturities shorten as the probability of default
increases; a similar pattern emerges in Dovis [2012]. As standard in sovereign debt literature, one key motive for the
risk-averse sovereign to borrow is for risk-sharing purposes in an incomplete market. Because debt maturity plays
a role in how the available assets span shocks, the equilibrium risk-sharing outcomes are affected by debt maturity.
This force is absent in most corporate finance models–including this paper–that are typically cast in a risk-neutral
setting with some deep-pocketed equity holders (a la Leland framework).




                                                          7
2         Model setup

2.1        Firm and Asset

All agents in the economy, equity and debt-holders, are risk-neutral with a constant discount rate

r ≥ 0. The firm has assets-in-place generating cash flows at a rate of yt , with


                                       dyt = −µy (yt ) dt, and µy (y) ≥ 0.                                           (1)


with µ0y (y) ≥ 0.11 Thus, yt is weakly decreasing over time. Our later analysis emphasizes that debt

maturity shortening occurs only when yt decreases strictly over time. This captures the economic

scenario in which the firm is facing deteriorating fundamental, just like the episodes leading to

the 2007/08 financial crisis. Because most evidence of debt maturity shortening is documented in

these episodes, condition (1) is a particularly relevant scenario for our theoretical investigation of

endogenous dynamic debt maturity.

         There is also a Poisson event arriving with a constant intensity ζ > 0; at this event, assets-

in-place pay out a sufficiently large constant cash-flow X > 0 and the model ends. This “upside

event” gives a terminal date for the model and can also be interpreted as the realization of a growth

option.12

         The above formulation allows for the cash-flow rate yt to become negative (e.g., operating

losses). Since yt is decreasing over time, when yt takes negative values it might be optimal to

abandon the asset at some time even in the first best case. Denote this optimal abandonment time

by Ta . Denote the arrival time of upside event by Tζ . Then, given the cash-flow process yt , the

asset value is                          "Z                                                           #
                                               min(Ta ,Tζ )
                                                              −rt                            −rTζ
                            A (y) = E                         e       yt dt + 1{Tζ <Ta } e          X .              (2)
                                           0

         The firm is financed by debt and equity. When equity holders default, debt holders take over the

firm with some bankruptcy cost, so that the asset’s recovery value from bankruptcy is B (y) < A (y).

Throughout we assume that B 0 (y) ≥ 0 as well as B 00 (y) ≥ 0, i.e., the firm’s liquidation value is
    11
     The key results of the paper will be for the two specifications µy (y) = µ and µy (y) = µ · y.
    12
     The upside event is introduced to give equity holders an incentive to keep the firm alive for some range of negative
yt . This will play a role when we link B (y) to the underlying cash-flows, as in Section 4, but is not of relevance
beforehand.




                                                                  8
weakly increasing and convex in the current state of cash-flows. In Section 4, we connect B (y) to

the unlevered firm value A (y), and the optionality of abandonment naturally gives the properties

required of B (yb ).


2.2      Dynamic Maturity Structure and Debt Rollover

2.2.1      Assumptions

We aim to study the dynamic maturity structure of the firm while maintaining tractability. The

firm has two kinds of bonds outstanding: long-term bonds whose time-to-maturity follows an

exponential distribution with mean 1/δL , and short-term bonds whose time-to-maturity follows an

exponential distribution with mean 1/δS , where δi ’s are positive constants with i ∈ {S, L} and

δS > δL .13

       Maturity is the only characteristic that differs across the two bonds. Both bonds have the same

coupon rate c and the same principal normalized to 1. To avoid arbitrary valuation difference

between two bonds, we set c = r which is the discount rate. We abstract away from tax-benefits

of debt in the most part of this paper, but they could be easily accommodated. This way, without
                                                                 rf
default both bonds are “risk-free” and have a unit value, i.e., DL  = DSrf = 1.

       To focus on maturity structure only and to minimize state variables, we assume that the firm

follows a constant “book leverage” policy. Specifically, following the canonical assumption in Leland

[1998], the firm rolls over its bonds in such a way that the total promised face-value is kept at a

constant normalized to 1. Implicitly, we assume that debt covenants, while restricting the firm’s

future leverage policies, do not impose restrictions on a firm’s future maturity. This assumption is

realistic, as debt covenants often specify restrictions on firm leverage but rarely on debt maturity.

We further assume equal seniority in default to rule out any other direct dilution motives. Then,

in bankruptcy, both bond holders receive, per unit of face-value, B (y) as the asset’s liquidation

value. Throughout, we assume that


                                      B (y) < Dirf = 1, for i ∈ {S, L} .                                        (3)
  13
    Thus, bonds mature in an i.i.d. fashion with Poisson intensity δi > 0. An equivalent interpretation is that of a
sinking-fund bond as discussed in Leland [1994b, 1998].




                                                         9
which implies a strictly positive loss-given-default for bond investors while equity recovers nothing

in bankruptcy.

       For our paper, the essence of constant “book” leverage is that it rules out direct dilution—more

future face-value issuance reduces the recovery value in default for each unit of face-value held by

bond investors. As explained later in Section 6.3, this direct dilution effect is the economic force

behind Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013], and by shutting this off we are highlighting a different and

novel channel, something we term indirect dilution. We discuss the relation to Brunnermeier and

Oehmke [2013] at length in Section 6.3, and show robustness of our results to potential deleveraging

in Section 6.2.


2.2.2      Maturity structure and its dynamics

Let φt ∈ [0, 1] be the fraction of short-term bonds outstanding. We also call φt the current maturity

structure of the firm.14 Given φt , during [t, t + dt] there are m (φt ) dt dollars of face-value of bonds

maturing, where

                                         m (φt ) ≡ φt δS + (1 − φt ) δL .                                      (4)

We have m0 (φ) = (δS − δL ) > 0; intuitively, the more short-term the current maturity structure is,

the more bonds are maturing each instant. We restrict the firm to have non-negative outstanding

bond issues so that the maturity structure is restricted to φ ∈ [0, 1]. We discuss this assumption in

Section 6.2.

       Under the constant debt face value assumption, the firm is (re-)issuing m (φt ) dt units of new

bonds to replace its maturing bonds every instant. The main innovation of the paper is to allow

equity holders to endogenously choose the proportion of newly issued short-term bonds, which we

denote by ft ∈ [0, 1],15 so that

                       dφt
                              =           −φt · δS           +          m (φt ) ft        .                    (5)
                        dt                | {z }                        |   {z   }
                                  Short-term maturing            Newly issued short-term
  14
     The assumption of random exponentially distributed debt maturities rules out any “lumpiness” in debt maturing,
which is termed “granularity” in Choi et al. [2015]. As another interesting dimension of corporate debt structure,
debt granularity is related to but different from debt maturity structure.
  15
     We assume that there is no debt buybacks, call provisions do not exist, and maturity of debt contracts cannot
be changed once issued. We discuss a larger possible issuance space f ∈ [−fL , fH ] allowing for some debt buybacks
in Section 6.2.



                                                        10
Consider constant issuance policies that take corner values 0 or 1, i.e. f ∈ {0, 1}. Suppose that

f = 1 always, so that the maturity structure is shortened; then φt = 1 − e−δL t (1 − φ0 ), so that

over time, the firm’s maturity structure φt monotonically rises toward 100% of short-term debt.

Similarly, if the firm were to issue only long-term bonds, i.e., f = 0 always, then the maturity

structure φt would monotonically fall toward 0% of short-term debt.

   Let fss (φ) be the issuance fraction that keeps the maturity structure constant, given by

                                                       φδS
                                     fss (φ) ≡                    ∈ [φ, 1] .                            (6)
                                                 φδS + (1 − φ) δL

Then, the firm is shortening (lengthening) its maturity structure for f > (<) fss (φ). For later

reference, this (constant) issuance policy fss (φ) also gives us the benchmark case of Leland [1998]

in which equity holders commit to maintain a constant debt maturity structure.


2.3     Rollover losses and endogenous default

In Leland [1998], equity holders commit to rolling over (refinancing) the firm’s maturing bonds by

re-issuing bonds of the same type. In our model, the firm chooses the fraction of short-term bonds

f continuously amongst newly issued bonds. Let DS (φt , yt ) and DL (φt , yt ) be the bond-prices

offered in the competitive market. Per unit of face value, by issuing an ft fraction of short-term

bonds, the equity’s net rollover cash-flows are


                   ft DS (φt , yt ) + (1 − ft ) DL (φt , yt ) −               1
                                                                             |{z}          .
                   |                  {z                   }
                       proceeds of newly issued bonds             payment to maturing bonds


Each instant there are m (φt ) dt units of face value to be rolled over, hence the instantaneous

expected cash flows to equity holders are


            yt     − |{z}
                       c   +    ζE rf     + m (φt ) [ft DS (φt , yt ) + (1 − ft ) DL (φt , yt ) − 1].   (7)
           |{z}                 | {z }
                    coupon
                                            |                          {z                          }
      operating CF           upside event                      rollover losses




                                                         11
We call the last term “rollover losses.”16 The third term “upside event” is the expected equity

payoff of this event, E rf ≡ X − Drf = X − 1 > 0, multiplied by its instantaneous probability, ζ.

       When the above cash flows in (7), net of the “upside event” expected flow, are negative, these

losses are covered by issuing additional equity, which dilutes the value of existing shares.17 Equity

holders are willing to buy more shares as long as the equity value is still positive. When equity

holders—protected by limited liability—declare bankruptcy at some time denoted by Tb , equity

value drops to zero, and bond holders receive the firm’s liquidation value B (yTb ) as their recovery

value at default.

       The two state variables, yt and φt , give rise to two distinct channels that expose equity holders

to heavier losses, leading to endogenous default. The first cash-flow channel has been studied

extensively in the literature (Leland and Toft [1996], He and Xiong [2012b]). For a given static

maturity structure φt and thus a constant rollover m (φt ), when yt deteriorates (say, yt turns

negative), equity holders are absorbing (i) heavier operating losses (the first term in (7)), and (ii)

heavier rollover losses in the third term in (7), as bond prices DS and DL drop given more imminent

default.

       Novel to the literature, the endogenous maturity structure φt also affects the equity holders’

cash-flows in (7). As indicated in the “rollover losses” term, φt enters the rollover frequency m (φt )

as well as the endogenous bond prices Di (φs , ys )’s. First, as m0 (φ) > 0, a shorter maturity structure

today implies an instantaneously higher rollover frequency m (φ), which amplifies the rollover losses

given bond prices. Second, as we will show below, a future path of increasing φ lowers bond prices

DS and DL today as equity holders tend to default earlier given shorter maturity structure. These

two forces jointly give rise to heavier rollover losses in (7), for a given cash-flow state y.

       The above discussion suggests that there exists a default curve (Φ (y) , y), where the increasing

function Φ (·) gives the threshold maturity structure given cash-flow y at which equity holders

declare default. We will derive Φ (·) shortly. In equilibrium, the firm defaults whenever the state

lies in the bankruptcy (or default) region B = {(φ, y) : φ ≥ Φ (y)}.
  16
     Equity holders are always facing rollover losses as long as c = r and B (yTb ) < 1, which imply that Di < 1. When
c > r, rollover gains occur for safe firms who are far from default. As emphasized in He and Xiong [2012b], since
rollover risk kicks in only when the firm is close to default, it is without loss of generality to focus on rollover losses
only.
  17
     The underlying assumption is that either equity holders have deep pockets or the firm faces a frictionless equity
market.



                                                            12
2.4     Equilibrium

The equilibrium concept in this paper is that of Markov perfect equilibrium, with payoff-relevant

states being (φ, y) ∈ S ≡ [0, 1] × R.


2.4.1    Strategies and payoffs

The players in our game are equity and bond holders. At any given state (φt , yt ) ∈ S, the strategy

of equity holders is given by {f, d} where f : S → [0, 1] is the issuance strategy, and d : S → {0, 1}

gives the default decision, with d = 1 indicating default. The evolution of the exogenous cash-flow

state yt is given in (1), and the evolution of the endogenous state φt is affected by the issuance

strategy f (φt , yt ) as in (5). The default region B ⊂ S is the region where d = 1. As default is

irreversible, the default time is given by Tb ≡ min {s ≥ 0 : ds = 1}; or, equivalently, it is the first

hitting time that the state (φt , yt ) hits the default region B. Hence, given the equity holders’

strategy {f, d}, there will be an endogenous mapping from the current Markov state (φt , yt ) to the

(distribution of) future default time Tb .

   The strategy of bond-holders can be described by their offered competitive prices for long and

short-term bonds, i.e., DS (φt , yt ) and DL (φt , yt ), given the state (φt , yt ) ∈ S. We assume here

that bond-holders always offer prices for both bonds, even though there may be only one of the

two bonds sold in equilibrium.

   Perfect competition amongst bond-holders implies that their offered bond prices will be the

discounted future bond payoffs, which is simply the coupon c until some stopping time that results

in a terminal lump-sum payout. This stopping time is the lesser of the default time Tb , in which case

there is a lump-sum payoff B (yTb ), the random upside even time, Tζ , and the random maturity

time of the individual bond, Tδ , the latter two featuring a lump-sum payoff of 1. Denote Tg ≡

min {Tδi , Tζ } where g indicates the “good outcome” with full principal repayment. Then, we have

the bond holders’ break-even condition for either bond i ∈ {S, L}:

                             "Z                                                                                        #
                                  min{Tb ,Tg }
                                                     −r(s−t)                    −rTb                            −rTg
        Di (φt , yt ) = Et                       e             cds + 1{Tb <Tg } e      B (yTb ) + 1{Tb >Tg } e
                              t
                             "Z                                                                           #
                                  Tb
                                       −(r+ζ+δi )(s−t)                              −(r+ζ+δi )Tb
                    = Et               e                   (c + ζ + δi ) ds + e                    B (yTb ) ,              (8)
                              t




                                                                 13
where the second expression just integrates out the good outcome event Tg = min {Tδi , Tζ } occurring

with intensity δi + ζ.

    The payoffs to equity holders are given by the discounted flow payoffs in (7), until Tb when they

receive nothing in default:

                    "Z                                                                                                           #
                           Tb                                                                                             
                                −(r+ζ)(s−t)                    rf
E (φt , yt ) = Et               e                 y − c + ζE        + m (φs ) [fs DS (φs , ys ) + (1 − fs ) DL (φs , ys ) − 1] ds .
                       t
                                                                                                                           (9)

Here, we have integrated out the upside event Tζ , so that equity holders payoffs are as if receiving

ζE rf per unit of time until Tb . Also, notice that the bond prices offered by bond-holders (i.e., bond

holders’ strategies) enter the value of equity holders via the rollover term.


2.4.2     Markov perfect equilibrium

Definition 1. A Markov perfect equilibrium in pure strategies of our dynamic maturity choice

game is defined as a strategy profile of equity-holders and bond-holders with {f, d, DS , DL } : S 4 →

[0, 1] × {0, 1} × R+ × R+ , so that the state evolutions are given by (1) and (5), and

   1. Optimality of equity holders. The issuance strategy {f } and the default decision {d}

        maximize (9) given any state (φ, y);

   2. Break even condition for bond holders. Given the issuance strategy {f } and the default

        decision {d} which jointly determine the equilibrium default time Tb , bond prices {DS , DL }

        satisfy (8).

    We pay special attention to the class of equilibria in which equity holders are taking cornered

issuance strategies.

Definition 2. A cornered equilibrium is an equilibrium where equity holders set either ft = 0 or

ft = 1 always. An equilibrium with ft = 1 always is called a shortening equilibrium (SE), and an

equilibrium with ft = 0 always is called a lengthening equilibrium (LE).

    As an example what does not constitutes an equilibrium, suppose that we conjecture an LE in

which equity holders are lengthening until default, i.e. f = 0 until a default time Tb . Consequently,

bond investors offer corresponding bond prices Di ’s in (8) based on this conjectured Tb . Suppose,


                                                                     14
however, that the offered prices incentivize equity holders to instead follow an SE path, i.e. keep

issuing short-term bonds with fˆ = 1 today and in the future, with a different default time T̂b due
               n    o
to a different φ̂s evolution. If this different resulting default time T̂b implies different bond prices

D̂i 6= Di using (8), then the conjectured LE is not an equilibrium.

    As a Markov perfect equilibrium, we need to specify strategies that are potentially off-equilibrium,

which still are themselves equilibria of the resulting subgame. More specifically, on and inside the

bankruptcy region B, the bond values equal the recovery value Di (φ, y) = B (y), while equity hold-

ers immediately default d (φ, y) = 1 so that Tb = 0. Further, in the survival or continuation region

C = S \ B we impose the additional refinement that given a deviation, bond investors “pick” the

continuation equilibrium that is closest to the original equilibrium in terms of default time Tb , which

allow us to use local deviations for the equilibrium construction (as we imposed gradual changes

by making the adjustment rate f bounded). This refinement is similar in nature to off-equilibrium

“beliefs” that treat deviations as mistakes, and are thus very much akin to a trembling-hand re-

finement. For example, suppose that all investors expect the firm to always shorten the maturity

structure in the future and then default at a certain time. A deviation today of lengthening then

does not alter the belief of bond investors that in the future the firm will always keep shortening

and default, if indeed for the slightly perturbed state today always shortening in the future is still

an equilibrium.



3     Incentive Compatibility Conditions and Endogenous Default

We study the key incentive compatibility condition for the endogenous issuance strategy taken by

equity holders, and explain the importance of endogenous default. Throughout, we assume that the

equity value function E (φ, y) and two bond value functions DS (φ, y) and DL (φ, y) are sufficiently

smooth that they satisfy the corresponding Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations.18
   18
      We show f has to be continuous in the state-space by the IC condition in the proof of Lemma 6, implying equity
value is C 1 . Fleming and Rishel [1975] Chapter IV, Theorem 4.4 shows that the value function being a C 1 function
is a sufficient condition for the solution of the HJB equation to give the optimal control of the problem.




                                                        15
3.1     Valuations and incentive compatibility condition

3.1.1    Valuations

Bond values solve the following HJB equation where i ∈ {S, L}:


                 rDi (φ, y)        =      c
                                         |{z} + δi [1 − Di (φ, y)] + ζ [1 − Di (φ, y)]
                                       coupon
                 |       {z   }                 |       {z       } |        {z       }
               required return                      maturing           upside event
                                                            ∂                     ∂
                                       +[−φδS + m (φ) f ]     Di (φ, y) + µy (y) Di (φ, y) ,                          (10)
                                                           ∂φ                    ∂y
                                          |                      {z              }   |       {z           }
                                              maturity structure change                   CF change

Equal seniority implies that in default Di (Φ (y) , y) = B (y). Later analysis involves the price wedge

between short- and long-term bonds, which is defined as


                          ∆ (φ, y) ≡ DS (φ, y) − DL (φ, y) with ∆ (Φ (y) , y) = 0.


We will later show that in our baseline setup we have


                                          ∆ (φ, y) > 0 for φ < Φ (y) ,                                                (11)


i.e., short-term bonds have a higher price than long-term bonds away from the default boundary.

Intuitively, short-term bonds are paid back sooner and hence less likely to suffer default losses

compared to long-term bonds.

   For equity holders who are choosing f endogenously, their valuation can be written as the

following HJB equation

                                                             h                  i          ∂
           rE (φ, y)          =        y−c             + ζ E rf − E (φ, y) + µy (y)           E (φ, y)
           |    {z   }                 | {z }            |            {z        }          ∂y
        required return           CF net coupon                  upside event
                                                                                     |      {z        }
                                                                                         CF change
                                                                                                             
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                                  m (φ) [f DS (φ, y) + (1 − f ) DL (φ, y) − 1]               
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                          
                                                  |                            {z                    }       
                                                                                                              
                                                                    current rollover losses
                                          
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
                                  + max                                              ∂                            .   (12)
                                            +
                                   f ∈[0,1]                      [−φδS + m (φ) f ]    E (φ, y)               
                                                                                    ∂φ
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                              
                                          
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
                                          
                                                                 |             {z               }            
                                                                                                              
                                                  maturity structure change affects future value
                                                                                                             




                                                             16
Here, the last term uses the evolution of firm’s maturity structure in (5). At default, equity is

worthless, which yields the boundary condition E (Φ (yb ) , yb ) = 0.


3.1.2     Optimal issuance policy and incentive compatibility condition

As indicated by the optimization term in (12), equity holders are choosing the fraction f of newly

issued short-term bonds to minimize the firm’s current rollover losses, but taking into account any

long-run effect of changing the maturity structure on their continuation value. Let Eφ (φ, y) ≡
 ∂
∂φ E   (φ, y) and define the Incentive Compatibility (IC) condition for equity as


                                   IC (φ, y) ≡ ∆ (φ, y) + Eφ (φ, y) .                             (13)


Due to linearity of (12) with respect to the issuance policy f , we have the following bang-bang

solution:                                
                                             1    if IC (φ, y) > 0
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                    f=     [0, 1] if IC (φ, y) = 0 .                              (14)
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                            0    if IC (φ, y) < 0

   In general, issuing more short-term bonds today (say f = 1) lowers the firm’s rollover losses

today, as short-term bonds have higher prices than long-term bonds. This just says that ∆ (φ, y) > 0

in (13) in general favors issuing more short-term bonds. However, issuing more short-term bonds

today makes the firm’s future maturity structure more short-term (higher φ). This has two negative

effects: first, it increase the firm’s future rollover losses (higher m (φ)); second, as shown shortly,

it drives the firm closer to its strategic default boundary. Both hurt equity holders’ continuation

value, leading to Eφ < 0 and hence pushing the IC towards long-term bond issuance. In Section 3.2

we show that the first effect just involves value neutral transfers between equity and debt holders;

it is the second effect of endogenous default that drives our analysis.


3.1.3     Endogenous default boundary

We assume that, as in Leland [1994a], equity holders choose when to default optimally in a dynam-

ically consistent way, i.e., equity holders cannot commit ex-ante to some default policy that may

violate their limited liability condition.


                                                   17
       In our model with deterministically deteriorating cash-flows, it is easy to show that equity

holders default exactly when their expected flow payoff in (7) hits zero from above.19 Suppose

that equity holders default at φ = Φ and defaulting cash-flow y = yb ≡ yTb . By equal seniority in

default, we have Di (Φ (yb ) , yb ) = B (yb ) for i ∈ {S, L}, so that the equity’s expected flow payoff

(7) at default becomes independent of f :


                                      yb − c + ζE rf + m (Φ) [B (yb ) − 1].                       (15)
                                                        |         {z          }
                                                            rollover losses

Equating the above term to zero, and solving for the default boundary Φ (yb ), we have

                                            "                          #
                                       1    yb − c + ζE rf
                         Φ (yb ) =                         − δL , with Φ0 (yb ) > 0.              (16)
                                   δ S − δL   1 − B (yb )

Let us define ymin and ymax by Φ (ymin ) = 0 and Φ (ymax ) = 1; we have ymin < ymax . Then, as

φ ∈ [0, 1], we know that all admissible bankruptcy points (Φ (yb ) , yb ) have yb ∈ [ymin , ymax ]. We

map an example bankruptcy boundary in the left panel of Figure 1, with ymin and ymax indicated

by vertical lines.

       As we will emphasize in Section 3.2, an upward sloping default boundary Φ0 (yb ) > 0 implies

that firms are more likely to default with a shorter maturity structure. The intuition is clear in

(15): The higher the Φ, the shorter the maturity structure, the heavier rollover losses the equity

holders are absorbing. As a result, equity will default at a higher cash-flow state.

       Finally, on the default boundary Φ (yb ), some issuance policies may pull the firm away from

the boundary. We restrict our attention to the situation in which this never occurs, which requires

a sufficiently large (downward) drift µy (yb ). The left panel of Figure 5 in the Appendix, and

the related discussion in Appendix A.2, provide more details. Importantly, this assumption yields

tractability and uniqueness of equilibria in the vicinity of the boundary. Intuitively, it restricts

the flexibility of the firm in changing its maturity structure relative to the change in the recovery

value—cash-flows or recovery value are assumed to change relatively faster than the speed at which

the firm can change its debt maturity structure, a reasonable assumption in reality.
  19
       For a formal argument with smooth pasting conditions, see Lemma 4 in Appendix A.2.




                                                        18
3.1.4        Valuations in (τ, yb ) space

For ease of analysis and comparison to the literature, we introduce a change of variables from (φ, y)

to (τ, yb ) where τ is the firm’s time-to-default, i.e., τ ≡ Tb − t where Tb is the firm’s endogenous

default time and yb is the defaulting cash-flow. In Section 4 we will analyze the sign of IC (φ, y) in

(13) in this new space, i.e., IC (τ, yb ), especially when τ is close to zero.

    Denote yτ and φτ as the cash-flow and the maturity structure with τ periods left until default.

Given the ultimate bankruptcy state (φτ =0 = Φ (yb ) , yτ =0 = yb ), the equilibrium path (φτ , yτ ) is

essentially a one-dimensional object indexed by time-to-default τ , with yb operating as a parameter.

It is natural to solve the model in the state space of (τ, yb ): Working our way back from the default

boundary to derive the equilibrium of the game. As we show later, the transformed state-space also

greatly helps us illustrate the model intuitions in Section 4.3. For details of the one-to-one mapping

between (φ, y) and (τ, yb ), as well as the closed-form expressions for bond values and equity value,

see Appendix A.1.


3.2     Why endogenous default is important

Before we discuss the equilibrium in detail, we highlight the role played by endogenous default in

the mechanism underlying our model. Endogenous default is at the heart of Leland-type models,

and the key contribution of our model is to study the joint determination of equity holder’s issuance

strategy f , the maturity structure φ, and the default decision Tb .


3.2.1        Exogenous default – MM and irrelevance of the issuance strategy

As a benchmark, suppose that the firm defaults at an exogenously fixed time Tb (and thus a fixed

yTb ), so that we are switching off the impact of the maturity structure φ on default; the logic applies

even to random Tb , as long as it is independent of φ. Following the Modigliani-Miller logic, we can

calculate total firm value V by simply summing up the discounted expected cash-flows from t to

Tb , i.e.,
                               Z   Tb
                         V =            e−(r+ζ)(s−t) (ys + ζX) ds + e−(r+ζ)(Tb −t) B (yTb ) .
                               t




                                                            19
Further, from (8) we recall that bond prices are affected by Tb only (i.e., independent of f or φ

directly), i.e.

                           Z    Tb
                    Di =             e−(r+ζ+δi )(s−t) (c + ζ + δi ) ds + e−(r+ζ+δi )(Tb −t) B (yTb ) .
                            t


As Tb (and thus yTb ) is fixed exogenously, all agents are risk-neutral and share the same discount

rate, we can derive equity as a residual value (recall φt is the fraction of short-term bonds; also

note that future debt investors always break even when purchasing newly issued debt)


                                            E = V − [φt DS + (1 − φt ) DL ] .                                     (17)


Now we can map this result back to Section 3.1.2: Taking the derivative of (17) with respect to φ,

noting that V , DS and DL are independent of φ, yields an identically zero IC condition everywhere

(13):

                                 Eφ = − [DS − DL ] = −∆ ⇒ IC = Eφ + ∆ = 0.

       Intuitively, as V and Di ’s are independent of the debt issuance policy,20 the residual equity

value must be independent of the issuance policy as well. What is going on is that any cash-flow

gain that stems from changing the maturity structure today is exactly offset by an equivalent

change in rollover losses in the future, once we fix the default policy/timing.21 This is simply a

Modigliani-Miller result: if cash-flows are fixed (here, the reader should think of the recovery value

B (yTb ) simply as a fixed terminal cash-flow at t = Tb ), then in a friction-less world, firm value is

invariant to the financing (be it static or dynamic) chosen by the firm. We conclude that once the

firm has an ex-ante commitment ability to a default time, the inability to ex-ante commit to a debt

issuance path becomes irrelevant.

Remark 1. The MM irrelevance result for all stakeholders of the firm continues to hold under

generalizations of the setup: First, adding volatility to the cash-flow process, say in the form of a

Brownian motion, can be accommodated as cash-flows to debt-holders are still fixed if the default
  20
     As the total face-value of bonds is fixed, there is no direct dilution. But, there is no indirect dilution either,
because the exogenous default time and equal seniority imply that the value of each bond is fixed.
  21
     Even with exogenous default timing, a higher current φ (t) indeed leads to a lower equity value today. However,
equity holders are indifferent in their issuance strategies, as their trading gains by changing maturity structure
(reflected by ∆) would exactly offset the equity value decrease.


                                                              20
timing is exogenous. Second, non-constant aggregate face-value of bonds can be accommodated as

long as older bonds have seniority. This is one of the key differences to Brunnermeier and Oehmke

[2013]; in that paper, the debt face-value varies over time, and expected recovery value of bonds

varies with the outstanding face-value by the underlying equal seniority assumption. See Section

6.3 for a detailed discussion.


3.2.2   Endogenous default – issuance strategy interacts with default decision

We now introduce endogenous default by equity holders as summarized by the default boundary

Φ (y). In contrast to the previous case with exogenous default timing, the issuance policy f affects

the maturity structure φ, which in turn affects the default time Tb . Given that bankruptcy is costly,

the economic surplus of the firm is varying, and the above irrelevance result ceases to hold.

   For illustration, an always shortening path, i.e., f = 1, will feature default at an earlier time

(recall the dynamics of y are unaffected by the choices of the firm) than say an always lengthening

path, i.e., f = 0. This is because with f = 1, the firm’s debt maturity structure φt grows, whereas

with f = 0 it shrinks. Then given an upward sloping default boundary Φ (y), the state pair (φt , yt )

hits the boundary (Φ (y) , y) earlier in the lengthening case. The right panel of Figure 1 illustrates

these two possible paths, with “SE” showing the f = 1 path, and “LE” showing the f = 0 path.

   Let us preview two economic mechanisms highlighted in our results. First of all, the issuance

policy f and the resulting maturity structure φ not only affect the size of pie (i.e., the total firm

value), but also how the pie is split (among equity, long-term bond, and short-term bond holders),

all indirectly via its impact on Tb through endogenous default. Equity holders are choosing the

issuance policy f to maximize their own value only, and in equilibrium it is likely that these equity-

value maximizing issuance policies are adversely affecting other stake-holders, leading to a lower

total surplus.

   The second point is regarding the (potentially negative) value of commitment. Recall that in

Leland models equity holders just follow a static maturity structure, i.e., f = fss (φ) always, so

that φt = φ0 for all t, as illustrated by the “Leland” path in the left panel of Figure 1. In contrast,

in our model equity holders have the flexibility to choose the firm’s future issuance policy, but of

course cannot commit ex-ante to any issuance path—rather, issuance paths have to be dynamically

optimal given the market prices of bonds. Here, flexibility and lack of commitment come as two

                                                  21
Figure 1: Left Panel: Default boundary Φ (yb ) as a function of the defaulting cash-flow yb . Right Panel:
Three sample paths for initial point (φ, y) = (0.28, 8.5): An always lengthening path (LE; dotted), an always
shortening path (SE; dot-dashed), and a path with constant maturity structure (Leland; dashed). For both
panels parameters are given by c = r = 10%, Drf = 1, E rf = 12, µ = 13, ζ = .35, δS = 5, δL = 1, αy = 3,
αX = .95.


sides of the same coin. Given the lack of commitment on default timing, it is unclear whether this

“flexibility” is a good thing; in fact, we later show that “flexibility” in future issuance policy may

exacerbate the endogenous default decision and lower firm value.


3.3    Roadmap of results

We will use Figure 1 as the springboard for our analysis. First, in the next section, we establish

that there exists a unique equilibrium in the vicinity of the bankruptcy boundary. More specifically,

Proposition 1 shows that we can partition the bankruptcy boundary into an SE, Interior, and LE

region, as show in the left panel of Figure 2. Importantly, the set of equilibria on the boundary then

significantly restricts the possible equilibria away from the boundary, as we show in Proposition 3

in Section 5. Figure 4 illustrates the proposition and the state-space partition. For example, any

candidate SE has to hit the SE region on the boundary. Then, by our assumption that the state

(φ, y) changes gradually, we can rule out what equilibria can arise for any point (φ, y) by checking

whether candidate maximal shortening and maximal lengthening paths lead to an inconsistency on

the boundary.




                                                     22
4         Equilibria in the neighborhood of the default boundary

We start by analyzing equilibria in the neighborhood of the default boundary. Then in the next

section, we solve the model away from the default boundary by working backwards and imposing

the equilibrium restrictions derived in the neighborhood of the default boundary.

         Throughout the rest of paper, we will use the following setting for our numerical examples.

We assume that the cash-flow drift is a negative constant, i.e., µy (y) = µ > 0. Debt holders are

less efficient in running the liquidated firm (relative to equity holders), so that post-default the

upside payoff X becomes αX X with αX ∈ (0, 1); and, given defaulting cash-flow yb , the current

cash-flow post-default becomes αy yb . Since in our numerical examples the defaulting cash-flows

yb < 0, to capture the inefficiency we set αy > 1.22 For simplicity, the liquidated firm is assumed

to be unlevered, so that B (y) = A (αy y; αX X) where A (·) is the first-best firm value given in (2).


4.1        Incentive compatibility condition and intuition

Consider the equilibrium issuance policy in the vicinity of default, i.e., in the neighborhood of

the default boundary. To this end, let us define fb ≡ fτ →0 ; recall τ ≥ 0 is the time-to-default.

Exactly at default, smooth pasting Eφ = 0 and equal seniority ∆ = DS − DL = 0 imply we have

IC (0, yb ) = Eφ + ∆ = 0. However, the equilibrium issuance policy in the immediate vicinity of

default, i.e., fτ →0 , is determinate and a function of how IC (τ, yb ) approaches IC (0, yb ) = 0—from

above, which implies IC (τ, yb ) > 0 so that f = 1, or from below, which implies IC (τ, yb ) < 0 so

that f = 0.

         As both Eφ and ∆ are analytical in their arguments, we analyze the sign of IC (τ, yb ) slightly

away from τ = 0 by considering the Taylor expansion in the τ -dimension of IC (τ, yb ):


                                IC (τ, yb ) = IC (0, yb ) + ICτ (0, yb ) τ + o (τ ) .                       (18)


Taking the limit, the sign of the derivative ICτ (0, yb ) determines how IC (τ, yb ) approaches IC (0, yb ) =

0 as τ → 0. The next lemma shows that ICτ (0, yb ) is driven by the derivatives of the issuance

proceeds of newly issued bonds, with respect to the maturity structure φ.
    22
    Thus, the cash-flows are assumed worse under the management of debt holders. This specification is similar to
the one found in Mella-Barral and Perraudin [1997].



                                                         23
Lemma 1. The τ derivative of IC (τ, yb ) at default, which gives the sign of IC (τ, yb ) for sufficiently

small τ , is given by

                                                      ∂                        ∂
                                                                                          
                        ICτ (0, yb ) = m (Φ (yb )) fb DS (0, yb ) + (1 − fb )    DL (0, yb ) .           (19)
                                                     ∂φ                       ∂φ

       Recall m (φ) > 0. The term in the bracket in (19), which can be rewritten for a fixed fb as

                                         ∂
                                           [fb DS (0, yb ) + (1 − fb ) DL (0, yb )] ,
                                        ∂φ

is the impact of maturity shortening on the issuance proceeds of newly issued bonds (fb of short-

term and (1 − fb ) of long-term), which gives the sign of the equity holders’ incentive compatibility

condition near the default boundary. Thus, equity holders act as if maximizing the issuance proceeds

of newly issued bonds. This result has implications on the welfare discussion in Section 6, as issuance

proceeds in general differ from the value of existing securities.

       This result echoes the Modigliani-Miller irrelevance result established in Section 3.2.1. There,

we showed that if the firm’s default policy is exogenously given, then the values of both bonds are
                                 ∂           ∂
independent of φ so that        ∂φ DS   =   ∂φ DL   = 0; as a result, we have ICτ = 0 always. With endogenous

default, equity holders control the maturity structure dynamically, taking into account the fact that

maturity structure affects the firm’s endogenous default policy and thus impacts bond valuations,
        ∂
i.e.   ∂φ Di (0, yb )   6= 0. Section 4.3 shows how this gives rise to a non-trivial incentive compatibility

condition for equity holders. Essentially, right before default, equity holders are choosing the firm’s

debt maturity structure to maximize their flow payoffs, in which the proceeds of newly issued bonds

play a key role.


4.2      Equilibrium uniqueness in the neighborhood of the default boundary

We first analyze “cornered” equilibria, i.e., equilibria with f = 0 or f = 1; recall Definition

2. Consider an SE just before default, i.e., limτ →0 f (τ, yb ) = 1. For this issuance policy to be

optimal, (14) says that IC (τ, yb ) has to be approaching IC (0, yb ) = 0 from above. Plugging the

conjectured strategy f (0, yb ) = 1 into (18), for the conjectured strategy to be an equilibrium we




                                                            24
require ICτ (0, yb ) > 0, which in turn requires by (19) (noting that m (φ) > 0)

                                             ∂
                                               DS (Φ (yb ) , yb ) ≥ 0.                                 (20)
                                            ∂φ

This condition says that an SE can only arise if the shortening strategy of equity holders locally

increases the value of short-term bonds, as equity holders are maximizing the total issuance proceeds

(in SE, only short-term bonds are issued). A similar derivation holds for a lengthening equilibrium

(LE) just before default, i.e., limτ →0 f (τ, yb ) = 0, with

                                             ∂
                                               DL (Φ (yb ) , yb ) ≤ 0.                                 (21)
                                            ∂φ

An LE can only arise if the lengthening strategy of the equity holders locally increases the value of

long-term bonds.

   Now consider an interior equilibrium just before default, i.e., limτ →0 f (τ, yb ) ∈ (0, 1). For such

an interior issuance policy to be an equilibrium, fb ∈ (0, 1) must be such that ICτ (0, yb ) = 0, i.e.,

the IC condition is equal to 0 even in the vicinity of default. Setting (19) equal to 0, after some

algebra detailed in Appendix A.3, we find the unique candidate issuance strategy (nc stands for

non-constrained)
                                        µy (yb ) B 0 (yb ) − [r + ζ + δL ] [1 − B (yb )]
                         fbnc (yb ) =                                                    ,             (22)
                                                    (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]

with fbnc (yb ) weakly increasing in yb . Of course, fbnc is only an equilibrium strategy if it is interior,

i.e., fbnc ∈ (0, 1). When fbnc exceeds the feasible issuance space [0, 1], the corresponding cornered

equilibrium arises, as shown by the next proposition. In the following proposition we show that

this uniqueness extend to the neighborhood of the default boundary:

Proposition 1. Define y0 = sup {y : fbnc (y) = 0} and y1 = inf {y : fbnc (y) = 1}. Then the unique

equilibrium issuance policy in the neighborhood of the bankruptcy boundary is given by
                                                
                                                
                                                 0,             y < y0
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                   fb (yb ) =    fbnc (yb ) ,   y ∈ [y0 , y1 ] .
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                1,
                                                               y > y1



                                                        25
Consider a recovery function with B (ymin ) = B 0 (ymin ) = 0. Then an LE always exists for some

part of the state-space as fbnc (ymin ) < 0. An SE exists for some part of the state space if and only
                             B 0 (ymax )       r+ζ+δL
if fbnc (ymax ) ≥ 1 ⇐⇒      1−B(ymax )     ≥   µy (ymax ) .


       The first part of the proposition discuss the optimal issuance policy in the vicinity of default.

The left panel of Figure 2 illustrates the different equilibria regions in the neighborhood of the

default boundary. On the far left, i.e. for low yb , we have the lengthening equilibria region labeled

“LE”. Next, we have the region labeled “Interior Equ.”—this region has fb (yb ) ∈ (0, 1). Finally, we

have the shortening equilibria region labeled “SE” to the far right of the bankruptcy boundary, i.e.,

for high yb . As fbnc (yb ) is increasing in yb , we have the following ordering of the equilibria: “LE”

always lies to the left of “Interior Equ.” which lies to the left of “SE” if we line them up according

to yb . The right panel of Figure 2 depicts the equilibrium issuance strategy by mapping fb (yb ) as

a function of yb . The curve kinks exactly at the points of transition from LE to interior equilibria,

y0 , and from interior equilibria to SE, y1 .

       The second part of the proposition gives conditions when different equilibria exist. For B (ymin ) =

B 0 (ymin ) = 0, we can show that an LE always exists on some part of the state-space. Next, for an
                                                                                    B 0 (ymax )       r+ζ+δL
SE to exists on at least some part of the state-space we need to check             1−B(ymax )     ≥   µy (ymax ) .   Thus,

we need a large slope of the recovery value function, B 0 (ymax ), relative to the loss-given-default

[1 − B (ymax )], for an SE to exist.23 Later on, when we link B (yb ) to the cash-flow process, we

will naturally have a flat part of the recovery function around ymin , thus immediately giving us the

existence of an LE.


4.3       When can a shortening equilibrium arise?

We are now ready to discuss the above results in more depth, with a special focus on shortening

equilibria.

       We use the chain rule to rewrite the derivative of a generic bond Di (φ, y) , i ∈ {S, L} with

respect to φ at the time of default; this derivative shows up in the equilibrium conditions (20) and
  23
    It is straightforward to show that in our setting of inefficient default, A (y) > B (y), and coupon equal to the
discount rate, c = r, we must have B (ymax ) < 1, as otherwise equity holders would leave money on the table by
defaulting early.




                                                              26
Figure 2: Left Panel: The regions of default boundary Φ (yb ): LE marks boundary regions with fb (yb ) = 0,
SE marks regions with fb (yb ) = 1, and the dotted part indicated by Interior Equ marks the boundary region
with fb (yb ) ∈ (0, 1). Right Panel: Equilibrium boundary issuance policy fb (yb ). The kinks in the curve
correspond to the transition from LE to Interior Equ, and from Interior Equ to SE in the left panel. For
both panels parameters are given by c = r = 10%, Drf = 1, E rf = 12, µ = 13, ζ = .35, δS = 5, δL = 1,
αy = 3, αX = .95.


(21):
              ∂Di (τ (φ, y) , yb (φ, y))               ∂Di (τ, yb ) ∂τ                 ∂Di (τ, yb ) ∂yb
                                                   =                             +                                 .      (23)
                        ∂φ                  τ =0          ∂τ        ∂φ   τ =0            ∂yb        ∂φ    τ =0
                                                       |          {z         }        |         {z           }
                                                       time-to-default,   (−)        default CF level,     (0/+)

The first partial derivative is with respect to the time-to-default τ , while holding the defaulting

cash-flow yb (and thus the recovery value B (yb )) fixed. The second partial derivative is with respect

to the defaulting cash-flow yb , while holding the time-to-default τ fixed.

   We now sign each term in (23). Given a positive loss-given-default and c = r, a longer time to

default increases the value of both bonds, all else equal. Similarly, a higher recovery in default, all

else equal, leads to a higher bond value. Stated formally, we have

        ∂Di (τ, yb )                                                             ∂Di (τ, yb )
                              = (r + δi + ζ) [1 − B (yb )] > 0,        and                             = B 0 (yb ) ≥ 0.   (24)
           ∂τ          τ =0                                                        ∂yb          τ =0


Further, Φ (y) being upward sloping implies that increasing the maturity structure marginally leads

to slightly earlier default in the vicinity of the default boundary. Similarly, hitting Φ (y) earlier leads

to a higher defaulting cash-flow, as cash-flows are deteriorating over time. This is illustrated in

the schematic drawing in Figure 3—as we shift up φ slightly, the distance to the default boundary

(and thus τ ) shrinks, whereas the cash-flow level at which the boundary is hit increases. The


                                                             27
mathematical expressions for these observations, proved in Appendix A.1, are

                                   ∂τ                       ∂yb
                                               < 0,   and                > 0.                         (25)
                                   ∂φ   τ =0                ∂φ    τ =0


   We will now consider two setups to highlight the intuition behind the results.


Constant recovery at default. Assume first that bond recovery value is fixed at B (yb ) = cst

regardless of yb . This implies that the second term in (23) is zero, so that the bond values decrease

as the maturity structure shortens on the default boundary. Then, by (21) the unique equilibrium

in the neighborhood of the boundary is a lengthening equilibrium. For any equilibrium other than

LE, i.e., for an interior or SE, there has to be a local gain for at least one of the bond holders when

increasing φ, but this cannot be the case according to (23).


Variable recovery at default. Recall that in our model the recovery value is an increasing

function of the defaulting cash-flow of the firm yb , i.e., B 0 (yb ) ≥ 0, with the inequality being strict

for at least some yb on the default boundary. Inspecting (23), we can see that the derivative of the

short-term bond with respect to φ may be positive on the default boundary for sufficiently large

B 0 (yb ), in which case an SE by (20) can arise.

   Why can a bond gain from a shortening of the maturity structure and an effective earlier default

time? This can happen when there is sufficient slope in the recovery value function with respect to

the cash-flow state, i.e. B 0 (yb )  0, so that it can outweigh the effect of the earlier default time

leading to a cessation of coupon flows. Thus, the recovery value function B (y) with B 0 (y) > 0 is the

key driver of our result. Economically, if default in the near future is unavoidable, then short-term

bond holders may prefer taking possession of the collateral early before it has lost most of its value.

This seems to be an empirical relevant force during 2007/08 crisis during which we observed debt

maturity shortening together with fundamental values of collateral assets deteriorating rapidly over

time (Krishnamurthy [2010]). We will come back to discuss its welfare implication in Section 6.1.




                                                      28
Figure 3: Default boundary Φ (y) and two schematic shortening paths: the solid path is the original path,
and the dashed path is the path after a deviation in φ today. Parameters are given by c = r = 10%, Drf = 1,
E rf = 12, µ = 13, ζ = .35, δS = 5, δL = 1, αy = 3, αX = .95.


5     Equilibria away from Boundary

Building on the result of the uniqueness of equilibria in the neighborhood of the bankruptcy bound-

ary, we now work backward to characterize equilibria further away from the boundary. Our results

roughly show that SE are more likely “close” to the SE part of the boundary, and vice-versa for

LE. Recall that if an SE exists on the boundary, it occurs for relatively high levels of short-term

debt, i.e., for high φ. Consequently, as the state (φ, y) adjusts gradually, an SE will also be more

likely to occur away from the bankruptcy boundary for high levels of short-term debt.


5.1     Equilibrium Regions

We first analyze cornered equilibria, for which we have sharper theoretical results. Lemma 6 in

Appendix A.4 significantly simplifies the subsequent analysis by showing that any equilibrium

issuance path {f }τ has to be continuous with respect to τ , which rules out jumps in f .


5.1.1    Cornered equilibria

For any point (φ, y), define τ i to be the time-to-default given the cornered strategy of either always

shortening (i = S) or always lengthening (i = L). Define ybi analogously as the cash-flow at default.

Thus, in the (τ, yb ) space, we have

                                                             
                                   y τ i , ybi = y and φ τ i , ybi = φ.


                                                    29
In Figure 1, we graph the two cornered candidate equilibrium paths associated with the initial state

(φ, y) = (0.28, 8.5), indicated by SE and LE respectively. In the SE, the firm keeps issuing short-
                                               
term bonds and defaults at φSb = Φ ybS , ybS , while in the LE the firms keeps issuing long-term
                                          
bonds and defaults at φL      L    L
                       b = Φ yb , yb . The times to default differ substantially across these

two equilibria: τ S = 0.7217 for the SE while τ L = 0.8913 for the LE.

      Next, observe that for any type of cornered equilibrium, any two distinct paths never cross. This

is simply a result of the exponential nature of φt in case of always f = 1 or f = 0. As Lemma 6

implies there is no jumps in f , SE and LE represent all possible cornered strategies. Next, to derive

sharper analytical results, let us consider drift specifications µy (y) = µ or µy (y) = µ · y. Under

these specifications, we can prove the optimality of a cornered issuance strategies along the whole

path, if indeed such a strategy is optimal in the neighborhood of the default boundary. This implies

that for cornered equilibria, we only need to check the IC condition at the defaulting boundary.

Proposition 2. Let µy (y) = µ or µy (y) = µ · y. Then, given any initial starting value (φ, y),

there exist (at most) two cornered equilibria: one with shortening always fs = 1 until default,
           h       i                                                                              h     i
i.e., s ∈ 0, τ S , and the other with lengthening always fs = 0 until default, i.e., for s ∈ 0, τ L .

Moreover, for the IC condition along the whole path s ∈ 0, τ i for i ∈ {S, L}, it is sufficient to
                                                                    


check the IC condition at default, i.e., for τ → 0, given by either (20) or (21), respectively.

      Going back to Figure 1, we see that the conjectured SE and LE paths are actual equilibria,

because they end in the appropriate regions of the bankruptcy boundary given in the left panel of

Figure 2. Since the defaulting cash-flow ybS is negative, αy > 1 (see footnote 22) says that the firm

is experiencing even worse (negative) cash-flows under the debt holders’ management post-default.

From (23) and the discussion afterward, a relatively high αy —which implies a greater B 0 (yb )—

helps satisfy the IC condition in SE. The lengthening path is also an equilibrium given the same

initial state, in which equity holders find it optimal to keep issuing long-term bonds and default at
                    
    φL      L    L
     b = Φ yb , yb . We compare the welfare of these two equilibria in Section 6.1.

      This multiplicity of either SE or LE echoes the intuition of self-enforcing default in the sovereign

debt literature (e.g., Cole and Kehoe [2000]). If bond investors expect equity holders to keep

shortening the firm’s maturity structure in the future and default early, then bond investors price

this expectation in the bond’s market valuation, inducing bond prices which can self-enforce the


                                                      30
optimality of issuing short-term bonds via (14). Similarly, the belief of always issuing long-term

bonds can be also self-enforcing.

   A special situation can arise in which this multiplicity disappears:

Corollary 1. Suppose that all points in the neighborhood of the default boundary have the same

cornered equilibrium. Then, the unique equilibrium for any (φ, y) has to be that same cornered

equilibrium.

   To see this, we know that any path has to end up, at least in the neighborhood of the default

boundary, with f = 0 or f = 1 always. Working backwards, we see that the IC condition for the

same cornered equilibrium also holds any distance away from the boundary. Finally, as cornered

paths do not cross, uniqueness naturally follows. The corollary applies, for example, to the specifi-

cation of the model with constant recovery, so that B 0 (yb ) = 0 everywhere as discussed in Section

4.3. There, we can only have LE on the default boundary. This in turn implies that–regardless of

the initial point–LE is the the only equilibrium of the game, and the firm which keeps lengthening

its maturity structure survives as long as possible subject to the endogenous default decision of

equity holders.


5.1.2   Equilibrium regions

Due to fbnc (yb ) being increasing in yb , the set of shortening equilibria in the neighborhood of the

bankruptcy boundary (if it exists) must take the form [y1 , ymax ] (recall that y1 satisfies fbnc (y1 ) = 1,

i.e. the point y at which f ≤ 1 starts binding, and ymax satisfies Φ (ymax ) = 1), and the set of

lengthening equilibria must take the form [ymin , y0 ]. Then, by our assumption f ∈ [0, 1] (which

bounds the rate of change of φ) and Proposition 2, we can partially characterize the equilibrium in

different regions of the state space:

Proposition 3. There exist at most six equilibrium regions:

   (I) Any initial point (φ, y) above the lengthening path emanating from (Φ (y0 ) , y0 ) and below

the shortening path emanating from (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ) can only feature interior equilibria.

   (S) Any initial point (φ, y) above the lengthening path emanating from (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ) has a unique

equilibrium—a SE.



                                                    31
   (SI) Any initial point (φ, y) below the lengthening path emanating from (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ), above length-

ening path emanating from (Φ (y0 ) , y0 ), and above the shortening path emanating from (Φ (y1 ) , y1 )

has a SE and possible interior equilibria.

   (SLI) Any initial point (φ, y) above the shortening path emanating from (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ) and below

the lengthening path emanating from (Φ (y0 ) , y0 ) has both an SE and an LE, and possible interior

equilibria.

   (LI) Any initial point (φ, y) below the shortening path emanating from (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ), below the

lengthening path emanating from (Φ (y0 ) , y0 ), and above the shortening path emanating from (Φ (y0 ) , y0 )

has a LE and possible interior equilibria.

   (L) Any initial point (φ, y) below the shortening path emanating from (Φ (y0 ) , y0 ) has a unique

equilibrium—a LE.

   Proposition 3 combines three previously established results: the insight from Proposition 2 that

checking the IC condition at default is sufficient for the whole path of any cornered equilibrium;

that SE and LE paths do not cross; and that adjustments to the state-variables have to be gradual.

As a result, there exists regions of no return, indicated by regions S and L in the left panel of

Figure 4, for which a unique equilibrium exists. Intuitively, given gradual adjustments to the state

variables, any maturity profile in region S (L), regardless of the future issuance profile {fτ }, cannot

change fast enough to avoid hitting the bankruptcy boundary in the SE (LE) region. But then we

know by Proposition 2 that LE (SE) must be the unique equilibrium in the whole region S (E).

   A similar logic implies that in region I we can only have interior equilibria; it is because any

cornered strategy would nevertheless hit the bankruptcy boundary in the interior region, invalidat-

ing the conjectured cornered strategy. Finally, regions SI, LI, and SLI are simply statements about

what cornered equilibria can exist, besides the possibility of multiple interior equilibria.


5.2    Interior equilibria

The last objects to analyze are paths that originate in the interior region of the bankruptcy bound-

ary, as indicated by the dashed region in the left panel of Figure 2. In Appendix A.4 we show

that any point on the boundary (Φ (yb ) , yb ) has a unique equilibrium issuance path {f }τ leading

to it that is defined via backward induction, i.e., no two distinct paths end at the same default


                                                   32
        ϕ                                                                 ϕ
  1.0                                                               1.0
                      S
                          SI

  0.8        y1                SLI                                  0.8

                                                                                             Interior
  0.6       y0    I                                                 0.6
                                                                                              Path
                                                                              Φ(y)
                               LI
  0.4                                                               0.4

        Φ(y)
  0.2                                                               0.2
                               L


  0.0                                                          y    0.0                                                       y
             -2       0        2     4     6       8      10                  -2     0   2      4           6    8       10



Figure 4: Left Panel: The six possible equilibrium regions I, S, L, SI, LI, and SLI as described in
Proposition 3. Right Panel: An interior issuance path (dashed line) that fulfills the IC conditions at all
of its points. For both panels parameters are given by c = r = 10%, Drf = 1, E rf = 12, µ = 13, ζ = .35,
δS = 5, δL = 1, αy = 3, αX = .95.


point. Further, we show that along any path with IC (τ, yb ) = 0, we can derive the unique inte-

rior issuance policy fτ at τ explicitly given the forward-looking endogenous equilibrium objects.24

However, unlike in Proposition 2, we cannot prove uniqueness of interior equilibria at a distance

from the default boundary. This is because at a sufficient distance, equilibrium paths may cross

due to the non-constant nature of f .

       To illustrate one interesting property of an interior equilibrium, we pick an ultimate default

point on the boundary that lies in the region of interior equilibria (the dashed region in the left

panel of Figure 2 which corresponds to region I in the left panel of Figure 4) and work our way

backward to trace out the equilibrium path. The right panel of Figure 4 maps out one such path.

We see that the firm’s maturity structure along the shown path is no longer monotone in time (as
                                                                                                    dφ(t)
opposed to the monotonicity in the cornered equilibria analyzed above), i.e.,                        dt     switches signs

(see earlier discussion around (6)). For large y’s the firm is shortening its maturity structure with

1 > fτ > fss (φτ ), leading to a slow rise in φ. However, once the firm is getting close to the default

boundary Φ (y), it reverses course and starts lengthening its maturity structure 0 < fτ < fss (φτ ),

leading to a fall in φ.
  24
       Forward looking here refers to natural time t, i.e., incorporating all times from today until the default time.




                                                               33
6         Welfare, Robustness, and Discussion

We first discuss the welfare implications of our equilibria identified in previous sections. We then

discuss how robust our results are to the restrictive assumptions that we impose in this paper, and

then compare our model to Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013].


6.1         Welfare analysis

Because equity holders in our model only maximize the value of their stake in the firm, and are

unable to commit to a default time ex-ante, their default decision and their issuance decisions

leading up to default are not be maximizing firm value in general. This section analyzes the

detailed welfare implications for various equilibria in our paper.

         For subsequent analysis, let us take the derivative of firm value V = E + φDS + (1 − φ) DL

with respect to the maturity structure φ, which decomposes its impact on the firm value into three

components:

                                                                   ∂                            ∂
         Vφ (φ, y) =       ∆ (φ, y) + Eφ (φ, y)        +      φ      DS (φ, y)     + (1 − φ)      DL (φ, y) .        (26)
                           |         {z          }                ∂φ                           ∂φ
                       Incentive Compatibility IC
                                                              |       {z     }        |          {z         }
                                                           Impact on ST bonds         Impact on LT bonds

Recall (19) showed that in the neighborhood of the default boundary equity holders are maximizing

the proceeds of newly issued bonds.


6.1.1         Conflicts of interest in the neighborhood of default

We analyze (26) in the neighborhood of the default boundary (Φ (yb ) , yb ) in this subsection. We

have IC = 0 at default, hence the impact of maturity shortening on firm value is given by the last

two terms in (26), which are the derivatives of the bond valuations with respect to the maturity

structure, weighted at the current maturity structure.

         In our stylized model, given the same coupon rate for both bonds, one can show that long-term

bonds put more weight on the bankruptcy recovery B (yb ) than short-term bonds.25

Lemma 2. At the neighborhood of default boundary, the sensitivity of long-term debt with respect
    25
         Intuitively, long-term bonds have a higher discounted (future) default probability than short-term bonds.




                                                             34
to the maturity structure φ is greater than that of short-term debt:

                                     ∂                       ∂
                                       DL (Φ (yb ) , yb ) >    DS (Φ (yb ) , yb ) .                                 (27)
                                    ∂φ                      ∂φ

                                                                                                 ∂
Cornered equilibria. From Proposition 1, we have an SE, i.e., fb = 1, if                        ∂φ DS   > 0 according
                                                   ∂           ∂
to (20). But then Lemma 2 implies that            ∂φ DL   >   ∂φ DS   > 0, i.e., shortening improves the values of

both long-term and short-term bonds. Similarly, for an LE with fb = 0, (21) and Lemma 2 imply
 ∂            ∂
∂φ DS    <   ∂φ DL   < 0, i.e., lengthening improves the values of both bonds as well. Thus, by inspecting

(26), in any cornered equilibrium equity holders are taking the locally firm-value maximizing action,

and everybody is better off by the equity holders’ self-interested policy of hastening or delaying

default slightly.

       There are two points worth making about this stark local-efficiency result. First of all, in next

subsection we will show that this local efficiency result at the neighborhood of default boundary

fails when the firm is away from boundary. In general, as a common result in Leland-type models

with costly default and debt-equity conflicts, there exists a global deviation featuring a sufficiently

large delay in default to improve the total firm value. This discrepancy implies that firm value

can be non-monotone in the firm’s default time.26 This non-monotonicity is behind the result that

away from default boundary, the LE with a longer time to default can Pareto dominate the SE, as

shown in the next section.

       Second, the local-efficiency result is more or less coincidence, and relies heavily on Lemma 2.

In fact, (27) might reverse if long-term bonds put less weight on the bankruptcy recovery B (yb )

than short-term bonds, which is empirically relevant if short-term bonds are zero-coupon discount

bonds in the form of say commercial paper while long-term bonds are traditional coupon bonds.27

Perhaps a more empirically relevant situation is one where there are also other stakeholders present

who may suffer from earlier default. In Appendix A.5.3, we imagine that the firm has another group

of debt holders holding consol bonds whose valuation does not enter the equity holders’ rollover
  26
     Intuitively, we can understand the non-monotonicity through state-dependence of bankruptcy cost. In our exam-
ple, the bankruptcy cost, which is measured by A (y) − B (y), is endogenously determined via the optimal stopping
problem (see the beginning of Section 4). Although it is always the case that A (y) > B (y) with a positive bankruptcy
cost, for sufficiently large αy the slopes might reverse with A0 (y) < B 0 (y) for some y, i.e., the higher the defaulting
cash-flows, the smaller the bankruptcy cost. Since earlier default leads to a higher defaulting cash-flows, this force
naturally gives rise to the non-monotonicity result.
  27
     To see this, with short-term debt coupon cS less than long-term debt coupon cL , at the default boundary we
have ∂D∂φ
         S
            − ∂D∂φ
                  L                                        ∂τ
                    = [cS − cL + (δS − δL ) (1 − B (yb ))] ∂φ , which might turn negative if cS < cL .


                                                           35
decisions at all. As earlier default leads to value losses to consol bonds (another form of dilution),

the maturity-shortening equilibrium may become locally inefficient, in the sense that right before

default the firm value is improved by marginally lengthening the firm’s maturity structure.


Interior equilibria. An interior equilibrium fb ∈ (0, 1) arises if and only IC = 0 holds in the

vicinity of τ = 0, i.e., ICτ = 0. From (19), Proposition 1 and Lemma 2, ICτ = 0 if and only if
 ∂                      ∂
∂φ DS   (φ, y) < 0 <   ∂φ DL (φ, y)   in the vicinity of the default boundary—short-term bond holders

prefer a marginal lengthening of the maturity structure, whereas long-term bond holders prefer a

marginal shortening. The issuance policy fb (yb ) ∈ (0, 1) in general does not keep the maturity

structure constant, i.e., fb (yb ) 6= fss (Φ (yb )), so that local conflicts of interest arise—equity holders

and one part of the debt holders gain, while the other part of the debt holders looses. Exactly

which bond holders get hurt depends on the characteristics of the equilibrium.

   Regarding total firm value, we know that (19) suggests that the issuance policy maximizes the

value of the currently issued short- and long-term bonds, which are issued in proportions fb (yb )

and [1 − fb (yb )], respectively. However, the total value of the firm at default in (26) stems from the

value of the stock of short- and long-term bonds outstanding, which are in proportion Φ (yb ) and

[1 − Φ (yb )], respectively. In general, fb (yb ) 6= Φ (yb ), so that the equity’s issuance policy does not

maximize total firm value. Formally, we set condition (19) equal to 0 for interior equilibria, divide

it by m (Φ (yb )) and subtract it from (26) evaluated at default, to finally get


                                Vφ |τ =0 = − [fb (yb ) − Φ (yb )] ∆φ (Φ (yb ) , yb ) .


As the change of φ is proportional to fb (yb ) − fss (Φ (yb )), the total firm value decreases when

Vφ |τ =0 dφ ∝ Vφ |τ =0 [fb (yb ) − fss (Φ (yb ))] < 0.

   At its heart, the conflict of interest among various stake holders (equity, long-term bonds, and

short-term bonds) is driving our results. The value gains from issuance and default policies do not

accrue to equity holders in a sufficient measure to incentivize them to undertake the socially optimal

policy. On the boundary, equity holders are maximizing the value of debt issuance proceeds, instead

of total firm value. In contrast to Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013], the conflict of interest is not

centered around direct redistribution (by expanding or shrinking the aggregate face-value of bonds)



                                                         36
of a fixed amount of recovery value (direct dilution), but rather around the impact of the maturity

structure φ on the timing of default and thus the changing size of the recovery value (indirect

dilution). The bond price expressions show that long-term bonds load on the recovery value B (yb )

and coupon c at a different rate than short-term bonds, and the former derive a larger percentage

of their value from default recovery than the latter. Therefore, in the interior equilibrium, a conflict

of interest between bond-holders arises with respect to the default timing.


6.1.2      Conflicts of interests away from default

The conflicts of interests we discussed above were of a local nature, i.e., we considered the impact

of a slight change in φ on the different stakeholders of the company in the neighborhood of default.

Away from the default boundary, the local derivatives we were considering above cannot be studied

analytically anymore. We will rather concentrate on comparing the outcomes across different

equilibria.

       Suppose we are at a point away from the boundary at which there exist both a shortening and

a lengthening equilibrium, as considered in Section 5 and depicted in Figure 1. Table 1 shows firm,

equity, and debt valuations for several different equilibria for a starting value of (φ, y) = (0.28, 8.5).

The first-best case is the one without debt-equity conflict, i.e., equity holders can commit to the

best policy available. The lengthening and shortening equilibria are as discussed in Section 4.

Finally, “Leland equilibrium” describes the equilibrium in which equity holders have committed to

keeping φ constant at its current level via issuance policy f = fss (φ) until Φ (yb ) = φ is hit (note

that the default boundary Φ (yb ) is still the same even for Leland models), an assumption made in

Leland-type models.

       We highlight several interesting results in Table 1. First, the LE Pareto dominates the SE;

the shortening strategy of always f = 1 in the SE—by adversely affecting the endogenous default

policy-–hurts short-term and long-term debt holders, together with equity holders.28 In other

words, it is because equity holders, given the debt prices prevails in the shortening equilibrium,

find that it is privately optimal to keep issuing short-term debt and eventually default earlier, which

hurts everybody in equilibrium.
  28
    The property of Pareto dominance may not hold generally, and we find other numerical examples in which relative
to the shortening equilibrium, equity and short-term bond holders gain in the lengthening equilibrium while long-term
bond holders lose strictly.


                                                         37
           Initial (φ, y) = (0.28, 8.5)   Time-to-default τ       V         E        DS        DL
                First-best case                1.0039          5.6658    4.8350    0.9958    0.7667
           Lengthening equilibrium             0.8913          5.6116    4.8115    0.9922    0.7254
              Leland equilibrium               0.8062          5.4942    4.7214    0.9876    0.6893
            Shortening equilibrium             0.7217          5.3839    4.6148    0.9825    0.6861

Table 1: Firm, equity, long-term bond, and short-term bond values for parameters c = r = 10%, Drf = 1,
E rf = 12, µ = 13, ζ = .35, δS = 5, δL = 1, αy = 3, αX = .95, and initial point (φ, y) = (0.28, 8.5).


      Second, the introduction of flexible issuance strategies f 6= fss (φ) can be both beneficial (in

case of the LE) and detrimental (in case of the SE) when compared to the Leland equilibrium

with an inflexible issuance strategy. As may appear intuitive, having flexibility in ones issuance

policy should help equity holders avoid inefficient (i.e., too early) default due to rollover pressure.

However, the presence of the SE shows the downside of such flexibility—as equity holders cannot

commit to any particular path of f and the resulting default policy, a worse equilibrium can arise

with a self-fulfilling shortening spiral. Oftentimes, the SE arising from this added flexibility hurts

total firm value. Furthermore, as Table 1 shows, the Leland equilibrium may even Pareto dominate

SE.


6.2     Robustness

We have adopted a stylized setting in order to deliver the main economic mechanism in a trans-

parent way. However, this simplification may come at some cost, as our framework misses at

least two important empirically relevant features: cash-flow volatility, and potentially endogenous

(de)leveraging policies. We discuss each in turn, as well as the restricted issuance space.


6.2.1     Stochastic cash flows

We work in a setting without cash-flow volatility. Mathematically, adding volatility to y leads to

some second-order derivative terms in (10) and (12), and we are unable to recover the clean expres-

sion (A.26) for equity holders’ IC condition right before default. We cannot think of any obvious

link between fundamental volatility and endogenous debt maturity structure. Nevertheless, there

is one interesting observation hinting that volatility might help the existence of shortening equilib-


                                                      38
ria. Note that (20) requires debt values to go down if the firm marginally lengthens its maturity

structure and hence delays default. With positive cash-flow volatility, if the firm survives longer,

the additional volatility is likely to cause debt values to go down, as debt values are concave in

the firm fundamental with capped upside—this exactly helps the existence of shortening equilibria.

We await future research to explore this possibility.


6.2.2     Potential deleveraging

To isolate debt maturity from leverage decisions, we follow the Leland tradition in assuming that

the firm commits to a constant aggregate face value (normalized to 1). Note, even with constant-

face value, market leverage is not fixed as bond and equity values fluctuate with distance to default.

Dynamic leverage decisions without commitment are a challenging research question itself,29 and

no doubt in practice firms have certain flexibilities in simultaneously adjusting their leverage and

debt maturity structure.

    In our setting, there is a strong force pushing firms to lengthen its debt maturity structure

when it is cutting its debt face value (either voluntarily or involuntarily). Appendix A.5.1 gives

the argument in details, but the intuition turns out to be quite simple. With a changing debt

burden with face-value Ft , as a standard technique in this literature (Goldstein et al. [2001], Fischer

et al. [1989], Dangl and Zechner [2006], DeMarzo and He [2014]), the effective recovery value per

bond is B (yb ) /Ft , and the debt price in (23) is generally increasing in recovery value. A time-

decreasing Ft thus translates into time-increasing recovery value for fixed yb , which runs counter

to the intuitive requirement that shortening equilibria need rapidly decreasing recovery values, and

thus the firm will be more likely to issue long-term bonds. Conversely, firms would like to shorten

their debt maturity structure if they are leveraging up toward bankruptcy (in fact, this observation

is consistent with Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013]).
  29
     The literature usually takes the tractable framework of Fischer et al. [1989], Goldstein et al. [2001] so that the firm
needs to buy back all outstanding debt if it decides to adjust aggregate debt face value. Apparently, this assumption
requires a strong commitment ability on the side of equity holders. Recently, Dangl and Zechner [2006] study the
setting where a firm can freely adjust its aggregate debt fact value downwards by issuing less bonds than the amount
of bonds that are maturing. DeMarzo and He [2014] study the setting without any commitment on outstanding debt
face value so that equity holders may either repurchase or issue more at any point of time; it is shown that equity
holders always would like to issue more. In sharp contrast to our paper in which firms who commit to a constant
aggregate face value but can freely adjust debt maturity structure over time, Dangl and Zechner [2006] and DeMarzo
and He [2014] instead assume that the firm can change its book leverage, but is able to commit to certain debt
maturity structure (parametrized by some exogenous rollover frequency).



                                                            39
6.2.3      Large issuance space f ∈ [−fL , fH ]

Motivated by realistic trading frictions and institutional restrictions in buying back corporate bonds

(Xu [2014]), we impose the exogenous bounds on the firm’s bond issuance strategy. The restriction

f ∈ [0, 1] does not affect the underlying trade-off present in the model, but it allows for sharper

analytical results especially in regards to uniqueness (see Proposition 1). In Appendix A.5.2, with

f only restricted to a large issuance space f ∈ [−fL , fH ], for large enough but still finite fL and fH

the equilibrium outcome in the neighborhood of the default boundary is uniquely fbnc (yb ) given in

(22), as it is easy to show that fbnc (yb ) is finite for any yb such that Φ (yb ) ∈ [0, 1]. By continuity

of all functions involved, any interior issuance path {f }τ is well defined and finite, and again, for

sufficiently large fL and fH is also interior.


6.2.4      Comparative statics with respect to outstanding face-value

Consider increasing the total amount of face-value outstanding F from F = 1. Suppose that

the recovery function B (y) satisfies the following condition (recall that y1 is the point at which

fbnc (y1 ) = 1):

                                                                           B 00 (y) µ0y (y)
                                                                                             "                 #
 Q (y1 ) > 0, where Q (y) ≡ (r + ζ) B 0 (y) − 1 + [y + Xζ − (r + ζ) B (y)]
                                                        
                                                                                   +        . (28)
                                                                           B 0 (y)   µy (y)

Then, we can establish the following comparative static with respect to total debt burden F :

                                                                                      dy1
Proposition 4. When face-value F increases, y1 increases, i.e.,                       dF    > 0. Further, when B (·)
                                                                                            dΦ(y1 )
fulfills the condition (28), then as F increases, Φ (y1 ) decreases, i.e.,                   dF       < 0. Thus, under

condition (28), the point (y1 , Φ (y1 )) shifts in a south-east direction. If additionally B (·) is such

that Q (y1 ) > [F − B (y1 )] (δS − δL ) δL [1−Φ(y   1 )]
                                            µy (y1 ) , then increasing F expands the set of points (φ, y)

that fulfill the conditions for a shortening equilibrium.

                               dy1
       The first result that   dF        > 0 is intuitive: As in Leland [1994a], the greater the debt burden,
                                                                  dΦ(y1 )
the earlier the default. It is also intuitive to have              dF       < 0 so that the defaulting debt maturity

becomes longer, because a lower rollover frequency but a greater refinancing shortfall F − B (y1 )

(due to a larger F ) can deliver a similar rollover loss which pushes equity holders to default.30
  30
     The extra condition in (28) guarantees that the endogenous increase of y1 does not overturn the direct effect of
F , so that the refinancing shortfall F − B (y1 ) increases with F overall.


                                                             40
        The second part of Proposition 4 delivers an empirical prediction: Conditional on Q (y1 ) >

[F − B (y1 )] (δS − δL ) δL [1−Φ(y   1 )]
                             µy (y1 ) , larger outstanding face-value, all else equal, makes shortening

equilibria more likely to arise. As F increases the dividing point between the interior and SE part

of the bankruptcy boundary, (y1 , Φ (y1 )), shifts in a south-east direction, and does so below the

(original) shortening path emanating from (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ) (in Figure 4 this is the path that separates

regions S, SI and SLI (all the regions for which an SE exists) from I and LI).31 Consequently, the

boundary of points (y, φ) in which an SE exists also expands in a south-east direction. Thus, higher

face-value makes a firm more prone to shortening equilibria. Our numerical example easily fulfills

both conditions given in Proposition 4.


6.3        Comparison to Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2013)

Our analysis highlights an economic mechanism that is different from Brunnermeier and Oehmke

[2013]. In that paper, the firm with a long-term asset is borrowing from a continuum of identical

creditors. Only standard debt contracts are considered with promised face value and maturity,

and covenants are not allowed. News about the long-term asset arrives at interim periods, so that

a debt contract maturing on that date will be repriced accordingly, as in Diamond [1991]. The

key assumption that Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013] make is that the rollover for each period is

cash-neutral, i.e., the aggregate face-value of bonds is adjusted so as to exactly give a zero rollover

loss. For certain types of interim uncertainty resolutions (about profitability rather than recovery

value), Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013] show that, given other creditors’ debt contracts, equity

holders find it optimal to deviate by offering any individual creditor a debt contract that matures

one period earlier, so that it gets repriced sooner. In equilibrium, equity holders offer the same

deal to every creditor, and the firm’s maturity will be “rat raced” to zero.

        The repricing mechanism constitutes the key difference between Brunnermeier and Oehmke

[2013] and our model. In their model, after negative interim news, a short-term bond gets repriced

by adjusting up the promised face value to renegotiating bond holders. Importantly, all bonds

are assumed to have equal seniority, so that interim expansion of aggregate face-value to new

bond-holders directly dilutes existing bond-holders without repricing opportunities by lowering their
   31
        Here, the slope of the shortening path (when working backwards in time) emanating from (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ) is given by
− δL [1−Φ(y
     µy (y1 )
              1 )]
                  whereas the slope of the movement in (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ) itself when F changes is given by − [F −B(yQ(y
                   ,                                                                                                   1)
                                                                                                                   1 )](δS −δL )
                                                                                                                                 .



                                                                 41
proportional claim on the recovery value.

       As emphasized in Section 2.2.1, to preclude direct dilution we follow Leland and Toft [1996]

in assuming that the firm commits to maintain a constant total outstanding face value when refi-

nancing its maturing bonds, which represents the minimum departure from the dynamic structural

corporate finance literature. Besides, in practice, most bonds feature covenants with restrictions

regarding the firm’s future leverage policies, but rarely on the firm’s future maturity structures.

This empirical observation lends support to our premise of a full commitment on the firm’s book

leverage policy but no commitment on its debt maturity structure policy.

       In essence, the commitment of maintaining a constant total outstanding face value amounts to a

bond covenant about the firm’s “book leverage,”32 so that equity holders cannot simply issue more

bonds to cover the firm’s rollover losses as in Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013]. Instead, in our

model equity holders are absorbing these losses through their own deep pockets (or through equity

issuance), and thus existing long-term bonds are insulated from direct dilution. However, equity

holders are protected via the limited liability provision, and thus at some point will refuse to absorb

these losses, leading to endogenous default. As highlighted in Section 3.2, the key driver of our

model is exactly the interaction between the endogenous debt maturity structure and endogenous

default decisions. In sum, once we shut down the interim direct dilution channel that drives the

result in Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013], we identify a new empirically relevant force—which

operates through endogenous default timing, something we term indirect dilution—in our paper.

       We have several empirical predictions that are unique to our model. First, we show that

following an economic downturn, the likelihood of observing a shortening of the maturity structure

increases—the economic force for shortening, indirect dilution, is present only in bad aggregate

states as it operates via a shrinking recovery value. In contrast, in Brunnermeier and Oehmke

[2013], direct dilution is the driving force of the shortening result, and is present irrespective of

the aggregate state. Second, as illustrated by the left panel of Figure 4, shortening equilibria

exists only when the existing debt maturity is sufficiently short (φ is sufficiently high). Hence, our

model suggests that conditional on deteriorating economic conditions, debt maturity shortening is

more likely to be observed in firms with already short maturity structures. Finally, the analysis
  32
   The covenant specifies a constant “book leverage.” However, the firm’s market leverage, which is defined as the
market value of equity divided by the firm’s market value, varies with the cash-flow state yt .



                                                       42
in Section 6.2.4 suggests that firms with greater debt burden are more likely have debt maturity

shortening. There is no obvious reasoning to think that Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013] has the

same empirical prediction.33



7         Empirical Predictions and Concluding Remarks

Our model with endogenous dynamic debt maturity structure is based on a Leland framework

where the basic agency conflict is the equity holders’ endogenous default decision at the expense of

debt holders. Dynamic debt maturity choice affects the endogenous default decision though rollover

concerns, leading to indirect dilution of existing debt holders. In the meantime, the endogenous

default decision affects bond valuations, feeding back to the endogenous debt maturity structure.

         We show that when cash-flows deteriorate over time so that the debt recovery value is affected

by the endogenous default timing, a shortening equilibrium with earlier default can emerge. The

short-term debt holders gain from the earlier default: The benefit of a more favorable recovery

value by taking the firm over earlier outweighs the increased expected default risk due to earlier

default. This seems to be an empirical relevant force during 2007/08 crisis during which we observed

debt maturity shortening together with earlier default, as the fundamental values of collateral

assets deteriorated rapidly over time and bond holders gained by taking possession of the collateral

sooner. We further show that the shortening equilibrium can be locally efficient while being globally

inefficient (in fact, it could be Pareto dominated), relative to the lengthening equilibrium which

features a much longer time to default.

         Though highly stylized, our model yields the following empirical predictions that are not implied

by the direct dilution mechanism of Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013]. First, one is more likely to

observe debt maturity shortening in response to worsening economic conditions. This is consistent

with the empirical findings cited at the beginning of the Introduction: that speculative-grade firms

are actively lengthening their debt maturity structure in good times as shown by Xu [2014], and that

financial firms are shortening their debt maturity shortening right before 2007/08 crisis when the

subprime mortgage market is worsening, as documented by Brunnermeier [2009], Krishnamurthy
    33
    The logic of Brunnermeier and Oehmke [2013] seems to suggest the opposite, as the direct dilution motive seems
to be the strongest when the existing debt contracts are relatively long-term. Of course, this conjecture require a
rigorous analysis to confirm.



                                                        43
[2010], Gorton et al. [2015]. Second, our model suggests that conditional on worsening economic

conditions, debt maturity shortening is more likely to be observed in firms with already short debt

maturity structure and greater debt burden, an empirical prediction that is readily tested. Finally,

Garcia-Appendini and Montoriol-Garriga [2014] present some evidence that when approaching de-

fault firms start by issuing more short-term debt, but stop issuing short-term debt right before

default. This is somewhat consistent with the non-monotone interior equilibrium found in Figure

4 in Section 5.2.

   We obtain great tractability and hence sharp analytical results by assuming that the firm

commits to a constant debt face value over time, and there is no volatility in cash-flows. As we

discussed in Section 6.2, relaxing either of them is a nontrivial task, and will be an interesting

direction for future research.



References

Anat R. Admati, Peter M. DeMarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer. The leverage ratchet

  effect. Working Paper, 2015.

Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador. Take the short route: How to repay and restructure sovereign

  debt with multiple maturities. Working Paper, 2013.

Cristina Arellano and Ananth Ramanarayanan. Default and the maturity structure in sovereign

  bonds. Journal of Political Economy, 120:187–232, 2012.

Harjoat S. Bhamra, Lars-Alexander Kuehn, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. The Levered Equity Risk

  Premium and Credit Spreads: A Unified Framework. Review of Financial Studies, 23(2):645–

  703, 2010.

Markus K Brunnermeier. Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-08. Journal of Eco-

  nomic Perspectives, 23(1):77–100, 2009.

Markus K Brunnermeier and Martin Oehmke. The Maturity Rat Race. Journal of Finance, 68(2):

  483–521, 2013.




                                                44
Charles W Calomiris and Charles M Kahn. The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal

  Banking Arrangements. American Economic Review, 81(3):497–513, jun 1991. URL http:

  //www.jstor.org/stable/2006515.

Hui Chen. Macroeconomic conditions and the puzzles of credit spreads and capital structures.

  Journal of Finance, 65(6):2171–2212, 2010. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/23324408.

Hui Chen, Yu Xu, and Jun Yang. Systematic Risk, Debt Maturity, and the Term Structure of

  Credit Spreads. Working Paper, 2013.

Hui Chen, Rui Cui, Zhiguo He, and Konstantin Milbradt. Liquidity and default of corporate bonds

  over the business cycle. Working Paper, 2014.

Ing-Haw Cheng and Konstantin Milbradt. The hazards of debt: Rollover Freezes, Incentives, and

  Bailouts. Review of Financial Studies, 25(4):1070–1110, 2012.

Jaewon Choi, Dirk Hackbarth, and Josef Zechner. Corporate Debt Maturity Profiles. Working

  Paper, 2015.

Harold L Cole and T J Kehoe. Self-fulfilling debt crises. Review of Economic Studies, 67:91–116,

  2000. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2567030.

Thomas Dangl and Josef Zechner. Debt maturity and the dynamics of leverage. Working Paper,

  2006.

Peter DeMarzo and Zhiguo He. Leverage dynamics without commitment. Working Paper, 2014.

D W Diamond. Debt Maturity and Liquidity Risk. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(3):

  709–737, aug 1991. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2937924.

D W Diamond and P H Dybvig. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. Journal of Political

  Economy, 91(3):401–419, jun 1983. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/1837095.

D W Diamond and Zhiguo He. A theory of debt maturity: the long and short of debt overhang.

  Journal of Finance, 69(2):719–762, 2014.




                                               45
Douglas W Diamond and Raghuram G Rajan. Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and Financial

  Fragility: A Theory of Banking. Journal of Political Economy, 109(2):287–327, apr 2001. URL

  http://www.jstor.org/stable/3078420.

Alessandro Dovis. Efficient sovereign default. Working Paper, 2012.

Edwin O. Fischer, Robert Heinkel, and Josef Zechner. Optimal Dynamic Capital Structure Choice:

  Theory and Tests. Journal of Finance, 44:19–40, 1989. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/

  2328273.

Mark J Flannery. Asymmetric information and risky debt maturity choice. Journal of Finance, 41

  (1):19–37, mar 1986. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2328342.

Mark J Flannery. Debt Maturity and the Deadweight Cost of Leverage: Optimally Financing

  Banking Firms. American Economic Review, 84(1):320–331, mar 1994. URL http://www.jstor.

  org/stable/2117987.

Wendell H. Fleming and Raymond W. Rishel. Deterministic and Stochastic Optimal Control.

  Springer, New York, NY, 1975.

Emilia Garcia-Appendini and Judit Montoriol-Garriga. Trade credit and financial distress. Working

  Paper, 2014.

Robert Goldstein, Nengjiu Ju, and Hayne Leland. An ebit-based model of dynamic capital struc-

  ture. Journal of Business, 74:483–512, 2001. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/

  322893.

Gary Gorton, Andrew Metrick, and Lei Xie. The Flight from Maturity. Working Paper, 2015.

John R. Graham and Campbell R. Harvey. The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence

  from the field. Journal of Financial Economics, 60(2):187–243, 2001.

Zhiguo He and Konstantin Milbradt. Endogenous liquidity and defaultable bonds. Econometrica,

  82(4):1443–1508, 2014.

Zhiguo He and Wei Xiong. Dynamic debt runs. Review of Financial Studies, 25:1799–1843, 2012a.

  URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/41485543.

                                               46
Zhiguo He and Wei Xiong. Rollover Risk and Credit Risk. Journal of Finance, 67(2):391–429,

  2012b. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/41419701.

Jing-Zhi Huang and Ming Huang. How Much of the Corporate-Treasury Yield Spread Is Due to

  Credit Risk? Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 2(2):153–202, 2012.

Arvind Krishnamurthy. How debt markets have malfunctioned in the crisis. Journal of Economic

  Perspectives, 24(1):3–28, 2010.

Hayne Leland. Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital structure. Journal of

  Finance, 49(4):1213–1252, sep 1994a. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2329184.

Hayne Leland. Bond prices, yield spreads, and optimal capital structure with default risk. Working

  Paper, 1994b.

Hayne Leland. Agency costs, risk management, and capital structure. Journal of Finance, 53(4):

  1213–1243, aug 1998. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/117400.

Hayne Leland and Klaus Bjerre Toft. Optimal capital structure, endogenous bankruptcy, and the

  term structure of credit spreads. Journal of Finance, 51(3):987–1019, jul 1996. URL http:

  //www.jstor.org/stable/2329229.

Guido Lorenzoni and Ivan Werning. Slow moving debt crises. Working Paper, 2014.

Timothy J. McQuade. Stochastic Volatility and Asset Pricing Puzzles. Working Paper, 2013.

Pierre Mella-Barral and William Perraudin. Strategic debt service. Journal of Finance, 52(2):

  531–556, jun 1997. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2329489.

Atif Mian and Joao Santos. Liquidity risk and maturity management over the credit cycle. Working

  Paper, 2011.

Konstantin Milbradt and Martin Oehmke. Maturity rationing and collective short-termism. Journal

  of Financial Economics, 118(3):553–570, 2015.

Gustavo Suarez, Enrique Schroth, and Lucian Taylor. Dynamic Debt Runs and Financial Fragility:

  Evidence from the 2007 ABCP Crisis. Journal of Financial Economics, 112:164–189, 2014.


                                               47
Qiping Xu. Kicking the Maturity Down the Road: Early Refinancing and Maturity Management

  in the Corporate Bond Market. Working Paper, 2014.



A      Appendix
A.1     Change of variables
We will solve the model in terms of (τ, yb ), that is time to maturity and cash-flow at time of bankruptcy. This change
of variables transforms the PDEs in the main part of the paper into ODEs on the equilibrium path. We then calculate
separately the IC conditions via the derivatives of Eφ under different assumptions of the issuance strategies. For the
moment, fix the issuance strategy f (τ ).
     The proportion of short-term debt φ (τ, yb ). Recall that we have φ ≡ PS is the proportion of short-term
debt. Consider an arbitrary path f (τ ) ∈ [0, 1] for the issuance strategy. Then, we have

                                       φ0 (τ ) = φ (τ ) [δS (1 − f (τ )) + f (τ ) δL ] − δL f (τ )

Integrating up, imposing φ (0) = φb = Φ (yb ), we have
                                      Rτ                                               Z     τ           Rs                                     
                                           [δS (1−fs )+fs δL ]ds                                      −        [δS (1−fu )+fu δL ]du
                     φ (τ, yb ) = e   0                            Φ (yb ) − δL                   e       0                              fs ds       (A.1)
                                                                                          0

Suppose that f (τ ) = f is constant throughout. Then we can solve to get
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                          1 − e−τ [δS (1−f )+f δL ]
                 φ (τ, yb )f (τ )=f,∀τ = eτ [δS (1−f )+f δL ] Φ (yb ) − δL f
                                                                                            δS (1 − f ) + f δL
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                            δL f                                    δL f
                                       = eτ [δS (1−f )+f δL ] Φ (yb ) −                                                  +
                                                                                     δS (1 − f ) + f δL                      δS (1 − f ) + f δL

In the general setting, taking derivatives, while keeping f (τ ) fixed, we have

                          ∂h1   ∂φ (τ, yb )
                              =                        =    φ (τ, yb ) [δS (1 − f (τ )) + f (τ ) δL ] − δL f (τ )                                    (A.2)
                          ∂τ       ∂τ                                     Rτ
                          ∂h1   ∂φ (τ, yb )                                       [δS (1−fs )+fs δL ]ds
                              =                        =    Φ0 (yb ) e        0                                                                      (A.3)
                          ∂yb     ∂yb
                                                                                                                             ∂y(τ,yb )
    The current cash-flow state y (τ, yb ). The differential equation for y gives                                              ∂yb
                                                                                                                                         > 0.
    Derivatives w.r.t. φ. The ODEs are solved in terms of

                                                                       z = (τ, yb )                                                                  (A.4)

However, the incentives of the equity holders are derived from the Markov system

                                                                       x = (φ, y) ,                                                                  (A.5)

as the optimal f requires the derivative Eφ . We are looking for points z = g (x) such that h (x, z) = h (x, g (x)) = 0
where                                                                       
                                               h1 (x, z)       −φ + φ (τ, yb )
                                  h (x, z) =              =                      =0                               (A.6)
                                               h2 (x, z)       −y + y (τ, yb )
and where                                                                                    
                                                                              τ (φ, y)
                                                           g (x) =                                                                                   (A.7)
                                                                              yb (φ, y)
    To calculate the derivative of of for exampleE (τ, yb ) = E (z) w.r.t. φ, we have to use
                                                                                                                             i      
                            ∂                          ∂τ                ∂yb   ∂          ∂z
                                                                                                           h
                              E (τ, yb ) = Eτ (τ, yb )    + Eyb (τ, yb )     =    E (z) ·                                                            (A.8)
                           ∂φ                          ∂φ                ∂φ    ∂z         ∂φ




                                                                           48
The Jacobian matrix is given by
                                                                                          ∂h1         ∂h1
                                                                                                           
                                                                ∂h (x, z)                 ∂τ          ∂yb
                                                             J=           =               ∂h2         ∂h2                                                             (A.9)
                                                                   ∂z                     ∂τ          ∂yb
                                                                                                      ∂h        ∂h ∂z
Then, applying the chain rule when taking the derivative w.r.t. xi ,                                  ∂xi
                                                                                                            +   ∂z ∂xi
                                                                                                                           = 0, we have for xi = φ,
                                                                                             
                                               ∂z   ∂g (x)    ∂               τ (φ, y)                           ∂
                                                  =        =                                      = −J−1           h (x, z)                                         (A.10)
                                               ∂φ    ∂φ      ∂φ               yb (φ, y)                         ∂φ

     Let us calculate the different derivatives. First, we have
                                                                          ∂h1
                                                                                    =     −1                                                                        (A.11)
                                                                          ∂φ
                                                                          ∂h2
                                                                                    =     0                                                                         (A.12)
                                                                          ∂φ

so that    ∂
          ∂φ
             h (x, z)     = − [1, 0]> . Then, we have
                                           ∂τ (φ,y)
                                                                        ∂h1       ∂h1
                                                                                           −1        ∂h1
                                                                                                                
                              ∂z               ∂φ                         ∂τ        ∂yb                ∂φ
                                 =          ∂yb (φ,y)        =   −        ∂h2       ∂h2                ∂h2
                              ∂φ               ∂φ                         ∂τ        ∂yb                ∂φ
                                                                                                      ∂h2
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                1                      ∂yb
                                                                                                                    − ∂h1
                                                                                                                      ∂yb           1
                                                             =    ∂h1 ∂h2
                                                                  ∂τ ∂yb
                                                                                −   ∂h1 ∂h2
                                                                                    ∂yb ∂τ
                                                                                                      − ∂h
                                                                                                        ∂τ
                                                                                                           2         ∂h1
                                                                                                                     ∂τ
                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                      ∂h2
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                1                      ∂yb
                                                             =    ∂h1 ∂h2
                                                                  ∂τ ∂yb
                                                                                −   ∂h1 ∂h2
                                                                                    ∂yb ∂τ
                                                                                                      − ∂h
                                                                                                        ∂τ
                                                                                                           2


                                                                                                                                ∂y(τ,yb )
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                           1                                      ∂yb
                                                             =                                                                                                      (A.13)
                                                                  ∂y(τ,yb ) ∂φ(τ,yb )
                                                                    ∂yb       ∂τ
                                                                                          −       ∂y(τ,yb ) ∂φ(τ,yb )
                                                                                                    ∂τ        ∂yb
                                                                                                                               − ∂y(τ,y
                                                                                                                                    ∂τ
                                                                                                                                        b)



Thus, we ultimately have
    ∂τ (φ,y)
                                                                                                                                                                               ∂y(τ,yb )
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
       ∂φ                                                                                     1                                                                                     ∂yb
    ∂yb (φ,y)       =                                                                                                                        Rτ
                        ∂y(τ,yb )                                                                                                                 [δS (1−fs )+fs δL ]ds       −µy (y (τ, yb ))
       ∂φ
                          ∂yb
                                    {φ (τ, yb ) [δS (1 − f (τ )) + f (τ ) δL ] − δL f (τ )} − µy (y (τ, yb )) Φ0 (yb ) e                     0

                                                                                                                                                                    (A.14)

A.2       Proofs of Section 3
First, an issuance policy fb is called admissible as a defaulting strategy on the boundary if it leads to immediate
default, i.e., the trajectory of (Φ (yb ) , yb ) points into the bankruptcy region B. The left panel of Figure 5 illustrates
the intuition: When we are at a point (Φ (yb ) , yb ), we want to ensure that any admissible strategy f ∈ [0, 1] still
points into the bankruptcy region. For paths f = 0 and f = 1 this is the case. As an example of a path that violates
admissibility, we graph a path for f = −1 which points inside C, the continuation region, and not inside B, the
bankruptcy region. Thus, the point (Φ (yb ) , yb ) would not be a defaulting point for all strategies f .

Lemma 3. An issuance strategy fb is admissible as a defaulting strategy on the boundary if
                                                                                 Φ (yb ) δS − µy (yb ) Φ0 (yb )
                                                fb > fadmissible (yb ) ≡                                                                                            (A.15)
                                                                                 Φ (yb ) δS + [1 − Φ (yb )] δL

with fadmissible (yb ) < 1.

     We assume throughout the paper that every point on the bankruptcy boundary is admissible, that is fadmissible (yb ) ≤
0 for all yb ∈ [ymin , ymax ] where Φ (ymin ) = 0 and Φ (ymax ) = 1.

Proof of Lemma 3. We cannot allow such f ’s that have (φ, τ ) pointing inside the bankruptcy region B when increasing
the time to maturity τ . Thus, we need to impose
                                                         dφ(τ,yb )
                                                            dτ                  Φ (yb ) [δS (1 − f ) + f δL ] − δL f
                                            Φ0 (yb ) >   dy(τ,yb )
                                                                   τ =0
                                                                          =                                          .                                              (A.16)
                                                                                              µy (yb )
                                                            dτ     τ =0




                                                                                 49
Figure 5: Left Panel: Linearized forward (in time) trajectory from point (Φ (yb ) , yb ) for different
arbitrary issuance strategies f . Right Panel: Linearized equilibrium backward (in time) trajec-
tories from different boundary points (Φ (yb ) , yb ) with equilibrium issuance strategy f (yb ). The
point (φC , yC ) is the closest intersection point of the (linearized) equilibrium path emanating from
(Φ (yA ) , yA ) to any neighboring (linearized) equilibrium path.

Rearranging, we have the following inequality that defines admissible f :

                                0    >       {Φ (yb ) [δS (1 − f ) + f δL ] − δL f } − µy (yb ) Φ0 (yb ) .          (A.17)

and setting this equal to 0 and solving for f , we get (A.15).

    Next, let us derive debt and equity values for given paths of f for (τ, yb ).
    Debt. Debt has an ODE
                                                                                       ∂
                                     (r + δi + ζ) Di (τ, yb ) = (ci + δi + ζ) −           Di (τ, yb )               (A.18)
                                                                                       ∂τ
that is solved by
                                                                                                            
                                                      c S + δS + ζ                          cS + δS + ζ
                         DS (τ, yb )     =                         + e−(r+δS +ζ)τ B (yb ) −                         (A.19)
                                                       r + δS + ζ                            r + δS + ζ
                                                                                                            
                                                      c S + δL + ζ                          c S + δL + ζ
                         DL (τ, yb )     =                         + e−(r+δL +ζ)τ B (yb ) −                         (A.20)
                                                       r + δL + ζ                            r + δL + ζ

Importantly, for a given (τ, yb ) debt values are independent of the path of f . Imposing ci = r for i ∈ {S, L} we get
the result that ∆ > 0.
    Equity. Equity solves the ODE where y = y (τ, yb ) and φ = φ (τ, yb )

              (r + ζ) E (τ, yb ) = y + ζE rf − c + m (φ) [f DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f ) DL (τ, yb ) − 1] − Eτ (τ, yb )   (A.21)
                           ∂
with boundary condition    ∂τ
                                E (τ, yb )   τ =0
                                                      = 0. Integrating up for a given path of f , we have
                                             Z    τ
                                                      e(r+ζ)(u−τ ) y (u, yb ) + ζE rf − c
                                                                  
                       E (τ, yb )    =
                                              0
                                             +m (φ (u, yb )) [fu DS (u, yb ) + (1 − fu ) DL (u, yb ) − 1]} du       (A.22)

Here, we can see how f affects the value of equity even for a given (τ, yb ).

Lemma 4. At the endogenous default boundary, we have smooth-pasting conditions in each dimension: Eφ (Φ (yb ) , yb ) =
0 and Ey (Φ (yb ) , yb ) = 0.

Proof of Lemma 4. E (Φ (yb ) , yb ) = 0 at default is obvious as equity defaults when their cash-flows turn exactly
zero in our deterministic setting. Plugging in E (Φ (yb ) , yb ) = 0 into the ODE for equity valuation, we see that


                                                                       50
Eτ (τ, yb )|τ =0 = 0. Change the coordinates of the state space to (φ, y), we have

                                                                 ∂τ                           ∂yb                              ∂yb
                        Eφ (Φ (yb ) , yb )|τ =0 = Eτ (τ, yb )                + Eyb (τ, yb )                   = Eyb (τ, yb )                 ,             (A.23)
                                                                 ∂φ   τ =0
                                                                                              ∂φ    τ =0
                                                                                                                               ∂φ     τ =0

where we use Eτ (τ, yb )|τ =0 = 0. However, we have Eyb (τ, yb )|τ =0 = 0, because equity defaults at τ = 0 and yb only
affects the recovery value that bond holders receives and equity holders get nothing. (Note that Eyb (τ, yb ) fixes τ
while changes yb ; it differs from Ey (φ, y)). Similarly we can show Ey (Φ (yb ) , yb ) = 0.

     Because the recovery value B (yb ) is weakly increasing in yb , i.e., B 0 (yb ) ≥ 0, one can verify that Φ (yb ) is strictly
increasing in yb . Note that yb − c + ζE rf + m (Φ) [B (yb ) − 1] = 0 ⇐⇒ yb − c + ζE rf = m (Φ) [1 − B (yb )] > 0, so
that
                                 [1 − B (yb )] + B 0 (yb ) yb − c + ζE rf
                                                                          
             0           1                                                          1       1 + m (Φ) B 0 (yb )
           Φ (yb ) =          ×                             2
                                                                            =             ×                     > 0.
                      δS − δL                  [1 − B (yb )]                    δS − δL        [1 − B (yb )]
    Evaluating the derivatives of time-to-default and defaulting cash-flows w.r.t. the maturity structure at τ = 0,
∂y(τ,yb )
  ∂yb
                   = 1, we have
            τ =0

                    ∂τ (φ,y)
                                                                                                                                              
                       ∂φ                                                  1                                                          1
                    ∂yb (φ,y)           =
                       ∂φ
                                          {Φ (yb ) [δS (1 − f (0)) + f (0) δL ] − δL f (0)} − µy (yb ) Φ0 (yb )                    −µy (yb )
                                 τ =0

Thus, for any admissible f (0) on the default boundary, the denominator is negative by (A.17), so that the time-to-
                                                                                            ∂τ
default shrinks and the defaulting cash-flow increases as the debt maturity shortens, i.e., ∂φ < 0 and ∂y
                                                                                                       ∂φ
                                                                                                         b
                                                                                                              > 0.
                                                                                                                               τ =0                    τ =0


A.3         Proofs of Section 4
Proof of Lemma 1. Differentiating IC (τ, yb ) = ∆ (τ, yb ) + Eφ (τ, yb ) w.r.t. τ , we have ICτ (τ, yb ) = ∆τ (τ, yb ) +
Eφτ (τ, yb ). Next, we differentiate (A.21) w.r.t. φ to get
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                            ∂DS (τ, yb )            ∂DL (τ, yb )
Eτ φ (τ, yb ) = m0 (φ) [f DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f ) DL (τ, yb ) − 1]+m (φ) f                                + (1 − f )              −(r + ζ) Eφ (τ, yb )
                                                                                               ∂φ                      ∂φ
                                                                                                                                         (A.24)
where Eτ φ (with slightly abused notation) is defined as
                                                       ∂                             ∂τ                  ∂yb
                                          Eτ φ =         Eτ (τ, yb ) = Eτ τ (τ, yb )    + Eτ yb (τ, yb )
                                                      ∂φ                             ∂φ                  ∂φ
Note here that we are using the envelope theorem with regards to derivatives of f w.r.t. φ—as equity is optimizing,
marginal changes in φ on f can be ignored.
   Plugging in for Eφτ (τ, yb ) from (A.24), we have
                                                (1)                                   (2)
                                           z    }|     {    z                         }|                             {
                          ICτ (τ, yb ) =∆τ (τ, yb ) + m0 (φ) [f DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f ) DL (τ, yb ) − 1]
                                                                                                         
                                                            ∂DS (τ, yb )            ∂DL (τ, yb )
                                            + m (φ) f                    + (1 − f )              − (r + ζ) Eφ (τ, yb ) .
                                                               ∂φ                      ∂φ          |       {z         }
                                                |                          {z                             }              (4)
                                                                           (3)

Interpreting the terms, we have the following terms:
    1. Change in the bond price wedge purely from time-to-default (keeping yb fixed).
    2. Change in rollover speed multiplied by the rollover loss.
    3. Change in value of newly issued bonds multiplied by rollover speed.
    4. Change in equity continuation value multiplied by discounting terms.
Substituting in ∆τ = (δS − δL ) − (r + ζ) ∆ − [δS DS − δL DL ] from (A.18), and use m0 (φ) = δS − δL from (4), we
have
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                     ∂DS (τ, yb )            ∂DL (τ, yb )
ICτ (τ, yb ) = − [r + ζ + δS (1 − f ) + δL f ] ∆ (τ, yb ) + m (φ) f                               + (1 − f )              − (r + ζ) Eφ (τ, yb )
                    |                      {z                     }                     ∂φ                      ∂φ          |       {z       }
                                        (1)+(2)                        |                            {z                                }              (4)
                                                                                                    (3)



                                                                             51
and we see that (1) and (2) combine to yield an expression that involves the price-wedge itself times an issuance
weighted discounting term. At default, the terms (1) and (2) vanish as the price wedge between the bonds vanishes
by equal seniority, and the change in the continuation value term (4) is zero by optimality. This is linked to the fact
that equity defaults at a point at which its expected cash-flows, as well as its default payoffs, are approximately zero.
Formally, at τ → 0 we have IC = ∆ = Eφ = 0, so we are left with term (3). Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 1. First, let us concentrate on fb on the boundary. Taking derivatives of (A.19) and (A.20)
w.r.t. φ via (A.14), and evaluating at τ = 0, we have

                              ∂Di                        (r + ζ + δi ) [1 − B (yb )] − µy (yb ) B 0 (yb )
                                               =                                                                                                 (A.25)
                              ∂φ        τ =0
                                                   {Φ (yb ) [δS (1 − fb ) + fb δL ] − δL fb } − µy (yb ) Φ0 (yb )

Using Lemma 1, i.e. (19), and plugging in, we have
                                                                                                                
               ∂IC (τ, yb )                                           ∂DS (τ, yb )             ∂DL (τ, yb )
                                        =      m (Φ (yb )) fb                      + (1 − fb )                           .                       (A.26)
                  ∂τ          τ =0
                                                                         ∂φ                       ∂φ              τ =0
                                                                [r + ζ + fb δS + (1 − fb ) δL ] [1 − B (yb )] − µy (yb ) B 0 (yb )
                                        =      m (Φ (yb ))                                                                                       (A.27)
                                                                  {Φ (yb ) [δS (1 − fb ) + fb δL ] − δL fb } − µy (yb ) Φ0 (yb )

As m (φ) ≥ δL > 0, we can ignore this term for determining the sign. Next, let us collect all terms in the numerator
multiplying fb , which are given by (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] > 0. Further, we know from condition (A.17) that for all
admissible fb the denominator has to be negative. Thus, we can concentrate on the numerator to determine the
optimal fb . We have

                                          [r + ζ + fb δS + (1 − fb ) δL ] [1 − B (yb )] − µy (yb ) B 0 (yb )
                                    =     (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )] − µy (yb ) B 0 (yb )
                                          +fb · (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]                                                                         (A.28)

and we see that we have a linear increasing function in fb . Thus, we have at most one unique root in (A.28), given by
fbnc (yb ). Importantly, we also know from (A.28) and the admissibility condition that ICτ crosses 0 from above if at
all. As the numerator is monotone, this implies a unique equilibrium. Since we have the restriction fb ∈ [0, 1], if the
numerator is everywhere negative for fb ∈ [0, 1], then fb = 1 if admissible. If the numerator is everywhere positive
for fb ∈ [0, 1], then fb = 0 if this is admissible. Lastly, if there exits an admissible

                                                   µy (yb ) B 0 (yb ) − (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                   fbnc (yb ) =                                                     ∈ (0, 1)                                     (A.29)
                                                               (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
then this is the unique equilibrium. Note that
                                                       0                                                                                        2
                                                                    µy (yb ) B 00 (yb ) + µ0y (yb ) B 0 (yb ) [1 − B (yb )] + µy (yb ) (B 0 (yb ))
                                                                                                        
 d nc              1              µy (yb ) B 0 (yb )
    fb (yb ) =                                              =                                                                                        >0
dyb            (δS − δL )          [1 − B (yb )]                                             (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]2
                                                                                                                                                 (A.30)
as B 0 (yb ) ≥ 0 and B 00 (yb ) ≥ 0.We thus have

                                                       fb (yb ) = min [1, max [fbnc (yb ) , 0]]                                                  (A.31)

as the unique equilibrium subject to admissibility on the bankruptcy boundary. As we assumed fadmissible (yb ) < 0
for all points on the bankruptcy boundary this concludes the proof.
     We now prove equilibrium uniqueness in the neighborhood of the default boundary. What we need to show is
that even though every point on the bankruptcy boundary has a unique path leading to it, that for points close to the
boundary this statement can be inverted—for an arbitrary point in the neighborhood of the bankruptcy boundary
there exists a unique equilibrium path to the boundary. In essence, we need to show that we can invert the problem.
The right panel of 5 illustrates the intuition: the intersection of the backward linearized equilibrium paths for different
points on the boundary stays bounded away from the boundary.
     What we need to show that for any two points, say A = (yA , Φ (yA )) and B = (yB , Φ (yb )), the backward
linearized paths originating from these points cross at a distance from the boundary. For fb (yi ) ∈ {0, 1} this is
straightforward—paths are essentially parallel and do not cross as f is held constant—this is true for the actual
paths, and not just for the linearized paths. However, for yb ∈ (y0 , y1 ) such that fb (yb ) ∈ (0, 1), moving along the
boundary, i.e. changing yb , changes fb and thus changes the direction of the path.




                                                                              52
    First, the linearized path from A is described by φA (y) = Φ (yA ) + mA (y − yA ) where the slope is given by

                                        dφ   Φ (yA ) δS − [Φ (yA ) (δS − δL ) + δL ] fb (yA )
                                 mA =      =
                                        dy                     µy (yA )

and similarly, we have φB (y) = Φ (yB ) + mB (y − yB ) where

                                            Φ (yB ) δS − [Φ (yB ) (δS − δL ) + δL ] fb (yB )
                                    mB =
                                                              µy (yB )

We are looking for an intersect yC that defines a point C = (φC , yC ) where the two lines meet, that is,

                                                                   Φ (yA ) − Φ (yB ) + mB yB − mA yA
                       φC = φA (yC ) = φB (yC ) ⇐⇒ yC =
                                                                                mB − mA
as fb0 (yb ) > 0 this point exists and is bounded away from the boundary for any two points on the boundary that are
at a distance from each other. We next shrink the distance between the two points, A and B. To this end, suppose
that yB = yA + ε. Then the distance along the curve between A and B, which we call c, is approximately
                                   q                                           q
                              c=     (yB − yA )2 + (Φ (yB ) − Φ (yA ))2 ≈ ε       1 + (Φ0 (yA ))2

Let us assume for the moment that µy (y) = µ. Then, we approximate the slope mB for small ε by

                      Φ (yA + ε) δS − [Φ (yA + ε) (δS − δL ) + δL ] fb (yA + ε)
               mB =
                                                 µ
                            Φ0 (yA ) δS − {Φ0 (yA ) (δS − δL ) fb (yA ) + [Φ (yA ) (δS − δL ) + δL ] fb0 (yA )}
                    = mA +                                                                                      ε
                                                                    µ
                    = mA + m0A ε

Plugging into our equation for yC , and again approximating around small ε, we have
                               Φ (yA ) − Φ (yB ) + mB yB − mA yA
                         yC =
                                            mB − mA
                               Φ (yA ) − [Φ (yA ) + Φ0 (yA ) ε] + (mA + m0A ε) (yA + ε) − mA yA
                             =
                                                      (mA + m0A ε) − mA
                                 −Φ0 (yA ) ε + mA ε + m0A yA ε
                             =
                                             m0A ε
                                 −Φ0 (yA ) + mA + m0A yA        −Φ0 (yA ) + mA
                             =               0
                                                         = yA +
                                            mA                       m0A

Thus, the distance of yC from yA is bounded away from zero, even as ε → 0. Note here that we are using |Φ0 (yA )| < ∞
and |fb0 (yA )| < ∞ (see equation A.30), which itself comes from B (yb ) being well behaved and uniformly below 1 for
y ∈ [ymin , ymax ] by the endogenous default decision of the equity holders, to get m0A < ∞. Thus, as ε → 0, every
point in the neighborhood of the boundary has a unique path leading to the boundary defined by fb . A similar proof
can be constructed for µy (y) = µ · y, as for small enough ε we have µy (y + ε) = µy (y) + µ0y (y) ε with µ0y (y) < ∞
by assumption on µy (·).
     As an aside, if fb did have a jump say at yA , then fb0 (yA ) = ∞ and thus m0A = ∞, which results in limε→0 yC (ε) =
yA . This would imply that in the neighborhood of point A we cannot rule out multiple equilibria. Or in other words,
the distance of the intersection point yC to yA shrinks to zero at the same speed as the distance between yA and
yB .

   Next, we want to answer the question if the first-order condition on default really implies optimality? We have
E = Eτ = 0 or E = Eφ = Ey = 0.

Lemma 5. For any admissible fb = min [1, max [fbnc (yb ) , 0]], immediate default is indeed optimal.

Proof of Lemma 5. To show optimality of default, we show that for any admissible equilibrium defaulting boundary




                                                              53
strategy f , Eτ τ (τ, yb )|τ =0 > 0. Differentiate (A.21) w.r.t. τ to get

     Eτ τ (τ, yb )   =     yτ (τ, yb ) + m0 (φ (τ, yb )) φτ (τ, yb ) [f DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f ) DL (τ, yb ) − 1]
                                                ∂                           ∂
                                            h                                             i
                           +m (φ (τ, yb )) f      DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f )       DL (τ, yb ) − (r + ζ) Eτ (τ, yb )
                                               ∂τ                           ∂τ
                     =     µy (y (τ, yb )) + (δS − δL ) [φ (τ, yb ) δS − m (φ (τ, yb )) f ] [f DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f ) DL (τ, yb ) − 1]
                                                ∂                           ∂
                                            h                                             i
                           +m (φ (τ, yb )) f      DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f )       DL (τ, yb ) − (r + ζ) Eτ (τ, yb )
                                               ∂τ                           ∂τ
Evaluating at τ = 0, we have

                         Eτ τ (τ, yb )|τ =0   =   µy (yb ) + (δS − δL ) [Φ (yb ) δS − m (Φ (yb )) f ] [B (yb ) − 1]
                                                  +m (Φ (yb )) [r + ζ + δL + f (δS − δL )] [1 − B (yb )]
                                              =   µy (yb ) + 2m (Φ (yb )) (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] f
                                                  − (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) δS [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  + [δL + Φ (yb ) (δS − δL )] (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                              =   µy (yb ) + 2m (Φ (yb )) (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] f
                                                  +δL (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  − (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) [1 − B (yb )] δS
                                                  + (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) [1 − B (yb )] (r + ζ + δL )
                                              =   µy (yb ) + 2m (Φ (yb )) (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] f
                                                  +δL (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  + (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) [1 − B (yb )] (r + ζ + δL − δS )

    Suppose first we have an SE, i.e., f = 1. Then we have

                         Eτ τ (τ, yb )|τ =0   =   µy (yb ) + 2 [Φ (yb ) (δS − δL ) + δL ] (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  +δL (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  + (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) [1 − B (yb )] (r + ζ + δL − δS )
                                              =   µy (yb ) + 2Φ (yb ) (δS − δL )2 [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  +2δL (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  +δL (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  + (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) [1 − B (yb )] (r + ζ)
                                                  − (δS − δL )2 Φ (yb ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                              =   µy (yb ) + Φ (yb ) (δS − δL )2 [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  +2δL (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  +δL (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                  + (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) [1 − B (yb )] (r + ζ)

which is always positive.




                                                                    54
                                               µy (yb )B 0 (yb )−(r+ζ+δL )[1−B(yb )]
    For interior fb (yb ) = fbnc (yb ) =                (δS −δL )[1−B(yb )]
                                                                                         from (14), we have

                      Eτ τ (τ, yb )|τ =0    =       µy (yb )
                                                    +2m (Φ (yb )) (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] f
                                                    − (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) δS [1 − B (yb )]
                                                    +m (Φ (yb )) (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                            =       µy (yb )
                                                    +2m (Φ (yb )) µy (yb ) B 0 (yb ) − (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                                         

                                                    − (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) δS [1 − B (yb )]
                                                    +m (Φ (yb )) (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                    µy (yb ) 1 + 2m (Φ (yb )) B 0 (yb )
                                                                                             
                                            =
                                                    − (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) δS [1 − B (yb )]
                                                    −m (Φ (yb )) (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]

But we also know that for any equilibrium we must have fb (yb ) = fbnc (yb ) ≥ fadmissible , where
                                                                                                                             0
                                       Φ (yb ) δS − µy (yb ) Φ0 (yb )   Φ (yb ) δS − µy (yb ) 1+m(Φ(y   b ))B (yb )
                                                                                              (δS −δL )[1−B(yb )]
                   fadmissible (yb ) ≡                                =
                                       Φ (yb ) δS + [1 − Φ (yb )] δL                  m (Φ (yb ))

Let us rewrite fbnc (yb ) ≥ fadmissible as

                                                                       fbnc (yb )   ≥    fadmissible (yb )
                                                                                                                  1+m(Φ(yb ))B 0 (yb )
                                    0
                 µy (yb ) B (yb ) − (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]                           Φ (yb ) δS − µy (yb )   (δS −δL )[1−B(yb )]
              ⇐⇒                                                                    ≥
                            (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]                                                    m (Φ (yb ))
                                0
                                                                                         Φ (yb ) δS (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] − µy (yb ) 1 + m (Φ (yb )) B 0 (yb )
                                                                                                                                                                  
⇐⇒ m (Φ (yb )) µy (yb ) B (yb ) − (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]                       ≥
                          ⇐⇒ µy (yb ) 1 + 2m (Φ (yb )) B 0 (yb )
                                                                              
                                                                                    ≥    Φ (yb ) δS (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] + m (Φ (yb )) (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]

Plugging this into Eτ τ (0, yb ) above, we see that Eτ τ (τ, yb )|τ =0 ≥ 0.
    Lastly, suppose we have an LE with fb (yb ) = 0 ≥ fbnc (yb ). The proof above covers any f = fb (yb ) ≥ fbnc (yb ) ≥
fadmissible , so the only case left is the case in which fb (yb ) = 0 ≥ fadmissible ≥ fbnc (yb ). Then, plugging in fb (yb ) = 0,
we get the following inequality

                               Eτ τ (τ, yb )|τ =0     =       µy (yb ) + m (Φ (yb )) (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                              −δS (δS − δL ) Φ (yb ) [1 − B (yb )]

Let us consider the information

                                                                                                                       1+m(Φ(yb ))B 0 (yb )
                                                                                               Φ (yb ) δS − µy (yb )   (δS −δL )[1−B(yb )]
                                                          0        ≥    fadmissible (yb ) =
                                                                                                           m (Φ (yb ))
                                                                                              1 + m (Φ (yb )) B 0 (yb )
                                                    ⇐⇒ 0           ≥    Φ (yb ) δS − µy (yb )
                                                                                              (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
            ⇐⇒ µy (yb ) 1 + m (Φ (yb )) B 0 (yb )
                                                         
                                                                   ≥    Φ (yb ) δS (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                                         Φ (yb ) δS (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                           ⇐⇒ µy (yb )             ≥
                                                                             [1 + m (Φ (yb )) B 0 (yb )]
as well as the information
                                                                                    µy (yb ) B 0 (yb ) − (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                                      0    ≥       fbnc (yb ) =
                                                                                                (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                                               ⇐⇒ 0        ≥       µy (yb ) B 0 (yb ) − (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]
                ⇐⇒ (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]             ≥       µy (yb ) B 0 (yb )




                                                                             55
Thus, we have

                   µy (yb )   ≥     Φ (yb ) δS (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] − m (Φ (yb )) µy (yb ) B 0 (yb )
                              ≥     Φ (yb ) δS (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )] − m (Φ (yb )) (r + ζ + δL ) [1 − B (yb )]

The result follows immediately. Thus, Eτ τ (τ, yb )|τ =0 > 0.

A.4      Proofs of Section 5
                                                                                        ft+dt −ft
Lemma 6. There is no discontinuities in f on any equilibrium path, i.e.                    dt
                                                                                                    < ∞ everywhere.

Proof of Lemma 6. Eφ (φ, y) can be calculated as
                                   ∂             ∂                          ∂τ                ∂yb
                                     E (φ, y) =    E (τ, yb ) = Eτ (τ, yb )    + Eyb (τ, yb )     .                                (A.32)
                                  ∂φ            ∂φ                          ∂φ                ∂φ
As before, the first term captures the effect of time-to-default τ , while the second term captures the effect of defaulting
cash-flows yb . Suppose now there exists a time-to-default τ̂ at which there is a jump in f , i.e., fτ̂ − 6= fτ̂ + . Equity
values and debt values (and thus the bond value wedge ∆) are continuous across τ̂ along the path (φτ , yτ ) by inspection
of (A.19), (A.20) and (A.22). However, equity’s derivative with respect to τ , i.e., Eτ , displays a discontinuity at the
policy switching point τ̂ . Plugging into (A.21), we have

                                          Eτ̂ − − Eτ̂ + = m (φ) ∆ · (fτ̂ − − fτ̂ + ) = m (φ) ∆.                                    (A.33)

Since m (φ) ∆ > 0, it implies that when equity switches to issuing more short-term bonds at τ̂ , i.e., fτ̂ − − fτ̂ + , the
equity value’s derivative with respect to τ jumps up, i.e., the benefit of surviving longer goes  up.         
    In the original (φ, y) state space, denote the corresponding switching points to be φ̂− , ŷ− and φ̂+ , ŷ+ . Equity’s
                                                  ∂
incentive compatibility condition depends on ∂φ     Eφ (φ, y) at these two points. By writing out the terms in integral
                                                                                     ∂τ
form, and noting that any f are bounded, we can show that in (A.32), both the ∂φ        in the first term, and the entire
second term related to yb , i.e., Eyb (τ, yb ) ∂y
                                               ∂φ
                                                 b
                                                   , are continuous at the switching point. Hence, equation (A.33) implies
that
                                                                     ∂τ                              ∂τ
                    Eφ φ̂− , ŷ− − Eφ φ̂+ , ŷ+ = (Eτ − − Eτ + )          = m (φ) ∆ (fτ̂ − − fτ̂ + ) ·    .
                                                                       ∂φ                              ∂φ
                ∂τ
Next, note that ∂φ < 0, i.e., shortening maturity gives rise to a shorter time-to-default. Following the intuition right
after (A.33), when equity switches to issuing short-term bonds, the benefit of surviving longer going up implies that
marginal negative impact of shortening maturity is more severe. To make the general point, let us write
                                                                        
                       IC φ̂+ , ŷ+        =    ∆ φ̂, ŷ + Eφ φ̂+ , ŷ+
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                         ∂τ
                                           =    ∆ φ̂, ŷ + Eφ φ̂− , ŷ− + −m (φ) ∆ (fτ̂ − − fτ̂ + )
                                                                                                           ∂φ
                                                                                                  
                                                                                              ∂τ
                                           =    IC φ̂− , ŷ− + m (φ) ∆ (fτ̂ − − fτ̂ + ) −
                                                                                               ∂φ
                                                                                                  ∂τ
                                                                                                                    
Consider first the case when fτ̂ − = 1 and fτ̂ + < 1. This implies that m (φ) ∆ (fτ̂ − − fτ̂ + ) − ∂φ                    > 0 and we imme-
                                                                                          
diately have a violation: if fτ̂ − = 1was optimal, then IC φ̂+ , ŷ+ > IC φ̂− , ŷ− ≥ 0 and thus fτ̂ + < 1 violates the IC
                                                                                                                ∂τ
                                                                                                                    
condition. Next, consider the case when fτ̂ − = 0 and fτ̂ + > 0. This implies that m (φ) ∆ (fτ̂ − − fτ̂ + ) − ∂φ       < 0,
                                                  
which implies IC φ̂+ , ŷ+ < IC φ̂− , ŷ− ≤ 0 and thus invalidates fτ̂ + > 0. Lastly, consider the case when
                                     
fτ̂ − ∈ [0, 1] such that IC φ̂− , ŷ− = 0. Then we immediately see that any fτ̂ + 6= fτ̂ − violates IC: (i) if fτ̂ − ∈ (0, 1),
                                                                                           ∂τ
                                                                                                
then we must have IC φ̂+ , ŷ+ = 0 as well, which is violated by m (φ) ∆ (fτ̂ − − fτ̂ + ) − ∂φ     6= 0. (ii) if fτ̂ − ∈ {0, 1},
then we are in the above proofs, and see that the violation exactly runs counter to the IC condition.

Proof of Proposition 2. We start with the following observation. Suppose the current state of the system is given by
(φ, y). Firm-value is then given by

                                      V (φ, y) = E (φ, y) + φDS (φ, y) + (1 − φ) DL (φ, y)

Suppose we consider an arbitrary equilibrium path (φ, y) → (Φ (yb ) , yb ) where default occurs at the point (Φ (yb ) , yb ).
We know that the default time is deterministic given the equilibrium strategy {fτ }. That is, we fix the starting point



                                                                     56
and the end-point of the path, and thereby the time to default, but leave the actual issuance strategy {fτ } and thus
the actual path taken by φ undefined. Let us sum up all the cash-flows to get an alternate expression for firm value,
                                                   Z     τ
                      V (τ, yb )           =                 e(r+ζ)(s−τ ) [y (s, yb ) + ζX] ds + e−(r+ζ)τ B (yb )
                                                     0
                                                         τ
                                                                                                     1 − e−(r+ζ)τ
                                                   Z
                                           =                 e(r+ζ)(s−τ ) y (s, yb ) ds + ζX                      + e−(r+ζ)τ B (yb )
                                                     0
                                                                                                        r+ζ

and we can thus define equity as a residual,

                              E (τ, yb ) = V (τ, yb ) − φ (τ, yb ) DS (τ, yb ) − [1 − φ (τ, yb )] DL (τ, yb )

Importantly, equity value is invariant to the specific future path of φ taken as long as yb and thus τ are held fixed.
However, incentives are not invariant to the path taken, as we will show below. Consider now
                                   ∂
                Eφ        =          [V (φ, y) − φDS (φ, y) − (1 − φ) DL (φ, y)]
                                  ∂φ
                                                                                                                 
                                                              ∂                      ∂
                          =        Vφ (φ, y) − φ                DS (φ, y) − (1 − φ)    DL (φ, y) − [DS (φ, y) − DL (φ, y)]
                                                             ∂φ                     ∂φ

so that we have, after rearranging

            IC (τ, yb )       =       Eφ (τ, yb ) + ∆ (τ, yb )
                                                      ∂                         ∂
                              =       Vφ (φ, y) − φ DS (φ, y) − (1 − φ)            DL (φ, y)
                                                     ∂φ                       ∂φ
                                        ∂                          ∂                                 ∂                ∂τ
                                      n                                                                             o
                              =            V (τ, yb ) − φ (τ, yb )    DS (τ, yb ) − [1 − φ (τ, yb )]    DL (τ, yb )
                                        ∂τ                         ∂τ                                ∂τ               ∂φ
                                                                                                                                                
                                               ∂                           ∂                                  ∂                                       ∂yb
                                      +           V (τ, yb ) − φ (τ, yb )     DS (τ, yb ) − [1 − φ (τ, yb )]     DL (τ, yb )
                                              ∂yb                         ∂yb                                ∂yb                                      ∂φ

Thus, we notice that since V (τ, yb ) as well as DS (τ, yb ) and DL (τ, yb ) are independent of the path of f for a given
                                                                 ∂τ
(τ, yb ), we see that f is only reflected in change-of-variables ∂φ and ∂y
                                                                         ∂φ
                                                                            b
                                                                              . We know that IC (0, yb ) = 0 by boundary
conditions.
     As the IC(τ, yb ) condition is not monotone in τ , we use a scaled up version ekτ IC (τ, yb ) with k = r + ζ + f δL +
(1 − f ) δS .
     For µy (y) = µ, we can show that for shortening equilibria (i.e. f = 1)

                                               e−δS τ δS − (δS − δL ) 1 − Φ ybS                                                                           − µB 0 ybS
                                                                                                                                                               
∂  (r+ζ+δL )τ                                                                                            eδL τ           (δS + r + ζ) 1 − B ybS
               IC τ, ybS
                         
   e                                   =
∂τ                                                                                           [δL Φ (ybS ) − δL ] − µΦ0 (ybS )
                                                   −δS τ
                                                                                                                                                     − µB 0 ybS
                                                                                                                                                          
                                               e                 δS − (δS − δL ) 1 − φ τ, ybS                     (δS + r + ζ) 1 − B ybS
                                       =
                                                                                           [δL Φ (ybS ) − δL ] − µΦ0 (ybS )
                                                                             (δS + r + ζ) 1 − B ybS − µB 0 ybS
                                                                                                              
                                       =       e−δS τ m φ τ, ybS
                                                                                          [δL Φ (ybS ) − δL ] − µΦ0 (ybS )

and for lengthening equilibria (i.e. f = 0) we have

                                                       e−δL τ δL + (δS − δL ) Φ ybL eδS τ                                                            − µB 0 ybL
                                                                                                                                                           
    ∂  (r+ζ+δS )τ                                                                                                (δL + r + ζ) 1 − B ybL
                   IC τ, ybL
                             
       e                                      =
    ∂τ                                                                                           δS Φ (ybL ) − µΦ0 (ybL )
                                                       e−δL                                                                                     − µB 0 ybL
                                                                 τ
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                    δL + (δS − δL ) φ τ, ybL                (δL + r + ζ) 1 − B ybL
                                              =
                                                                                               δS Φ (ybL ) − µΦ0 (ybL )
                                                                                     (δL + r + ζ) 1 − B ybL − µB 0 ybL
                                                                                                                      
                                                           −δL τ
                                              =        e           m φ     τ, ybL
                                                                                                  δS Φ (ybL ) − µΦ0 (ybL )

    Next, for µy (y) = µy, we can show that for shortening equilibria (i.e. f = 1)

                                                                                              (δS + r + ζ) 1 − B ybS − µybS B 0 ybS
                                                                                                                                   
            ∂  (r+ζ+δL )τ
                           IC τ, ybS                                   e−δS τ m φ τ, ybS
                                     
               e                                              =
            ∂τ                                                                                              [δL Φ (ybS ) − δL ] − µΦ0 (ybS )



                                                                                      57
and for lengthening equilibria (i.e. f = 0) we have

                                                                                        (δL + r + ζ) 1 − B ybL − µybS B 0 ybL
                                                                                                                             
                ∂  (r+ζ+δS )τ                                  −δL τ
                               IC τ, ybL                                      τ, ybL
                                         
                   e                                    =   e           m φ
                ∂τ                                                                                       δS Φ (ybL ) − µΦ0 (ybL )

    As e−[f δS +(1−f )δL ]τ m (φ (τ, yb )) > 0, we notice that the remaining term is exactly condition (22) evaluated at
the appropriate f . Thus, the IC condition at 0 is sufficient for all cornered paths.
    Then, by the fact that LE paths never cross other LE paths, and SE paths never cross other SE paths, there can
at most be one LE and at most one SE equilibrium for any point (φ, y).

Proof of Proposition 3. By fbnc (yb ) increasing and the fact that any fb (yb ) = 1 implies admissibility we know that if
an SE exists, it has to be of the form [y1 , ymax ] where fbnc (y1 ) = 1 and Φ (ymax ) = 1 with y1 ≤ ymax . By Proposition
2 then we know that there is at most one LE and one SE at any point (φ, y). We further know that any point on the
SE region of the boundary has paths that also fulfills the SE incentive conditions. As paths do not cross, the lowest
point (Φ (y1 ) , y1 ) and the shortening path emanating from it describe the boundary of the SE possible set—any point
above this path features an SE equilibrium, as the SE paths are dense in the (φ, y) space. For the second part, we
note that the fastest rate of change for φ to decrease is given by f = 0. Thus, extending a lengthening path out form
(Φ (y1 ) , y1 ), any point between the boundary and this path cannot escape hitting the boundary in the SE region.
But that implies that the only equilibrium in this region is the SE equilibrium. A similar argument holds for the LE
regions.

Proposition 5. Any point on the bankruptcy boundary (Φ (yb ) , yb ) has a unique path leading to it.

Proof of Proposition 5. By the fact that cornered paths do not cross, any cornered equilibrium on the boundary
clearly has a unique path leading up to it. What remains to show is that interior paths defined by ICτ = 0 also have
a unique path leading up to it, i.e. a unique sequence of issuance decisions f . We now show that any interior path
features a sequence of uniquely determined f when working back from the boundary. Writing out IC (τ, yb ), we have

                            IC (τ, yb )    =   ∆ (τ, yb ) + Eφ (τ, yb )
                                                                                                                
                                                                                   ∂yb           ∂
                                           =   DS (τ, yb ) − DL (τ, yb ) +                          E (τ, yb )
                                                                                   ∂φ           ∂yb
                                                                                                                                   
                                                   ∂τ            y (τ, yb ) − c + ζE rf − (r + ζ) E (τ, yb )
                                               +                                                                                                    (A.34)
                                                   ∂φ       +m (φ (τ, yb )) [f DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f ) DL (τ, yb ) − 1]
                                                                     ∂y(τ,yb )                                                                     ∂
Let us move things under the common denominator                        ∂yb
                                                                               {φ (τ, yb ) [δS       (1 − f ) + f δL ] − δL f }−µy (y (τ, yb ))   ∂yb
                                                                                                                                                      φ (τ, yb )
                       ∂yb          ∂τ                          ∂yb       ∂τ
that comes from        ∂φ
                              and   ∂φ
                                       .   Plugging in for      ∂φ
                                                                    and ∂φ , we have

                                                                        1
IC (τ, yb )     =     ∂y(τ,yb )                                                                           ∂
                        ∂yb
                                  {φ (τ, yb ) [δS (1 − f ) + f δL ] − δL f } − µy (y (τ, yb ))b          ∂y
                                                                                                               φ (τ, yb )
                                   h                                                                                 i                                   
                                      ∂y(τ,yb )                                                ∂y(τ,yb ) ∂                                  ∂
                        ∆ (τ, yb )
                       
                                        ∂yb
                                                {φ (τ, yb ) [δS (1 − f ) +  f δL ] − δL f } −    ∂yb    ∂yb
                                                                                                            φ (τ, yb )  − µ y (y (τ, yb )) ∂yb
                                                                                                                                               E (τ, yb ) 
                                                                                                                                                          
                     ×                                                                                                                               (A.35)
                                                                                            rf
                                                                                                                                
                                                                        y (τ, yb ) − c + ζE − (r + ζ) E (τ, yb )
                                                + ∂y(τ,y b)                                                                                              
                                                     ∂yb         +m (φ (τ, y )) [f D (τ, y ) + (1 − f ) D (τ, y ) − 1]
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                        b           S      b                L       b


Suppose we have an interior equilibrium. For interior equilibria we have IC (τ, yb ) = 0, so that for non-zero denomi-
nators, we must have
                                                                                                                           
                          ∂y (τ, yb )                                                             ∂                               ∂
0   =    ∆ (τ, yb )                   {φ (τ, yb ) [δS − f (δS − δL )] − δL f } − µy (y (τ, yb ))    φ (τ, yb ) − µy (y (τ, yb ))     E (τ, yb )
                             ∂yb                                                                 ∂yb 0                           ∂yb
                                                                                           
              ∂y (τ, yb )        y (τ, yb ) − c + ζE rf − (r + ζ) E (τ, yb )
         +                                                                                                                                              (A.36)
                 ∂yb            +m (φ (τ, yb )) [f ∆ (τ, yb ) + DL (τ, yb ) − 1]




                                                                              58
Collecting powers of f on the LHS, we see that f cancels out:
                                                 ∂y (τ,yb )
                                             =     ∂yb
                                                            [φ(δS −δL )+δL −m(φ)]=0
                   z                                                  }|                                      {
                        ∂y (τ, yb )                                 ∂y (τ, yb )
                                    [φ (τ, yb ) (δS − δL ) + δL ] −             · m (φ (τ, yb )) ∆ (τ, yb ) f
                           ∂yb                                         ∂yb
                                                                                                      
                              ∂y (τ, yb )                                  ∂                                ∂
              =    ∆ (τ, yb )             δS φ (τ, yb ) − µy (y (τ, yb ))     φ (τ, yb ) − µy (y (τ, yb ))     E (τ, yb )
                                 ∂yb                                      ∂yb                              ∂yb
                                                                                                  
                     ∂y (τ, yb )          y (τ, yb ) − c + ζE rf − (r + ζ) E (τ, yb )
                   +                                                                                                                                   (A.37)
                        ∂yb                    +m (φ (τ, yb )) [DL (τ, yb ) − 1]

Let us take the derivative with respect to τ of the RHS only, noting that the LHS is identically 0 across τ as long as
we have an interior equilibrium.
    For future reference, differentiating (A.21) w.r.t. yb and using the envelope theorem, we have

                      ∂E (τ, yb )             ∂y (τ, yb )                                                         ∂φ (τ, yb )
            (r + ζ)                      =                + (δS − δL ) [f DS (τ, yb ) + (1 − f ) DL (τ, yb ) − 1]
                        ∂yb                      ∂yb                                                                ∂yb
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                    ∂DS (τ, yb )            ∂DL (τ, yb )   ∂                  ∂E (τ, yb )
                                              +m (φ) f                           + (1 − f )              −                                             (A.38)
                                                                      ∂yb                     ∂yb          ∂τ                   ∂yb
                                                   
                                        ∂E(τ,yb )                                                                                               ∂E(τ,yb )
with boundary condition       ∂
                              ∂τ          ∂yb
                                                                   = 0 and where we used m0 (φ) = δS − δL . Integrating up                        ∂yb
                                                                                                                                                          ,   we
                                                         τ =0
have
                                              Z      τ                      
                      ∂E (τ, yb )                            (r+ζ)(u−τ )        ∂y (u, yb )
                                         =               e
                        ∂yb                      0
                                                                                   ∂yb
                                                                                                                         ∂φ (u, yb )
                                              + (δS − δL ) [fu DS (u, yb ) + (1 − fu ) DL (u, yb ) − 1]
                                                                                                                            ∂yb
                                                                                                                             
                                                                  ∂DS (u, yb )             ∂DL (u, yb )
                                               +m (φ (u, yb )) fu              + (1 − fu )                                         du                  (A.39)
                                                                     ∂yb                      ∂yb

    Coming back to the IC condition, we then have
                                                                                                      
                                        ∂y (τ, yb )                                 ∂φ (τ, yb )             ∂∆ (τ, yb )
                         0   =                      δS φ (τ, yb ) − µy (y (τ, yb ))
                                           ∂yb                                        ∂yb                      ∂τ
                                                                                                                                 
                                                             ∂y (τ, yb ) ∂φ (τ, yb )                   ∂ 2 φ (τ, yb )
                                    +∆ (τ, yb )                         δS           − µy (y (τ, yb ))
                                                                ∂yb         ∂τ                            ∂yb ∂τ
                                                                  ∂ 2 E (τ, yb )
                                    −µy (y (τ, yb ))                                                                                                   (A.40)
                                                                    ∂yb ∂τ
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                    b)
                                        ∂y (τ, yb )                 ∂τ
                                                                        + m0 (φ (τ, yb )) [DL (τ, yb ) − 1] ∂φ(τ,y
                                                                  ∂y(τ,yb )
                                                                                                               ∂τ
                                    +                                                                            b)
                                                                                                                                                       (A.41)
                                           ∂yb                      +m (φ (τ, yb )) ∂DL∂τ
                                                                                        (τ,yb )
                                                                                                − (r + ζ) ∂E(τ,y
                                                                                                            ∂τ
                                                                                                                             
                                                             ∂ 2 y (τ, yb )                 ∂µy (y (τ, yb )) ∂φ (τ, yb )
                                    +∆ (τ, yb )                             δS φ (τ, yb ) −                                                            (A.42)
                                                                ∂yb ∂τ                           ∂τ            ∂yb
                                        ∂µy (y (τ, yb )) ∂E (τ, yb )
                                    −                                                                                                                  (A.43)
                                             ∂τ            ∂yb
                                                                                                                    
                                        ∂ 2 y (τ, yb )             y (τ, yb ) − c + ζE rf − (r + ζ) E (τ, yb )
                                    +                                                                                                                  (A.44)
                                           ∂yb ∂τ                       +m (φ (τ, yb )) [DL (τ, yb ) − 1]

where bold-face functions indicate (linear) functions of contemporaneous f . For µy (y) = µ, we have y (τ, yb ) =
                   2           ∂µ (y(τ,y ))
yb + µτ and thus ∂ ∂yy(τ,yb )
                       b ∂τ
                              = y ∂τ b = 0, so the last three lines are identically zero. Similarly, for µy (y) = µy,
                                              ∂ 2 y(τ,yb )                                                 ∂µy (y(τ,yb ))
we have y (τ, yb ) = yb eµτ and thus            ∂yb ∂τ
                                                                  = µ ∂y(τ,y
                                                                        ∂yb
                                                                            b)
                                                                               = µµτ (y (τ, yb )) =             ∂τ
                                                                                                                          ,   and the last three lines are
identically zero.




                                                                                   59
    Plugging in for the bold-face functions, dropping (τ, yb ) for brevity, we have
                                                        
                             ∂y                ∂φ            ∂∆
                0    =           δS φ − µy (y)
                             ∂yb               ∂yb           ∂τ
                                                                                                                        
                            ∂y                                               ∂φ                                      ∂
                         +∆     δS [f {−m (φ)} + δS φ] − µy (y) f (δL − δS )                                   + δS     φ
                            ∂yb                                              ∂yb                                    ∂yb
                                             ∂y                        ∂φ
                                                                                                  
                                            n∂yb + (δS − δL ) [DL − 1] ∂yb                     o
                                                   ∂φ                                    ∂∆
                         −µy (y)  +f (δS − δL ) ∆ ∂y + m (φ)
                                                                                                  
                                                                        b                ∂yb       
                                                             ∂DL                   ∂E
                                              +m (φ)         ∂yb
                                                                   − (r + ζ)       ∂yb
                                                                                                                  
                                                 ∂y
                                                 ∂τ
                                                     + m0 (φ) [DL − 1] [f {−m (φ)} + δS φ]
                           ∂y
                                                                                                  
                         +                       ∂DL               y + ζE rf − c + m (φ) [DL − 1]                                (A.45)
                           ∂yb  +m (φ)               − (r + ζ)
                                                  ∂τ                +f · {m (φ) ∆} − (r + ζ) E
                                                                                                    

where we left terms multiplying f bold-face. Gathering terms as
                                                                                                    (numerator)
                             0 = (numerator) − (denominator) f ⇐⇒ f =                                                            (A.46)
                                                                                                   (denominator)
we have
                                                                                                                            
                                                     ∂y                                                     ∂∆
               denominator         =   m (φ)             {∆ [δS + (r + ζ)] − (δS − δL ) (1 − DL )} + µy (y)
                                                     ∂yb                                                    ∂yb
                                                                                                                 
                                           ∂y                ∂φ                 ∂∆       ∂y                ∂φ
                    numerator      =           δS φ − µy (y)                       + ∆δS     δS φ − µy (y)
                                           ∂yb               ∂yb                ∂τ       ∂yb               ∂yb
                                                         ∂y                      ∂φ
                                                                                                      
                                                           + (δS − δL ) [DL − 1] ∂y
                                                         ∂yb
                                       −µy (y)                                      b
                                                          +m (φ) ∂DL
                                                                 ∂yb
                                                                               ∂E
                                                                     − (r + ζ) ∂y b
                                                                                                                            
                                           ∂y                      ∂y    0
                                                                     + m (φ)
                                                                   ∂τ
                                                                              [DL − 1] δS φ + m (φ) ∂D
                                                                                                     ∂τ
                                                                                                       L
                                       +                                   rf
                                                                                                                                (A.47)
                                           ∂yb        − (r + ζ) y + ζE              − c + m (φ) [DL − 1] − (r + ζ) E

Thus, by linearity we have a unique candidate fτ . The bold terms feature contemporaneous f that is linear in all




                                                                            60
cases:

                           m (φ)      =    δL + φ (δS − δL )                                                                                                  (A.48)
                                           
                                               yb + µτ            linear
                         y (τ, yb )   =                                                                                                                       (A.49)
                                               yb eµτ             exponential
                                           
                    ∂                          1           linear
                       y (τ, yb )     =                                                                                                                       (A.50)
                   ∂yb                         eµτ         exponential
                                           
                    ∂                          µ                  linear
                       y (τ, yb )     =                                                                                                                       (A.51)
                    ∂τ                         µyb eµτ            exponential
                                               Rτ                                                 Z     τ           Rs                                   
                                                       [δS (1−fs )+fs δL ]ds                                     −        [δS (1−fu )+fu δL ]du
                         φ (τ, yb )   =    e   0                                 Φ (yb ) − δL                e       0                            fs ds       (A.52)
                                                                                                     0
                                               Rτ
                  ∂                                    [δS (1−fs )+fs δL ]ds
                     φ (τ, yb )       =    e   0                               Φ0 (yb )                                                                       (A.53)
                 ∂yb
                 ∂
                    φ (τ, yb )        =    f {−m (φ (τ, yb ))} + δS φ (τ, yb )                                                                                (A.54)
                 ∂τ                                                                      
             ∂ ∂                                                      ∂                                 ∂
                    φ (τ, yb )        =    f (δL − δS )                    φ (τ, yb )         + δS         φ (τ, yb )                                         (A.55)
             ∂τ ∂yb                                                  ∂yb                               ∂yb
                                                                                                                              
                                           c + δS + ζ                          c + δS + ζ
                       DS (τ, yb )    =               + e−(r+δS +ζ)τ B (yb ) −                                                                                (A.56)
                                           r + δS + ζ                          r + δS + ζ
                                                                                                                               
                 ∂                                                                                           c + δS + ζ
                    DS (τ, yb )       =    − (r + δS + ζ) e−(r+δS +ζ)τ B (yb ) −                                                                              (A.57)
                 ∂τ                                                                                          r + δS + ζ
                  ∂
                     DS (τ, yb )      =    e−(r+δS +ζ)τ B 0 (yb )                                                                                             (A.58)
                 ∂yb
                                           Z       τ
                                                       e(r+ζ)(u−τ ) y (u, yb ) + ζE rf − c
                                                                      
                        E (τ, yb )    =                                                                                                                       (A.59)
                                               0
                                           +m (φ (u, yb )) [fu DS (u, yb ) + (1 − fu ) DL (u, yb ) − 1]} du                                                   (A.60)
                  ∂
                       E (τ, yb )     =    y + ζE rf − c + m (φ (τ, yb )) [DL (τ, yb ) − 1]                                                                   (A.61)
                  ∂τ
                                           +f · {m (φ (τ, yb )) [DS (τ, yb ) − DL (τ, yb )]} − (r + ζ) E (τ, yb )                                             (A.62)
                                           Z       τ                  
                   ∂                                                       ∂
                      E (τ, yb )      =                e(r+ζ)(u−τ )           y (u, yb )                                                                      (A.63)
                  ∂yb                          0
                                                                          ∂yb
                                                                                                                                     ∂
                                           + (δS − δL ) [fu DS (u, yb ) + (1 − fu ) DL (u, yb ) − 1]                                    φ (u, yb )            (A.64)
                                                                                                                                    ∂yb
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                            ∂                           ∂
                                           +m (φ (u, yb )) fu                  DS (u, yb ) + (1 − fu )     DL (u, yb )                             du         (A.65)
                                                                           ∂yb                         ∂yb


                    ∂     ∂                              ∂y (τ, yb )                                ∂φ (τ, yb )
                              E (τ, yb )       =                     + (δS − δL ) [DL (τ, yb ) − 1]
                   ∂τ ∂yb                                   ∂yb                                       ∂yb
                                                                                                                                 ∂φ(τ,yb )
                                                              (                                                                               )
                                                                   (δS − δL ) [DS (τ, yb ) − DL (τ, yb )]                           ∂yb
                                                         +f                                   h
                                                                                                  ∂DS (τ,yb )               ∂DL (τ,yb )
                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                     +m (φ (τ, yb ))                ∂yb
                                                                                                                      −       ∂yb

                                                                               ∂DL (τ, yb )           ∂E (τ, yb )
                                                         +m (φ (τ, yb ))                    − (r + ζ)                                                         (A.66)
                                                                                 ∂yb                    ∂yb
The interior equilibrium path is unique for any ultimate bankruptcy state (Φ (yb ) , yb ) as it is stems from a linear
equation. Thus, suppose that fτ =0 ∈ {0, 1}. Then we know that ICτ (0, yb ) ≷ 0 and fτ =0 stays cornered until a time
τ at which IC (τ, yb ) = 0. Suppose fτ =0 ∈ (0, 1). Then immediately we have, by Lemma 6, as f is continuous that
the above determines the path of f uniquely as it is a linear equation, until a time τ at which f becomes cornered.
In this case, then, IC starts diverging from 0 and again f is uniquely determined by the sign of IC. They key step
here is to note that IC is continuous by the functions involved and by the continuity of f .




                                                                               61
A.5     Further results for Section 6
Proof of Lemma 2. Imposing ci = r for i ∈ {S, L} , writing out the derivatives of DS and DL w.r.t. φ at τ = 0 by
using (23), (24), and (25) , we have
                                                                                                               
                     ∂DL   ∂DS                                         ∂τ                      0   ∂yb
                         −            =     (r + δL + ζ) [1 − B (yb )]                   + B (yb )
                      ∂φ    ∂φ                                         ∂φ           τ =0
                                                                                                   ∂φ    τ =0
                                                                                                                   
                                                                        ∂τ                             ∂yb
                                           − (r + δS + ζ) [1 − B (yb )]                    + B 0 (yb )
                                                                        ∂φ            τ =0
                                                                                                       ∂φ    τ =0

                                                                      ∂τ
                                      =    − (δS − δL ) [1 − B (yb )]                 > 0.
                                                                      ∂φ       τ =0




A.5.1     Deleveraging
We know that a proportion m (φt ) of bond is maturing every instant. Suppose that a portion of (1 − α) of maturing
debt is (forcibly) retired, so that α ∈ (0, 1) implies deleveraging and α > 1 implies re-leveraging. Then overall face
value Ft is dynamically changing according to

                                                   dFt = −m (φt ) (1 − α) Ft dt

whereas the amount of short-term debt changes according to

                                               dSt = [−δS St + f · αm (φt ) Ft ] dt

Thus, the maturity structure changes according to
                                            dS    S dF
                                 dφ    =       −
                                             F    F F
                                       =    [−φδS + f · αm (φ) − φ (−m (φ) (1 − α))] dt
                                       =    [−φδS + [f · α + φ (1 − α)] m (φ)] dt
                                       =    µφ (f ) dt

which is not a function of F , but only of φ and α.
    As we have three state variables, (y, φ, F ), we write

(r + ζ) E = y − cF + ζ (X − F ) + m (φ) F {α [f DS + (1 − f ) DL ] − 1} − µy (y) Ey + µφ (f, φ) Eφ − m (φ) (1 − α) F · EF

The FOC w.r.t. f is then given by

                       α · m (φ) max f {F (DS − DL ) + Eφ } = α · m (φ) max f {F · ∆ + Eφ }
                                f ∈[0,1]                                              f ∈[0,1]


so that IC = F · ∆ + Eφ . We can also write everything in terms of (τ, yb , Fb ):

                     (r + ζ) E = y − cF + ζ (X − F ) + m (φ) F {α [f DS + (1 − f ) DL ] − 1} − Eτ

Taking derivatives w.r.t. φ, we have
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                              ∂DS            ∂DL
            (r + ζ) Eφ = m0 (φ) F {α [f DS + (1 − f ) DL ] − 1} + m (φ) F α f                     + (1 − f )                − Eτ φ
                                                                                               ∂φ             ∂φ

Evaluated at τ = 0 and imposing Eφ |τ =0 = 0 we have
                                                                                                                 
                                                       B (yb )                    ∂DS            ∂DL
                     Eτ φ |τ =0 = (δS − δL ) Fb α              − 1 + m (φ) Fb α f     + (1 − f )
                                                        Fb                         ∂φ             ∂φ

Further, we have for c = 1                                                                        
                                                                 −(r+ζ+δi )τ       B (yb )
                                      Di (τ, yb , Fb ) = 1 + e                             −1
                                                                                    Fb




                                                                 62
At default τ = 0, we have
                                                             IC (0, yb , Fb ) = Fb · 0 + 0 = 0
so that we again have to look at
                                                         ICτ (τ, yb , Fb ) = Fτ ∆ + F · ∆τ + Eτ φ
Evaluate at τ = 0 to get
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                           B (yb )                   B (yb )                    ∂DS            ∂DL
ICτ (0, yb , Fb ) = Fτ 0 + Fb (δS − δL ) 1 −                       + (δS − δL ) Fb α         − 1 + m (φ) Fb α f     + (1 − f )
                                                            Fb                        Fb                         ∂φ             ∂φ
                                                                                                        
                                                                                  ∂DS            ∂DL
                   = − (1 − α) (δS − δL ) B (yb ) + m (φ) Fb α f                      + (1 − f )
                                                                                   ∂φ             ∂φ

Writing out
                     ∂                    ∂                   ∂τ    ∂                   ∂yb    ∂                   ∂Fb
                       Di (τ, yb , Fb ) =    Di (τ, yb , Fb )    +     Di (τ, yb , Fb )     +     Di (τ, yb , Fb )
                    ∂φ                    ∂τ                  ∂φ   ∂yb                  ∂φ    ∂Fb                  ∂φ
and we have
                                                                                                           
                                                      ∂                                       B (yb )
                                                         Di (0, yb , Fb ) = (r + ζ + δi ) 1 −
                                                      ∂τ                                       Fb
                                                      ∂                     B 0 (yb )
                                                         Di (0, yb , Fb ) =
                                                     ∂yb                       Fb
                                                      ∂                       B (yb )
                                                         Di (0, yb , Fb ) = −
                                                     ∂Fb                         Fb2
When does shortening arise? Suppose we have f = 1. Then we must have
                                                                                                                ∂DS
                                           ICτ > 0 ⇐⇒ (1 − α) (δS − δL ) B (yb ) < m (φ) Fb αf
                                                                                                                 ∂φ
                               ∂τ                                                                 ∂yb
In general, we have            ∂φ
                                    < 0 (the higher φ, the earlier the default), and              ∂φ
                                                                                                        > 0 (the earlier the default, the higher
                                            ∂Fb
the defaulting cash-flow), but              ∂φ
                                                   has a sign that is determined by α. In case of deleveraging at default, i.e., α < 1,
                   ∂Fb                                                                                   ∂                       ∂Fb
then we have       ∂φ
                          > 0, and shortening at default becomes more difficult as                      ∂Fb
                                                                                                            Di   (τ, yb , Fb )   ∂φ
                                                                                                                                       < 0. However, in
                                                                                 ∂Fb
case of releveraging at default, i.e., α > 1, then we have                       ∂φ
                                                                                       < 0, and shortening at default becomes less difficult as
 ∂                       ∂Fb
∂Fb
    Di   (τ, yb , Fb )   ∂φ
                                > 0.

A.5.2        Larger issuance space
                                                                           r+ζ+δL
For large issuance space, we note that minyb ∈[ymin ,ymax ] fbnc (yb ) = − (δ S −δL )
                                                                                      as in the vicinity of ymin we have
 0
B (yb ) = 0. Further, if
                                                                    r + ζ + δL
                                     min           fbnc (yb ) = −              > −fL >       max         fadmissible (yb )
                               yb ∈[ymin ,ymax ]                    (δS − δL )         yb ∈[ymin ,ymax ]

then all results of the main part of the paper go through. This is the case for fL = −0.4 in our numerical examples.

A.5.3        Consol bonds
Suppose that the firm borrows from another group of debt holders holding consol bonds with coupon cconsol as in
Leland [1994a] that do not feature any rollover. To make the analysis stark and simple, we assume that these consol
bonds get zero payment in both the upper and the default events.34 Further, we assume that there is a tax advantage
of bond-holders receiving ρci while equity holders are only paying out ci , with ρ > 1. As a result, the valuation
formula for the long-term and short-term bonds remain identical if we assume ρci = r for i ∈ {S, L}. The equity
holder’s problem remains almost the same, with the only adjustment of an additional coupon outflow of cconsol . The
default boundary becomes                                                         
                                              1      yb − c − cconsol + ζE rf
                                 Φ (yb ) =                                    − δL ,
                                           δS − δL          1 − B (yb )
  34
   Zero recovery in the default event can be justified by the assumption that the consol bonds are junior to the term
bonds we analyzed so far.


                                                                                 63
which affects the endogenous time-to-default τ . The value of consol bonds, denoted by Dconsol , is given by
                                                                         ρcconsol 
                                                                                   1 − e−(r+ζ)τ ,
                                                                                               
                                                 Dconsol (τ, yb ) =
                                                                          r+ζ
      ∂                                ∂τ
with ∂φ Dconsol (φ, y)      = ρcconsol ∂φ < 0. Intuitively, shortening maturity structure leads to an earlier default and
                       τ =0
hence a lower value of consol bonds.
    Now the firm value includes the value of consol bonds. As before, we can decompose the local effect of maturity
shortening on the firm value, i.e., Vφ (φ, y), into
                                                          ∂                      ∂                               ∂
     Vφ (φ, y) =    Eφ (φ, y) + ∆ (φ, y)           +φ       DS (φ, y) + (1 − φ)    DL (φ, y) +                     Dconsol (φ, y) .           (A.67)
                    |         {z             }           ∂φ                     ∂φ                              ∂φ
                   Incentive compatibility
                                                     |                         {z                     }         |       {z           }
                                                              Impact on ST & LT bonds                       Impact on consol bonds
At default, the last term is negative, increasing in cconsol and may dominate the second positive term in a maturity-
shortening equilibrium, leading to Vφ (Φ (yb ) , yb ) < 0.
    At τ = 0, we have
                                              ∂                      ∂                                     ∂
                    Vφ (Φ (yb ) , yb ) = φ      DS (φ, y) + (1 − φ)    DL (φ, y) +                           Dconsol (φ, y)
                                             ∂φ                     ∂φ                                    ∂φ
                                         |                          {z                      }         |          {z       }
                                                   Impact on ST & LT bonds                       Impact on consol bonds
as the IC condition vanishes.
    We will concentrate on the equilibrium in which f = 1 is just binding, which is given by a point yb . For this to
hold, wee need
                                                       ∂
                                                         DS = 0
                                                      ∂φ
Writing out the derivative of total firm value evaluated at the default boundary at point y1 , we have
                                                                                                                                
                         ∂       ∂                                                                          ∂τ             ∂yb                    dτ
   Vφ = [1 − Φ (y1 )]      DL +    Dconsol = [1 − Φ (y1 )]                   (r + δL + ζ) [1 − B (y1 )]        + B 0 (y1 )           + ρcconsol
                        ∂φ      ∂φ                                                                          ∂φ             ∂φ                     dφ

Let us note that
                               ∂                                      ∂τ             ∂yb
                                 DS = 0 ⇐⇒ (r + δS + ζ) [1 − B (y1 )]    + B 0 (y1 )     =0
                              ∂φ                                      ∂φ             ∂φ
So that
                     ∂                                  ∂τ             ∂yb
                       DL = (r + δL + ζ) [1 − B (y1 )]     + B 0 (y1 )
                    ∂φ                                 ∂φ              ∂φ
                                                       dτ                               ∂τ             ∂yb
                          = − (δS − δL ) [1 − B (y1 )]     + (r + δS + ζ) [1 − B (y1 )]    + B 0 (y1 )
                                                       dφ                               ∂φ             ∂φ
                                                       dτ
                          = − (δS − δL ) [1 − B (y1 )]     >0
                                                       dφ
and thus f = 1 is socially inefficient locally if and only if

                                         ρcconsol − [1 − Φ (y1 )] (δS − δL ) [1 − B (y1 )] > 0                                                (A.68)

Plugging in for Φ (y1 ), we have
                                                                                                   
                                                1             y1 − c − cconsol + ζE rf
                   0 < ρcconsol −       1−                                             − δL               (δS − δL ) [1 − B (y1 )]
                                             δS − δL                 1 − B (y1 )
                    = ρcconsol − δS [1 − B (y1 )] − y1 − c − cconsol + ζE rf
                                                                                               

                    = (ρ − 1) cconsol − δS [1 − B (y1 )] − y1 − c + ζE rf
                                                                                          

so we have an inefficient shortening equilibrium near the bankruptcy boundary if
                                                                                                     
                                                           δS [1 − B (y1 )] − y1 − c + ζE rf
                                             cconsol >
                                                                                  ρ−1




                                                                             64
A.5.4      Comparative statics w.r.t. aggregate face-value F
Proof of Proposition 4. Let F be the total face-value outstanding. For the main part of the paper, we have F = 1.
Note that for recovery value B (y), each individual bond recovers B(y)
                                                                     F
                                                                        . Let us assume ρc = c = r throughout. First,
note that                                                                          
                                                  1      yb − rF + ζ (X − F )
                                 Φ (yb ; F ) =                                 − δL
                                               δS − δL        F − B (yb )
and
                                                    µy (yb ) B 0 (yb ) − (r + ζ + δL ) [F − B (yb )]
                                     fbnc (yb ) =
                                                                (δS − δL ) [F − B (yb )]
The value y1 is defined by fbnc (y1 ) = 1, which is equivalent to

                                                                       µy (y1 ) B 0 (y1 )
                                        fbnc (y1 ) = 1 ⇐⇒                                 = r + ζ + δS
                                                                        F − B (y1 )
Finally, note that
                                                         ∂f nc (y1 )            µy (y1 )B 0 (y1 )
                                                     b
                                           dy1        ∂F                    (δS −δL )[F −B(y1 )]2
                                               = − ∂f nc (y1 )
                                                               =                  ∂f nc (y1 )
                                                                                                    >0
                                           dF        b                               b
                                                            ∂y1                      ∂y1

which implies that raising the face-value shifts up the cash-flow state y1 at which f = 1, the shortening constraint,
                                       ∂f nc (y )
starts binding. Plugging in for y1 and b∂y1 1 , we can simplify to

                      dy1                                µy (y1 ) B 0 (y1 )
                          =                  2
                                                                         
                      dF    µy (y1 ) B 0 (y1 ) + [F − B (y1 )] B 00 (y1 ) + µ0y (y1 ) B 0 (y1 ) [F − B (y1 )]

Next, note that
                                            ∂Φ (yb ; F )    yb + Xζ − (r + ζ) B (yb )
                                                         =−
                                               ∂F            (δS − δL ) [F − B (yb )]2
Noting that yb ∈ [ymin , ymax ], we have Φ (yb ) > 0 ⇐⇒ δL [F − B (yb )] + (r + ζ) F < yb + Xζ, so that

                                  yb + Xζ − (r + ζ) B (yb ) > (δL + r + ζ) [F − B (yb )] > 0

We thus have
                       ∂Φ (yb ; F )    yb + Xζ − (r + ζ) B (yb )     (δL + r + ζ) [F − B (yb )]
                                    =−                            <−                            <0
                          ∂F            (δS − δL ) [F − B (yb )]2     (δS − δL ) [F − B (yb )]2
so that the bankruptcy boundary shifts outwards — default occurs at an earlier cash-flow state for any given φ.
    Finally, we note that
dΦ (y1 ; F )                dy1
             = Φy (y1 ; F )      + ΦF (y1 ; F )
   dF                       dF
                B 0 (y1 ) µ0y (y1 ) [y1 + ζX − (r + ζ) B (y1 )] + µy (y1 ) −B 0 (y1 ) + (r + ζ) B 0 (y1 )2 + [y1 + Xζ − (r + ζ) B (y1 )] B 00 (y1 )
                                                                                                                                                  
             =−
                              (δS − δL ) [F − B (y1 )] µy (y1 ) B 0 (y1 )2 + [F − B (y1 )] B 00 (y1 ) + µ0y (y1 ) B 0 (y1 ) [F − B (y1 )]
                                                                                                   

By assumption µ0y (y) ≥ 0, B 00 (·) ≥ 0 as well as B 0 (·) ≥ 0, and using B (y1 ) < F , the denominator is positive. Thus,
we are left with investigation of the numerator. After dividing the numerator by F − B (y1 ) > 0 and by (r + ζ + δS ),
and then using the definition of y1 , we can write the transformed numerator (without the negative sign) as

                                                                                                                   µ0y (y)
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                        B 00 (y)
                        Q (y) ≡ (r + ζ) B 0 (y) − 1 + [y + Xζ − (r + ζ) B (y)]
                                                          
                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                        B 0 (y)    µy (y)

If Q (y1 ) > 0, then dΦ(y
                       dF
                         1 ;F )
                                < 0 follows immediately. Note that by assumptions on B (·) and µy (·) as well as y ≥ ymin
the second term is always positive.
     Next, to show that the set of firms (φ, y) that fulfill the SE criteria expands, we need to show that
                                                    dΦ(y1 ;F )         ∂φ
                                                      dF               ∂τ        δL [Φ (y1 ) − 1]
                                                      dy1
                                                                 <     ∂y
                                                                            =
                                                      dF               ∂τ
                                                                                     µy (y1 )




                                                                            65
Plugging in for the LHS, simplifying and switching signs, we have

B 0 (y1 ) µ0y (y1 ) [y1 + ζX − (r + ζ) B (y1 )] + µy (y1 ) −B 0 (y1 ) + (r + ζ) B 0 (y1 )2 + [y1 + Xζ − (r + ζ) B (y1 )] B 00 (y1 )
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                      δL [1 − Φ (y1 )]
                                                                                                                                                  >
                                             (δS − δL ) [F − B (y1 )] µy (y1 ) B 0 (y1 )                                                                  µy (y1 )
which we can rewrite as
                                                                                  µ0y (y1 )
                                                                                             
                                                                     B 00 (y1 )                       (δS − δL ) B 0 (y1 ) δL [1 − Φ (y1 )]
Q (y1 ) = (r + ζ) B 0 (y1 ) − 1 + [y + Xζ − (r + ζ) B (y1 )]
                               
                                                                       0
                                                                                +                 >
                                                                     B (y1 )      µy (y1 )                      (r + ζ + δS )
                                                                                                                                δL [1 − Φ (y1 )]
                                                                                                  = [F − B (y1 )] (δS − δL )
                                                                                                                                    µy (y1 )
If this holds, then the set of shortening equilibria expands away from the bankruptcy boundary.




                                                                 66
