                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE EFFECT OF TAKEOVER ACTIVITY ON
             CORPORATE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT




                      Bronwyn H. Hall




                   Working Paper No. 2191




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                         March 1987




This paper was prepared for a National Bureau of Economic
Research Conference on the Economic Effects of Corporate
Mergers and Acquisitions held in Key Largo, Florida, on
February 19-21, 1987. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2191
                                                March 1987

                    The Effect of Takeover Activity
                 on Corporate Research and Development


                                ABSTRACT

     It is widely thought that increases in corporate mergers and

acquisitions of the sort which the United States has experienced in the

recent past lead to a reduction in such longterm investment activities

as R&D because of a shortened horizon on the part of managers. This

paper uses a newly created dataset containing all acquisitions of

publicly traded firms in the manufacturing sector in the last ten years

to answer some basic questions which pertain to this issue. I find that

the firms involved in acquisitions and mergers where both partners are

in the manufacturing sector have roughly the same pattern of R&D

spending as the sector as a whole and that the acquisition itself does

not cause a reduction in R&D activity on the part of these firms.

Moreover, the R&D capital thus acquired is valued more highly by the

acquiring firm than by the stock market. On the other hand, I also find

that the substantial increase in the number and size of acquisitions

made by privately held firms in the eighties is concentrated primarily

on firms with low R&D intensity which also are in non-R&D intensive

industries. Because the pattern of low investment in R&D is

longstanding, and because the firms taken over have less rather than

more R&D capital than the industry as a whole, it seems unlikely that

the recent increase in takeover activity has had a significantly

negative effect on R&D spending in these industries.



                                               Bronwyn H. Hall
                                               NBER
                                               204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
                                               Stanford, CA 94305
                                                                March 1987


                  The Effect of Takeover Activity on
                  Corporate Research and Development
                                              1
                            Bronwyn H. Hall


1. Introduction

     Economists generally agree that research and development activity

is an important factor in the long-term growth of the economy. The

purpose of this paper is to explore the effects, possibly deleterious,

of the recent increase in takeover activity in the U. S. corporate

sector on the level and pattern of research activity. R&D is

interesting in this context because it is a decision variable for the

firm which is viewed as "long-term" in nature -   - if a wave of mergers
distracts managers from all but shortrun activity, we might expect that

R&D performance would cease to be optimal.

     This paper uses evidence on the observed characteristics of the

mergers which actually take place in order to shed some light on this

topic. It explores the factors which determine the probability of an




1. I am grateful to Zvi Griliches and Timothy Bresnahan for ongoing
discussions, to Alan Auerbach, Charlie Brown, Lawrence Lau, Tom Macurdy,
Ariel Pakes, and John Shoven for comments at various times during this
research, and to Chris Hall for help with the data collection. Comments
by seminar participants at Stanford University, University of Santa
Clara, Boston University, Harvard University, MIT, University of
Chicago, and University of California at Berkeley were also helpful in
preparing this revision. Some of this work was done while I was a Sloan
Dissertation Fellow and a John M. Olin graduate research fellow, and I
thank these foundations for their support. The data preparation effort
was partially supported by a National Science Foundation Grant (PRA 81-
08635) and by the National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                2
 acquisition as well as the valuation of these factors at the time of

 takeover in order to quantify the role of R&D in acquiring and acquired

 firms. For this purpose, I build a simple model for acquisition choice

which is tractable for estimation and captures the idea that there is

heterogeneity across firms and therefore unique synergies to a merger:

different targets are worth different amounts to acquiring firms and the

highest valuer is most likely to make the acquisition.

     The question of whether increased merger activity is a good thing

for the economy in general remains unresolved and is not likely to be

resolved by focusing purely on the experience of the firms involved.

There is the view of Jensen (1986) and others that merger activity

represents an unambiguously positive shifting of assets into their best

use and provides the best mechanism for ensuring that managers act in

the shareholders' interest. A more neutral view would hold that the

level of merger activity is just a byproduct of this asset shuffling and

has no particular externality; it fluctuates from time to time in just

the same way as the number of shares traded on the stock market

fluctuates from day to day. The negative view, associated with Scherer

(1984), sees acquired entities (lines of business in his empirical work)

as almost always suffering declining profitability after merging, and

infers from this result the conclusion that increased acquisition

activity is likely to be a wasteful thing for the economy as a whole.

     Roll (1986) essentially provides an efficient financial markets

explanation of the phenomenon observed by Scherer, although that was not

his specific aim: He argues that we only see transactions where the

management of acquiring firms misperceives the value of the target firm

as too low, and hence that even under efficient markets, we get more

negative surprises than positive. This picture of acquisition activity



                               3
implies that an increase in mergers is associated with an increase in

corporate "hubris" (his term) which is not good for the economy as a

whole. However, for this view to hold in the presence of efficient

markets, the offer made by an acquiring firm should be associated with a

fall in its share price, since shareholders should be capable of

inferring that the decision to buy is likely to be a bad one. The

existing evidence on bidding firm returns does not seem really

consistent with this.

     Is merger activity likely to have a negative effect on R&D

performance?   One reason it might is substitution: if firms with large

amounts of cash would rather spend it than return it to shareholders in

the form of dividends, we would expect R&D and acquisition to be

substitutes for these firms.   An increase in the attractiveness of

acquisition opportunities would depress spending on internal investment,

including R&D. They may be substitutes on the real side also: there

are two ways to acquire knowledge capital, either by investment within

the firm (an R&D program) or by purchasing another firm after its R&D

program has yielded successful results. The latter strategy has the

advantage that more information is available about the output of the

R&D, which tends to be higly uncertain. Under the two assumptions of no

scale economies or diseconomies in R&D over the relevant range and

perfect capital markets, the two strategies should be perfect

substitutes for the firm.

     Alternatively, the view that some acquisitions are used as Itcash

cows" to service the debt incurred in order to finance them also implies

a negative effect on R&D activity: an easy way to increase short-term

cash flows at the expense of long-term profits is to cut spending on




                                4
 such things as R&D. However, evidence that this indeed takes place in

 the instances we observe is not evidence that it is the wrong thing to

 do: the longrun profit rate may not have been high enough to justify

 the pre-merger R&D level of the acquired firm, and cutting it may be

 precisely what a now presumably better management should do.

      There is some evidence on a few of these questions: Using roughly

 the same data as mine, Addanki found no support for the hypothesis that

firms with larger R&D programs were attractive acquisition prospects.

If anything, innovators were less likely to be acquired. An SEC study

 (1985) found that firms which were taken over invest less in R&D than

other firms in their industry, although they did not control for size,

which could account for some of the result. The same study produced a

related piece of evidence on the market valuation of long term

investments such as R&D: the 20 day excess return for an announcement

of an increased level of R&D was 1.8 percent, suggesting that the market

placed a positive value on such announcements.

     On the other hand, for a sample of 1337 Industrial File firms in

1976, of which 301 were acquired by 1983,   I found that once I had

controlled for Tobin's q at the beginning of the period, the R&D to

assets ratio was positively related to the probability of being

acquired. The coefficient was consistent with a shadow price for the

R&D capital stock of around 0.6 times that for the physical capital

stock of the firm. In other words, firms for which the measured ratio of

market value to book value was high because they also had intangible

assets such as a large R&D program, were more likely to exit from the

sample by merger, ceteris paribus. In this version of the probability

model, I did control for size, so the R&D effects would not be

confounded by the negative correlation between the size of the firm and



                                5
its R&D intensity. However the coefficient was rather imprecisely

measured, and results tended to be sensitive to the exact choice of

sample (whether or not the sample included firms traded Over-the-

Counter, for example).

     In this paper, I investigate these somewhat inconsistent results on

the attractiveness of R&D-doing firms as takeover candidates further, as

well as exploring some of the other issues related to R&D performance

and takeover activity. To this end I assemble a dataset on all the

publicly traded U.S. manufacturing firms which were acquired between the

years 1976 and 1986, and examine the pattern of acquisition and merger:

were the acquired firms more or less R&D intensive than others in their

industry? What were the characteristics of the acquiring firms and what

kinds of synergy favored the merger?      I also examine what happened to

the R&D of the new larger firm, to see if there is any evidence that the

acquisitions take place partly to reduce R&D expenditures because of

scale economies or other reasons. Finally, is there any evidence that

winners (successful innovators) were being picked by the mergers and

acquisitions process, suggesting that this is how successful innovators

capture the appropriate rate of return?



2. Modelling the Acquisition Decision

     My approach to modelling takeover activity views such activity as

a response to changes in states of the world (such as technology shocks)

which make some assets less productive in their current use than in

some alternative use. Because of information lags, transactions costs,

or whatever, these assets do not move continuously into their optimal

use, so the shocks induce a disequilibrium which is resolved by the




                                6
purchase of discrete bundles of assets by other firms. In other words,

merger activity is the result of the rearrangement of productive assets

in response to changes in the available technology, or, in the case of

the domestic manufacturing sector, to changes in the nature and level of

competition from the rest of the world.2

     1     gin by denoting the value of the assets of a particular firm as

V(X) —                   where X is a vector of characteristics of the firm,
         V(X1,X2,...),
such as capital stock, R&D stock, industry, tax characteristics, and so

forth.     The value function V can be thought of as the present

discounted value of the revenue streams which could be generated from

these assets either alone or in combination with other assets. For the

moment, I do not necessarily identify V(X.) with the current stock

market value of the firm, although in a world with fully informed

rational shareholders and efficient markets, V(X) would of necessity be

the price at which this bundle of assets traded. The reason I do not

make this assumption here is the well-known fact that acquisitions take

place a a significant positive premium over pre-announcement stock

market value (Jensen and Ruback (1983) and the references therein),

which implies that some agents place a higher value on       than the

market. Thus it would be a mistake to impose at the outset a constraint

that the market for corporate assets is in a fully-informed equilibrium,



2. An additional reason for changes in merger activity might be changes in
the transactions or other costs associated with buying another firm. For
example, Jensen (1986) has suggested that the innovation of junk bonds
facilitates takeovers by small entities of large firms which would not
previously have taken place. In my investigation here, I am abstracting
somewhat from the changes in takeover technology which have occured in
the recent past, since they primarily affect things in the time series
dimension, and my focus is on cross sectional differences and
similarities among takeovers.




                                   7
since it is the disequilibria which drive the acquisition process. The

implications of this assumption for the estimation strategy will be

clarified after I present the model.

      I assume that each period (a year in my data), the optimal

configuration of corporate assets changes due to shocks to the economic

environment. Acquiring firms are subscripted j, and possible targets,

which consist of my entire sample of firms, are subscripted i. Each

firm in my sample can acquire any other firm; if it does so, then the

increment to the value of the acquiring firm j due to the new

configuration of assets is denoted V(X). Assuming for the moment that

only one acquisition is possible per period, firm j will buy firm i

(that is, j and i will find it beneficial to combine) if



        V.(X) - P. >          -         V k E   Sample
(1)
                       V(X)
        V.(X.) - P.    0
         3



where P1 is the price he will have to pay for i's assets. The last

condition ensures that there is a positive gain from the acquisition;

many potential acquirers will find that it holds for none of the targets

and hence will acquire no firms during the period.

      Equation (1) is similar to the equations which define product

choice by a consumer in a Random Utility Choice model (McFadden (1973),

Manski and McFadden (1981) and references therein). To see this, think

of the asset aggregation function (V's) in this model as analogous to

consumer utility expressed as a function of the underlying (Lancastrian)

characteristics of the good. Thus the market for acquisitions resembles

the market for differentiated products, with one important difference:




                                  8
 in the consumer demand literature, price enters the indirect utility

 function directly, since the consumers are assumed to be price-takers.

 In this market, one cannot assume that the price firm j will pay for the

 assets is independent of his attempt to purchase them. The empirical

 evidence is that by making a bid, firm j reveals something about the

value of the assets which was not previously known and hence finds it

necessary to bid above the current trading price. In a companion piece

Hall (l987b) I derive the equilibrium price in a market with a large

finite number of unique differentiated buyers and sellers and show that

it will lie somewhere between the value of the good to the highest

valuer and the next highest valuer. In the econometric work here, I

assume that the price at which the potential acquirers will evaluate the

purchase is not P, the current trading price of firm i's stock, but an

unobservable V(X.), which is a function of the assets X..
                1                                      1

       The advantage of viewing the acquisition decision in this way is

that there exists a large body of literature on the econometric

estimation of models of the demand for differentiated products in terms

of their characteristics, on which we can build in order to describe the

types of mergers which take place and how the characteristics of targets

are valued by different acquirers. Although I frequently use the

language of consumer demand to describe the acquisition decision

throughout this paper, it should be kept in mind that because price is

not exogenous, what is actually being estimated can be interpreted

instead as an equation determining the gains from particular mergers,

where the buyers and sellers are treated symmetrically, rather than an

equation describing the demand of an acquiring firm for a target.

    An estimating equation is derived from the conditions in equation

(1) by partitioning the gain to firm j from the acquisition into



                                9
observable and unobservable components:


(2)      V.(X.) - P. —
          3   1        1
                           f(X.1   X.) +
                                    3
                                               ..
                                               13


and letting .. have an extreme value distribution. If the . . 's are
                  13                                         3.3


independently distributed across alternative, then one obtains the usual

multinominal logit probability that an acquisition will take place:



                                          exp(f(X. ,X.))
(3)       P(j buys iC) — ______________________________

                                         exp(f(X. ,XK))
                                        kEG

where C is the entire pool of firms. The likelihood function is formed

by multiplying these probabilities and conditioning on the observed

characteristics of the acquirers and potential targets.3

      At this point the alert reader will notice that the choice set C is

very large: potentially it includes any firm within or without the

United States. Even if I confine the choice set to my dataset, it

consists of more than 2000 firms, which raises questions as to the

feasibility of econometric estimation and the validitiy of the hA




3. As was suggested by one of the discussants of this paper, Ariel Pakes,
it is possible to reverse this model by viewing the decision from the
perspective of the potential target. In this case the coefficients of
the gain function are estimated from a comparison of the actual acquirer
to those firms which might have acquired the target. If the
specification is correct, and the c. . 's are truly independent, both
methods should give the same estimas of the structural parameters. A
full exploration of the econometric specification of such a model,
although interesting, is beyond the scope of the current paper. Work
now underway on this topic suggests that differential propensities to be
acquired or to make an acquisition (that is, lack of independence of the
alternatives) may have a role here.




                                          10
assumption. Fortunately, McFadden (1978) has considered the large

choice set problem and suggested two approaches for dealing with it.

The first solution is to construct a nested logit model, which describes

the choice from 2000 alternatives as a hierarchical sequence of choices

each of which considers vastly fewer alternatives. For example, I might

hypothesize that firms choose the industry in which they wish to make an

acquisition first, and then choose among firms in that industry. This

solution requires more a priori information, but has the advantage that

it gets around the hA problem somewhat.       I have not chosen to use this

model in my initial exploration of the data, since I wished to avoid

imposing too much structure on the choice problem at the outset.

      The second solution to the problem of very large choice sets

suggested by McFadden is simpler to implement, although possibly not the

most powerful or realistic in terms of its assumptions: One randomly

samples from the unchosen alternatives and includes only a subset for

each observation. McFadden shows that as long as the sampling algorithm

has what he calls the "uniform conditioning property" and the choice

probabilities satisfy the hA assumption, estimates obtained using the

subset of alternatives and a conventional multinomial logit program are

consistent. The uniform conditioning property is defined as


(4)     If i,j   D c C, then ir(DIi,z) —   ,r(Dj,z)

where D is the subset of alternatives used, it   is   the probability

distribution used to draw D from C, and z are the exogenous variables of

the model. The algorithm which I used to generate my subsets D has this

property, since my D consists of the chosen (numerator) alternative

augmented by a random sample selected from the other alternatives. The

size of D which I used was seven, but this is obviously an area where



                               11
more experience and experimentation would be desirable.

       For the econometric estimation of the model in equations (2) and

0), I need to specify a functional form for f(X.,X.). The difficulty

with this function as written is that the gains from different

acquisitions are likely to have extremely heteroskedastic and possibly

nononormal disturbances          due to the large size range of the firms in

the dataset.4 I would like to choose a specification that

mitigates this problem as much as possibly, since the multinomial logit

estimates will be biased in this case. My solution to the problem is to

specify the acquisition choice problem in terms of rates of return to

acquisitions rather than total gains; this implies a condition of the

form


(5)       V.(X)/P. > V.(X.)/P

rather   than equation (6). By using a multiplicative disturbance for the

value functions and then taking logarithms, I arrive at the following

estimating equation for the econometric model:




4. In data of this kind, with a skew size distribution, the functional form
which typically has disturbances which are normally distributed is the
log-log. For example, consider the form

       logy —   + 1logX   + c,

If we choose instead to estimate using V, we obtain

       V—e X e A0X (l+e)
by a first order Taylor series expansion; this disturbance is clearly
very heteroskedastic (and skew).




                                   12
                                exp(v. (X.)v(X))
                                        1
(7)       P(j buys iC) —

                              exp(v. (Xk)v(X.K))
                              keG

where the lower case v denotes the measurable component of the logarithm

of the valuation function. The subscripted v denotes the valuation from

the perspective of the acquiring firm, whereas v without a subscript is

the function which describes the equilibrium price at which the firm's

assets will trade.


      For the econometric estimation, I model the logarithm of V as a

function of firm characteristics including the logarithm of the capital

stock, R&D intensity, and the two-digit industry. The exact functional

form I use is motivated partly by a simple intertemporal optimizing

model of a firm with a given stock of assets A, and partly by a desire

for tractability and interpretability of the estimating equation. A

Cobb-Douglas price-taking firm with one type of capital for which there

are adjustment costs, and with all other inputs freely variable has a

value function


(8)     V(A) —        Aa
                 a0

as a result of maximizing present discounted cash flow, where o is a

scale parameter which is equal to unity in the constant returns case

(Lucas and Prescott (1971), Mussa (1974), Abel (1983,1985)). In the

absence of a good model for the value function of more than one kind of

capital (see Wildasin (1984)), I incorporate a second capital, knowledge

capital K, by the simple expedient of aggregating it with A, but with a

freely varying coefficient:




                               13
          V(A,K) —          (A+YK)a —
(9)                    a0               a0 A° (l+y(K/A))U


Taking logarithms,


(10)          v(A,K)     a logA + a log(l+-y(K/A))              a logA + ay (K/A)


Thus the coefficient of size in my estimating equation can be

interpreted as a scale coefficient and that of R&D intensity as

representing a premium (or discount) which the R&D capital receives in

the market over that of ordinary capital. Of course, in order to

interpret the R&D coefficient in this way, one must be careful to

measure K and A in comparable stock units.

        Using the basic underlying model for the valuation of the assets of

the firms, I capture the synergy of combining the two firms in two

different ways. The first models the gain from the acquisition, v.,(X..)

-     v(X.)    as a linear function of the assets of the two firms and the

distance between them in asset space:


(11)          v.(X.) -   v(X.) —   X.1    +
                                              X.fl   +
                                                         lxi
                                                                -
                                                                    X.fl3
where the X variables are the vector of variables describing the assets

of the firm in question (for example, log A and (K/A)). Because of

the form of the multinominal logit probability, the coefficients of the

acquiring firm's characteristics, ,                  will      not be estimable since they

cancel from the numerator and denominator, so that only X and (X -

X.)2   will enter the logit equation in this case. In any case these

coefficients will contain both terms from v(X.) and the linear terms

from v.(X.).
         31
        The second method for modelling the synergistic relationship

between the two firms starts from the notion that each acquiring firm



                                          14
has a value v.(X.) for the target firm i which is a different function

of firm i's characteristics, so that


(12)       v.(X.)
            J  1     311,1
I   then model the "shadow prices" -y. as linear functions of the

characteristics of firm j. This will imply that cross products of the

variables for firm j and firm i enter the equation for the probability

of a choice. The advantage of this formulation is that it allows us to

place a valuation interpretation on the estimated coefficients; in other

words, the -y. estimates are hedonic prices of the characteristics X.



3. Data and Sample Statistics

       The data from which I draw my sample consist of 2519 manufacturing

firms on the Industrial and Over-the-Counter Compustat tapes which

existed sometime during the 1976 to 1985 period. The basic features of

the 1976 based subset of this sample were described in Bound et al

(1984) and Cummins et al (1986) and the construction of the whole

sample is described in Hall (l987a). It consists of a rolling panel of

firms, with annual data available as far back as 1959 for some firms;

all firms are followed as long as they remain publicly traded and

therefore in the Compustat files, with the last year of coverage being

1985. The number of firms actually in the sample in any one year

declines from a high of about 2000 in 1976 to around 1500 in 1985.

       I used four sources of information in order to identify the reasons

for exit of the approximately 900 firms which were not in the file as of

1985 as well as the name of the acquiring firm for all acquisitions:

the FTC Merger Reports of 1977 through 1980, a list of around 400




                                15
 acquisitions involving Compustat firms supplied to me by Auerbach and

 Reishus (for more detail see Auerbach and Reishus (1986)), the Directory

 of Obsolete Securities (1986), and the Standard and Poor Corporate

 records, which provide news reports indexed by firm name every year for

 the entire period in question. This yielded a complete breakdown of the

 reasons for exit: of the 875 firms which exited the sample by 1985, 601

 were acquired, 94 went bankrupt or were liquidated, 115 underwent a name

 change (and should have the data for the new entity restored to the

 file), 45 were reorganized (the capital structure was changed

 significantly enough so that it was reported in the Directory of

Obsolete Securities), and 20 exits remain unexplained.

      After splicing together the records for firms whose names had

changed (e.g., U. S. Steel became USX Corp), and also those for firms

whose CUSIPs changed because of reorganization, I updated this

distribution of exits and searched out the remaining unexplained exits.

The final tabulation is shown in Table 1 by year of exit. The most

striking fact in this table is the well-known one that the rate of

acquisition has risen from the late seventies into the eighties (note

that my numbers for 1986 are undoubtedly incomplete). In addition, a

large part of the increase in the acquisition rate between the 1976-1981

period and the 1982-1986 period is due to the increase in acquisition

activity by privately held and foreign firms. Weighted by employment,

these acquisitions have tripled, while the acquisitions by publicly

traded firms have increased by one third. In this case, privately held

means acquisition by a firm which does not file 10-Ks with the SEC on a

regular basis and is therefore not in our sample; some of these are

leveraged buyout by management or other investors ("taking the firm

private").



                               16
     Because the non-publicly traded acquirers perform roughly half the

acquisitions, and these acquisitions are likely to be a nonrandom sample

(for example, they are on average about fifty to sixty percent as

large), throughout the paper I will try to compare results for my

subsample of acquisitions with those for the whole sample.

Unfortunately, it is not in general possible to obtain data on the pre

and post-acquisition experience of these acquirers, which is a

limitation of this study.

     Some simple statistics on all the acquisitions are presented in

Table 2a, where I show the industrial breakdown for the firms in the

manufacturing sector in 1976 and 1981 and for the subset which were

acquired between the two periods 1977 to 1981 and 1982 to 1986. To give

an idea of the relative importance of acquisition activity by industry,

I also report the total employment in these firms. Judging by the

fraction of an industry's employees which were affected by acquisition,

the industries with the greatest activity are Food, Textiles, and

Electrical Machinery. In fact, over a third of the employees in the

manufacturing sector subject to takeover were in these three industries.

The other industries with a substantial number of employees involved in

acquisitions are Rubber and plastics, Fabricated metals, and Machinery.

There does not seem to be much of a pattern, except when we look at the

second period. There, the industries with the largest acquisition share

seem to be the older, perhaps somewhat technologically backward

industries which are in the process of upgrading to meet foreign

competition. Is the acquisition activity in these industries primarily

oriented toward consolidation and shrinkage of the industry, or is there

also an attempt to buy smaller firms in the industry which have been




                               17
successful innovators? I will defer this question until we examine the

R&D to sales ratios of the stayers and exiters.

     Out of the approximately 600 firms that were acquired, I was able

to identify 342 that were acquired by firms on the Industrial or OTC

Compustat files; of these, there are about 320 for which I have good

data on both acquiree and acquirer. This excludes any which were

acquired by foreign firms, as well as those acquired by privately held

firms. It does include nonmanufacturing firms which acquired firms in

the manufacturing sector.   The characteristics of the subset for which

I have data on the acquirer are given in Table 2b. Although they

account for only half the acquisitions made during this period, they

have two-thirds of the employees involved in acquisitions (two million

out of three million). I also show the industrial distribution of the

firms which are doing the acquiring; there are fewer firms in this

column since some make more than one acquisition during the period.

     Table 2b makes it clear that there is no overwhelming pattern to

the merger and acquisition activity: the distribution by industry of

acquirers and acquirees is quite different, but not in a particularily

meaningful way. The largest share of firms were taken over in the

Aircraft, Machinery, and Electrical machinery industries, while the

Aircraft, Electrical Machinery, and Petroleum industries had the largest

share of firms performing acquisitions. This last fact is a consequence

of the fact that these industries are also the ones with the largest

number of employees per firm on average.

     In Tables 3a and 3b, I investigate the differences in R&D intensity

between exiting firms and those which remain in the industry, and then

between acquiring firms and those firms which they acquire. For those

firms which are acquired by firms in the publicly traded manufacturing



                               18
sector, the difference in R&D intensity between acquired firms and

stayer firms is insignificantly different from zero for the whole

manufacturing sector and for each industry taken separately. Only in

Primary and Fabricated metals is there a suggestion that the exiting

firms are doing slightly more R&D than those which stay. There is no

evidence that the dominant pattern is either a weeding out of firms

which are technologically backward, or a culling of successful R&D

projects.

        However, the firms acquired by private companies or by foreign

firms do have significantly lower R&D intensity than those acquired by

the manufacturing sector: one percent on average rather than two

percent. This pattern persists throughout the whole period; it is not a

consequence of the rise in private buyouts in the latter part. It occurs

partly because these acquisitions tend to take place in the less R&D

intensive, more slowly growing industries such as textiles: with only

one exception, the petroleum industry, the industries with less than

average R&D intensity are those where private and foreign acquisitions

are a larger than average share of all acquisitions. These industries,

which contain half the firms in the sample, account for seventy percent

of the acquisitions by private or foreign companies. This suggests that

the recent increase in acquisition activity due to leveraged buyouts or

other such private purchases is more or less orthogonal to the R&D

activity in manufacturing. Even if all such purchases resulted in the

complete cessation of R&D adtivity by the firm, this would amount to

only around 500 million 1982 dollars a year compared to expenditures on R&D

by the manufacturing sector of approximately 40 billion 1982 dollars per

year.




                                 19
     When I examine the firms actually doing the acquiring, there does

seem to be a suggestion that R&D intensity is lower in the surviving

firms; the firms being taken over have on average a higher R&D to sales

ratio than the ones which take them over. However, this is primarily

due to the 38 non-manufacturing takeovers of manufacturing firms which

occurred, and we expect that in this case, the firms are being combined

with an entity that may do considerably less R&D in its non-

manufacturing lines of business. At the industrial level, it is

difficult to draw any strong conclusions owing to the relatively small

samples.

     The columns labelled R/S in Tables 3a and 3b are an attempt to

answer the question of what happens to the R&D program of the combined

firm after an acquisition has taken place. tR/S for Stayers is the

average two-year change in R&D intensity over the period for the firms

in the industry. oR/S for Exiters is the two year change in R&D

intensity around the time of acquisition for the firms involved in the

acquisition classified by the acquired firms industry. In Table 3b the

same quantity appears, classified by the acquiring firms industry. The

pre-acquisition R&D intensity is computed in the following way:


                        +           +
(13) (R/S)pre —
                   (R       R)/(S       S)
where i,j index the two firms involved. The conclusions are not changed

by restricting attention to those acquisitions where both R and R are

non-zero, so the numbers presented are for all firms.

     The individual industry numbers are difficult to interpret, owing

to the imprecision with which they are estimated, although there do seem

to be some significant increases in R&D around acquisition time,

particularly in textiles, machinery, computers, and electronics. Viewed



                                20
in the context of differing patterns of industry growth, this finding

may have different meanings for different industries: in the textiles

and machinery industries for example, two thirds of the acquirers are

outside the publicly traded manufacturing sector, so the acquistions

which we see here are a special group and are perhaps a reflection of the

improved prospects for the remaining firms after the industry has shrunk

(see Schary (1986) for a more detailed study of the long-run reaction of

firms in the textile industry to its declining profitability).       In

computers and electronics, however, almost all the acquisitions are in

the manufacturing sector, specifically in closely related industries,

and the growth in R&D is perhaps another indicator that the firms

engaged in acquisition activity need to invest more rather than less in

order to exploit the value of their acquisitions.

     Overall, however, there is little evidence of a significant

difference in the mean growth rates of R&D intensity between firms

involved in acquisitions and non-acquiring firms. Comparing the means

is only part of the story, however: it is possible that R&D intensities

change in different ways for different types of acquisitions in such a

way as to leave the mean growth rate unchanged. To check this, in

Figure 1, I plot the distribution of these changes for all firms in the

manufacturing sector and for the acquisitions only. These plots show

some evidence that the variance of the changes in R&D intensities are

somewhat higher for the acquisitions, and even that more of them

experience a decline than the overall sample. However, non-parametric

tests5 for the difference of the overall means of .R/S in Tables



5. I used the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test (best for the logistic distribution),
the Median Score test (best for double exponential), the Van der Waeden



                               21
3a and 3b accept equality in almost all cases (whether or not publicly

traded non-manufacturing acquisitions are excluded, whether or not zero

R&D-doers are excluded). The only case where a significant positive

difference exists is when all publicly traded firms and zero R&D-doers

are included, and here only for two of the four non-parametric tests.

The same conclusion holds when I look at three year changes around the

time of acquisition (not reported). The conclusion is that there is no

overwhelming evidence of a change in R&D behavior around the time of

acquisition by acquiring firms.

     In the next section I try to quantify the determinants of

acquisition further by estimating probability models involving more than

one explanatory variable, since it is known that size is systematically

related both to R&D intensity and to the probability of being acquired,

making these tables somewhat difficult to interpret in detail.



4. Estimating the Probability of Entering the Acquisition Narket

     Before I present results for the full-blown multinomial logit model

of acquisition matches, I present estimates of the "marginals" of such a

model. These estimates are not marginals of the distribution of the

multinomial logit model in the statistical sense, since they cannot be

obtained by aggregating over the choice set,6 but they summarize


test (best for normal), and the Savage test (best for exponential).

6. In the special case where there are no synergies in acquisition (the
gain is additively separable in the characteristics of i and j), these
are the true marginal probabilities of acquisition and being acquired,
but it seems unlikely that this particular model holds in these data.
Simple significance tests on the interaction terms confirm this.




                                  22
the data from the perspective of the acquiring and acquired firms

separately. They also provide an indication of the change in the sample

when I restrict the data to the approximately 300 acquisitions for which

I can actually observe both partners.

       I assume that the reduced form for the probability of being

acquired in any one year can be written as a logit function of various

firm characteristics:


(14)        P(i acq in year tIX.,t) —   exp(48X.+a)/(l+exp(X.t+a))

where X. are the characteristics of the firm. The estimates of and

   can then be obtained with a conventional maximum likelihood logit

estimation. The same type of model can also be used to estimate the

probability of firm j making an acquisition in year t, conditional on

its characteristics X.
                     it
       The model of acquisition sketched in Section 2 uses the assets of

the firms to predict their valuation, and hence the gain from merger.

To keep things simple, I focus on two assets: capital stock (including

all plant and equipment, inventories, and other investments), and the

stock of knowledge capital. These two assets do tend to be the most

significant in a simple stock market value equation. For the buyers and

sellers in 311 transactions which took place between 1977 and 1986, I

have constructed estimates of the book value of the physical assets in

current dollars and the R&D capital held by these firms one year before

the acquisition, using methodology described in Cummins, et al (1985).

Adjustments for the effects of inflation on the book value of the

physical assets have been applied, and R&D capital has been depreciated

at a rate of fifteen percent per year (see Griliches and Mairesse (1981,




                                23
 1983)). Before use, these variables are then deflated to be in 1982

dollars, using a fixed investment deflator and an R&D deflator (Cumniins

et al (1985)) respectively, since I will be pooling across years.

      I estimated equation (14) using as regressors size (the log of

capital stock), the R&D stock to capital stock ratio, and a trend

variable. I also included a dummy for the more technologically oriented

industries (those with R/S greater than one percent in Table 3a) to

check whether the R&D effects were in reality industry effects. These

estimates are shown in Table 4; the first column pertains to the

complete sample of acquisitions for which data existed, while the other

columns are for two subsets: firms acquired by private or foreign firms

and firms acquired by firms in my sample (mostly manufacturing with a

few non-manufacturing firms).

     The estimates for the two groups are quite different, and confirm

the findings in the simple statistics of Table 3a. For the private

acquisitions, there is a much steeper positive trend, and all the other

variables have predictive power. Size, R&D intensity, and whether the

firm is in a science-based industry have a significant negative effect

on the probability of it being acquired by a privately-held or foreign

firm. On the other hand, these variables have no effect on the

probability of it being acquired by a publicly traded manufacturing

firm. Thus, it is likely that the private acquisition activity is

targeted towards those industries and firms where growth opportunities

have already been perceived by current management as unprofitable. This

could be construed as evidence that management has cut R&D spending for

these firms in an effort to avert takeovers, but if so, they have not

been successful. It seems more likely that this activity facilitates a

needed shrinkage in the assets devoted to these particular activities.



                                24
Without knowledge of subsequent events in these firms, it is difficult

to be more precise about the reason for this finding. What is true is

that manufacturing acquisitions seem to be indistinguishable from non-

acquired manufacturing firms.

     The equation for the probability of making an acquisition is shown

in the bottom half of Table 4.    I consider three different samples:

acquisitions made during the whole sample period, and then those for the

two subsets: 1976 to 1981, and 1982 to 1986. The results are

unsurprising: size is postively related to making an acquisition, and

the probability of making an acquisition rises towards the end of the

period, while R&D intensity is not important. When I focus on the two

subperiods, a difference does emerge: in the eighties, the firms making

these large acquisitions have a somewhat lower R&D intensity than the

other manufacturing firms, suggesting some substitution between R&D

performance and acquisition activity. I also included the TECH variable

in these equations, but it was completely insignificant in all periods,

so this result is not due to a shift of acquisition activity towards

non- technologically oriented industries.



5. Results for the Matching Model of Mergers

     I now turn to estimates of the multinomial logit model of the match

between acquiring and acquired firms. In this version of the paper, I

confine my sample to firms which actually made acquisitions; that is,

my estimates are conditional on a firm having chosen to enter the

takeover market and describe the choice made once the firm is in the

market. A reasonable way to augment this model so that it also

describes the decision to enter the market would be to build a nested




                                 25
logit model, where the decision to make an acquisition is logically

prior to the choice of target. The estimates which I obtain here are

consistent for the lower branch of such a nested logit model (McFadden

(1978,1981)) although the interpretation of the coefficients would

change. The upper branch would be somehwat similar to the Logit model

estimated in Table 4, since it would describe the choice between making

any acquisition or making none, but it would include an additional term

corresponding to the "inclusive value" of the set of takeover candidates

available. In other words, the characteristics of the available targets

would enter in the form of a kind of index function along with the

characteristics of the acquirer.

     With this caveat in mind, I now describe the application of the

Random Utility Choice model to this problem. It is well-known that when

the unobserved part of the utility function has an extreme value

distribution, the probability of a particular choice being made from a

set of alternatives has the multinomial logit form (again, see McFadden

(1973), and Manski and McFadden (1981)). It is only slightly less well-

known that any model for choice probabilities can be written in the

multinomial logit form, with the proviso that if the independence of

irrelevant alternatives assumption does not hold, characteristics of the

other choices may enter into the "utility" function associated with a

particular choice. This needs to be kept in mind, since it allows us to

view the multinomial logit model estimated here as a descriptive summary

of the data we observed, even if the underlying interpretation of the V

functions as determining acquisition probability is suspect.

     The results of estimation conditional on an acquisition being made

are shown in Table 5. These are estimates of the choice model given in

equation (7), with the choice set consisting of the chosen alternative



                               26
plus six others randomly selected from the firms in the sample that

year. In the first two columns, Model I captures the character of the

match (v(X)) very crudely with the absolute value of the difference in

size and the difference in R&D intensity of the two firms. In addition,

the size of the target and its R&D intensity enter the logit equation

(via v(X.). The second column includes a dummy for whether or not the

firms are in the same industry; it improves the explanatory power (x2(l)

  183.), but does not affect the other coefficients very much. The

estimates imply that mergers which involve a large difference in size

are less likely to take place, and that mergers between firms with

differing R&D intensities are less likely to happen. Thus there is

fairly strong evidence that mergers within the manufacturing sector tend

to be between firms which are alike in their characteristics.

       The next set of estimates in Table 5 are for the model (Model II)

suggested in equation (12) and they provide a richer description of the

matching taking place in the merger market: Taking the estimates in the

last column as representative, they imply an equation for the

incremental value of an acquisition to a firm of the following form:


(15)
           v(X) 10j +          7ljl0i +
       is not identified in the conditional logit model since it cancels
70j
from the numerator and denominator of equation(7), but the other

coefficients are the following:


(16)            —         + 0.17 logA - 0.18
          71j       110                      (K/A)

                          + 0.32 logA + 4.1 (K/A).
           12j —    20
In other words, the bidding firms value the size of the target at an



                                      27
increasing rate with respect to their own size and a decreasing rate

with respect to their R&D intensity, and, more interesting, the shadow

price for the R&D intensity of the target is an increasing function of

the size and R&D intensity of the bidding firm. This may arise partly

because of the preference for firms to acquire firms close to their own

industry, but the simple correction of controlling for the match being

in the same industry had very little effect on the magnitude of the

estimates, although it did reduce the R&D match coefficient somewhat, as

expected. Further investigation of this finding particularily within

and across industries seems warranted.

     What do these estimates tell us about the valuation of the R&D

stock of the firm at the time of acquisition? Unfortunately, it is not

possible to say very much about this without making strong assumptions

about the way in which v(X.), the price paid for the acquisition, is

determined, since the estimates of the coefficients of the

characteristics of the target will contain terms from both the
                                                                 v (Xi)
(e.g., -y10) and the v(X.) equation.7 This limits my ability to

interpret equations (17) beyond pointing out that the shadow value

placed on R&D capital is steeply rising with the acquiring firms R&D

intensity.

     On the other hand, it is possible to know something about the price

actually paid for the assets of the firms which were acquired, and to

compare this with the preacquisition value of these assets. For the




7. I am grateful to Charles Brown, one of the discussants, for pointing out
that the identifying assumption used the first version of this paper,
       is not very reasonable.




                              28
acquisitions which actually took place, I have collected such data for

271 of the 311 acquisitions in the sample. I use the value of debt plus

equity in the year before the acquisition as the preacquisition market

value of the firm (see Cumniins et al (1985) for details). I then

collected data on the price actually paid to each holder of a share of

common stock in the acquired firm at the time of acquisition and used

the rate of return thus earned by holders of the common stock between

the year before acquisition and acquisition to update the value of debt

plus equity (assuming that the total value of the firm was increasing

along with the value of the common stock). This procedure is necessary

owing to the difficulty of valuing the claims of all stock and

bondholders at the time of exit.

       Using these numbers, I estimated a valuation equation for these

271 firms in the year before acquisition and at acquisition time.      The

results were


(18)      log V(A,K) —    + 0.96   logA + 0.49 (K/A)
                            (0.02)          (0.12)




(19)      log V(A,K) —   + 0.95    logA +   0.65 (K/A)
                            (0.03)          (0.14)


where      denotes a dummy for the year in question. These equations

suggest that a firm's R&D stock is valued at a slight premium over its

value in the stock market when the firm is a candidate for takeover.

This is strikingly consistent with Addanki's (1985) findings using some

of the same data but a different model, and deserves to be investigated

further by integrating these equations into the full niultinomial logit

model of acquisition choice.

       The analysis in this section has yielded two findings which bear on



                                   29
the role of R&D in acquisition activity: First, the takeover premium is

positively related to the amount of R&D capital possessed by the firm.

Second, there does seem to be a kind of matching at work in the merger

market: firms prefer to acquire firms which look more like themselves,

especially with respect to R&D intensity. This result is not one that is

easily determined from the aggregate (marginal) patterns of merger

estimated in Table 4, and this suggests that the full matching model

which I tried for the first time here may yield more information about

the merger market than we have hitherto been able to obtain. It would

be desirable to verify this result with some additional information

about the other firm characteristics which prompt takeover activity.




6. Conclusions

     I began this paper with some questions about costs and benefits of

increased merger activity in the United States and suggested that

exploring the role of Research and Development activity might shed some

light on whether at least the firms involved were benefitting from the

increase. I also cited some earlier and rather inconsistent evidence on

the attractiveness of R&D in the takeover market. With respect to this

last, the richer model of acquisition which attempts to match buyers and

sellers seems to provide an explanation for some of the earlier results:

although on average acquired firms invest the same or slightly less in

R&D as the industry norm, the R&D which they do is valued more highly at

the margin by the firms which take them over. This result at least

hints that successful innovators are being taken over. In addition,

there is evidence that larger gains are generated by acquisitions where

both firms involved have high R&D intensity.



                               30
     I also found evidence that much of the acquisition activity by

private and foreign firms in the domestic market is directed towards

firms and industries which are relatively less R&D intensive and have a

weaker technological base, so that this kind of acquisition activity

cannot be a major factor in causing a shift of focus away from

innovation activity, unless we take the view that managers in these

industries saw themselves as threatened with takeover far in advance and

cut R&D spending in anticipation. Given the nature of the industries

involved, this seems somewhat unlikely. Explaining this result would

seem to require further investigation into the motives for private

acquisitions.

     Finally, I found very little evidence in the existing data (through

1985) that acquisitions cause a reduction in R&D spending; in the

aggregate, firms involved in mergers showed no difference in their pre

and post-merger R&D performance over those not so involved. At the

individual industry level, the results were too imprecisely measured to

draw firm conclusions.

     However, I have left many open questions which deserve further

attention: First, at the level of econometric specification, what are

the optimal regressors in such a model, the optimal sampling for the

choice set, and how do the results change when a nested logit model is

used to estimate the probability of acquisition and the probability of

the choice made. Second, can we learn more about the precise valuation

of this part of the returns to R&D by incorporated exit prices directly

into the model of acquisition probability Finally, is there more

information about the relative importance of other reasons for merger to

be gained from a more complete model of the acquisitions market using




                              31
this framework?




                  32
                                         Table 1

                      Reasons for Exit from the Publicly Traded
                                Manufacturing Sector

                                                               *
                              Number of Firms and Employment

                       Acquisition      Acquisition     Acquisition     Liquidated
           Total        by Public       by Private      by Foreign          or
Year       Exits      Domestic Firm        Firm            Firm          Bankrupt


1976      28   92        24     89          1      0       2        2     2    0

1977      55 256         35 165             5      6      11       81     2    2

1978      42 243         20 204            13    22        8       16     1    0

1979      33 131         23     80          5    14        2        7     1   14

1980      59 353         31 270             5    15        8       21     9   17

1981      81 323        35 220             22    58        6       18    11   16

1982      67 190        23      72        23     47        7       36   11    30

1983      71 249        27 102            21     66        3        1   10    16

1984 115 596            44 290            38 161          10       74   11    10

1985 111 823            43 552            36 138           7       78   19    11

1986     58 466         23 153            15     86       8        52    5    14

                 **
Total    704 3721      332 2195          199 615         72 385         101 132

Notes:
*
 The first entry in each pair of columns in the number of firms, and the
second entry is the total employment (in l000s) in these firms the year
prior to exit.
**
  Columns and rows do not sum due to a few exits as yet unidentified as to
reason and/or year of exit.




                                            33
                                     Table 2a

              Characteristics of 550 Manufacturing Acquisitions

                                     1977 -1986



                Number Empi.     Acquired 77-81     Number Empi. Acquired 82-86
Indus try        in76 in76       Percent % Empi.    in 81   in 81 Percent % Empi.


Food              158    1,753    19.0    18.6        120   1,771   25.0   17.0
Textiles          153      996     7.2     6.1        117     831   26.5   24.3
Chemicals         103    1,378    19.4     4.6         87   1,382   10.3    9.0
Drugs              92      739    10.9     4.4         99     793   14.1   15.3
Petroleum          66    1,456     9.1     5.2         58   1,681    8.6    8.1
Rubber,Plstcs      76      708     9.2     1.0         61     545   23.0   22.3
Stone,Clay,Gl      58      373    17.2     8.2         47     342   23.4   13.4
Prim. Metals       87      771    11.5     8.0         76     796   15.8   18.0
Fab. Metals       136      565    13.2     5.2        115     576   21.7   18.9
Engines            59      592    10.2     9.6         53     570    5.7    1.5
Computers         113    1,107    12.4     3.0        130   1,566    3.8    0.6
Machinery         157      657    21.0    17.3        122     557   14.8   11.2
Elec. Mach.        82    1,492    14.6     7.1         84   1,447   22.6    8.5
Electronics       192    2,000     8.3     2.6        198   2,376    7.6    5.6
Autos              77    1,357    14.3     4.6         62   1,041   19.4   10.3
Aircraft           40      823    12.5     1.7         37     984   21.6    9.4
Instruments        87      232     8.0     5.3         88     265    8.0    2.6
Lumber&Wood       154      916     9.7     6.1        127     824   16.5    7.2
Misc Mfg          166      957    11.4     5.0        150   1,091   18.0   10.0

Total Mfg        2056 18,874      12.8        6.6    1831 19,436    15.6   10.4


All employment figures are in thousands; they include part-time and
seasonal workers, and exclude any contract employees or consultants.

The first four columns refer to acquisitions made between 1977 and 1981 as
a share of the industry as it existed in 1976. The next four columns are
for acquisitions made between 1982 and 1986 as a share of the industry in
1981.

The number of firms acquired and the employment in those firms are shown as
a percent of the base period number of firms and employment.




                                         34
                                 Table 2b

                 Characteristics of the Buyers and Sellers
                    in 314 Manufacturing Acquisitions

                                  1977-1986


            Total # Employ.                  Acquired 77-86            Acquiring 77-86
Indus try   in 1976 in 1976     Number Percent Employ. % Emp. Number Percent


Food             158   1,753      26         16.5%     541.5   30.9%      23    14.6%
Textiles         153     996      11          7.2%      50.0    5.0%      14     9.2%
Chemicals        103   1,378      19         18.4%     182.1   13.2%      12    11.7%
                  92      739     17         18.5%     110.7    1.5%      12    13.0%
Drugs
Petroleum         66    1,456       8        12.1%     164.6   11.3%      14    21.2%
Rubber,Plstcs     76      708     11         14.5%       8.2    1.1%       9    11.5%
                  58      373     10         17.2%      31.3    8.3%       8    13.8%
Stone,Clay,G1
Prim. Metals      87      771     12         13.8%     161.3   20.9%       5     5.7%
Fab. Metals      136      566     25         18.4%      45.7    8.1%      16    11.8%
                  59      592       6        10.2%      44.3    7.4%       3     5.1%
Engines
                 113    1,107     18         15.9%      53.4    4.8%      10     8.8%
Computers
                 157      657     31         19.7%     143.9   21.9%      14     8.9%
Machinery
Elec. Mach.       82    1,492     18         22.0%     131.9    8.8%      13    15.8%
Electronics      192    2,000     27         14.1%     173.0    8.9%      16     8.3%
Autos             77    1,357       6         7.8%      21.0    1.5%      11    14.3%
Aircraft          40      823     10         25.0%      89.3   10.8%       6    15.0%
Instruments       87      232     11         12.6%      18.1    7.8%       9    10.3%
Lumber&Wood      154      916     23         14.9%      71.3    7.8%      10     6.5%
Misc Mfg         166      957     25         15.1%      47.1    4.9%      11     6.6%

Total Mfg       2056   18,874     314        15.3%   2,088.7   11.1%     216    10.5%


NB: The sample consists of manufacturing acquisitions where both the
buyer and the seller appeared on the Compustat Files.

The first two columns are totals for the manufacturing sector in 1976, All
employment figures are in thousands; they include part-time and seasonal
workers, and exclude any contract employees or consultants.

The next four columns are totals for the firms which were acquired between 1977
and 1986. The columns labelled percent show their share of the 1976 industry,
both in number of firms, and in employment.

The final two columns describe the firms in the industry which made acquisitions
of publicly traded manufacturing firms between 1977 and 1986.




                                        35
                                        Table 3a

                       Comparison of R&D to Sales Ratios
                 for Acquired and Non-Acquired Firms 1977-1986

                            By Acquired Firm's Industry

                    Number      R/S          SR/S    R/S          SR/S         R/S Diff.
                  of Firms Exiters Exiters Stayers Stayers                    Avg T - stat


Food                   26       .253%        .06%     .160%       .01%   - .093%      -1.5
Textiles               11       .158         .41      .169        .02         .012     0.1
Chemicals              19      1.79      - .21        1.80    -   .35         .015     0.0
Drugs                  17      7.21          .23     4.87         .59    -2.34        -0.6
Petroleum               8       .322         .14      .337        .01      .016        0.1
Rubber,Plstcs          11       .573     - .04        .915        .06         .342     0.8
Stone,Clay,G1          10       .411         .01      .372        .03     -   .039    -0.2
Prim. Metals           12       .623     -.10         .269    -   .01     -.354       -2.1
Fab. Metals            25       .986         .16      .563        .02     - .422      -2.3
Engines                 6       .826     -.07        1.37         .11         .547     1.1
Computers              18      5.64          .48     5.32         .26     -   .319    -0.1
Machinery              31      1.12          .40     1.58         .20         .455     0.7
Elec. Mach.            18      3.51      -   .13    4.40          .40         .893     0.3
Electronics            27      4.07          .88    3.44          .44     - .631      -0.3
Autos                   6       .782     -.12        .766 -.18            -.016       -0.0
Aircraft               10      2.12          .09    2.02    .26          - .107       -0.1
Instruments            11      4.56          .35    4.10    .43          - .455       -0.2
Lumber&Wood            23       .345         .03      .342        .32    - .004       -0.0
Misc Mfg               25       .620         .04      .340        .02    - .028       -1.6

Total Mfg             314      1.97%         .18    1.82%         .16     - .154%     -0.4

Acquisitions outside 254       0.92%                1.82%                -0.90 %      -3.0
  of sample


R/S is the deflated R&D to sales ratio. The deflator for sales is the
Producer Price Index for Finished Goods (Bureau of Labor Statistics) and
that for R&D is due to Griliches following Jaffe (see Cummins et al
(1985) for details).

The column labelled Exiters contains the average R&D to sales ratio for
the 314 firms which were acquired by firms in my sample, measured one
year before exit and the change in R&D to sales ratio for the combined
firm measured from one year before exit until one year after. The one
labelled Stayers is the average R&D to sales ratio and the growth of
that ratio for the firms which did not exit, averaged over the 1977 to
1986 period. It is based on several hundred observations per industry.

The last two columns are the difference in R/S for the two groups and
the T-statistic for the hypothesis that the difference is zero.




                                        36
                                  Table 3b

                     Comparison of R&D to Sales Ratios
                for Acquired and Acquiring Firms 1977-1986

                            By Acquiring Industry

                   Number        R/S            R/S         LIR/S        R/S Diff.
                  Acquired      Acquired Acquiring Acquirers             Avg   T-stat

Food                   30          .320%        .209%       .07%     -   .111%   -1.1
Textiles               15          .276         .467        .49          .191     0.6
Chemicals              18        3.22          2.69         .18      -   .532    -0.7
Drugs                  14        7.33          4.77         .31     -2.56        -0.9
Petroleum              11          .864         .383    -   .06      -   .481    -1.5
Rubber,Plstcs          11          .841         .921        .11          .080     0.2
Stone,Clay,Gl           9        1.11          1.10         .12      -   .017     0.0
Prim. Metals            7          .084         .204    - .02            .120     1.0
                                                .649    - .12        -   .199    -0.6
Fab. Metals            28          .849
Engines                 3        1.18          2.11         .06          .935     1.1
Computers              10        6.61          5.76         .46      -   .854    -0.6
Machinery              21        1.08          1.24         .52          .161     0.4
Elec. Mach.            23        3.34          2.00         .02     -1.34        -1.4
Electronics            17        3.92          4.07     1.88             .145     0.2
Autos                  14        2.59          1.12     - .05       -1.47        -1.1
Aircraft                9        3.97          3.61     - .26        -   .361    -0.3
Instruments            11        1.79          3.33         .12      1.54         1.9
Lumber&Wood            10          .520         .304        .01      -   .215    -0.6
Misc Mfg               18          .656         .179    -   .06      -   .477    -1.3

Total Mfg             279        2.05          1.68         .22      -   .369    -0.9

Non-Mfg                38        1.38           .168                -1.21        -3.4

Total                 317        1.97%         1.50%                 -   .472%   -1.5


The two columns labelled R/S give the average R&D to sales ratio for the
acquiring firms and the firms they acquired. R/S is defined the same way as
in Table 2a.

The column labelled tSR/S is the average implied change in R/S around the
time of aquisition for acquisitions by firms in that industry.

The last two columns again test the difference between the two R/S ratios.




                                          37
                                           Table 4
                                                                         *
               Logit    Estimates of the Probability of Acquisition

                                     21, 900 Observations

                                     Probability of Being Acquired

                         All          by Private or Foreign by Manufacturing Firms


#   Acquisitions        557                      229                   328

Log A              -
                       .042(.022)            -
                                                 .166(.030)           .036(.028)

K/A                -
                       .139(.144)            -.514(.314)              .058(.167)

D(Tech)                .232(.097)                .830(.175)           .146(.l22)
        **
Trend                  .125(.0l6)                .239(.028)           .054(.020)

         for A,K,Tech      12.0                       60.2               3.4


                          Probability of Making an Acquisition

                          All Years                    1976-1981       1982-1986


# Acquisitions                 319                           167         152

Log A                      .432 (.025)                  .546(.036)    .320(.034)

K/A                      - .314   (.266)                .218(.340)   - .994(.385)

Trend
      **                   .027 (.023)                - .0l5(.049)    .264(.079)


Variables:

Log K — Log of deflated capital stock of the firm in the year before it
        is acquired or acquires.
K/A   — Ratio of R&D stock to assets in the same year.
D(Tech)—Dummy for the Chemicals, Drugs, Engines, Computers, Machinery,
        Elec. Machinery, Electronics, Aircraft, and Instruments Industries.

Notes:

*Estimates are obtained by the method of Maximum Likelihood. All
standard errors are heteroskedastic-consistent estimates.

**A dummy for 1986 was also included since the data are incomplete for
that year.




                                                 38
                                             Table 5

                Conditional Logit Estimates of Acquisition Choice

                                 311 Acquisitions: 1977-1986

                                                    Coefficient Estimates
Variables                               Model I                              Model II

logA                         -l.04(.15)           -l.00(.17)

L(K/A)                       -4.05(.60)           -3.78(.66)

LogA..LogA.                                                       .17(.02)    .17(.02)

(K/A)..LogA.                                                     -.31(.l6)   -.18(.20)

LogA..(K/A).                                                      .28(.08)    .32(.08)

(K/A)..(K/A).                                                    3.82(0.98) 4.05(1.09)

D(Same md.)                                    2.34(.21)                     2.41(.18)


LogA.                    -
                             .72(.14)         -.73(.16)         -1.13(.13)    -1.21(.15)

(K/A).                   3.30(.53)           3.09(.58)         -2.98(0.72)    -3.28(0.82)


Log of Likelihood -502.3                      -424.7           -557.8        -467.2


Variables:

LogA —   log
           of deflated assets in the year before the acquisition, where
       assets is the sum of capital stock, inventories, and other
       investments.
(K/A) — Ratio of R&D stock to assets in the year before the acquisition.

Ei1ogA     J   logA. - logA I
L(K/A) —       I(K/A).   -
                             (K/A).I
D(Same md.) — 1 if acquiring and acquired firm are in the same two-digit
                     industry.

The subscript j indexes acquiring firms and i indexes target firms. The
coefficient estimates are for the probability that firm j chooses firm i when it
makes an acquisition. Models I and II are described more completely in the text.

Notes:

Standard error estimates are robust heteroskedastjc-consjstent estimates.
They differ from the conventional estimates by less than ten percent in
almost all cases.



                                                     39
                                Figure 1.




                  Two Year Change in R&D Intensity for Acquiring and Non—
                                      Acquiring Firms

        58.Ox
        45.8,
        48. Ox
P
e 35.Rx
'
u.;j
    F308.,<                                                      N Acquis.
e                                                                  All
n
    S
        1S.Od<
0
f       ie.o',-

         5.8,
         8. 8          p          -                    p     I      I        I
                  —1.75—1.25—8.75—8.25 8.25 8.75 1.25 1.75 2.25 2.75
                                           Change in R/S x




                    Two Year Change in R&D Intensity (includes Non—R&D
                                          Doers)

        68. Ox


        50.Ox
P
C
rC F 48. Ox                                                      N Acquis.
 e r 38.Ox
    1

 n m                                                               All
t
    28. Ox

        10.Ox

         8. Ox
                  —1.75—1.25—8.75—0.25 8.25 0.75 1.25 1.75 2.25 2.75
                                           Change in R/S x




                                      40
                              References


Abel, Andrew B. 1983. "Optimal Investment under Uncertainty," American
     Economic Review 73: 228-233.

Abel, Andrew B.  1984. "R&D and the Market Value of the Firm: A Note,"
     in Z. Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents, and Productivity. Chicago,
     Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

Abel, Andrew B.  1985. "A Stochastic Model of Investment, Marginal q,
     and the Market Value of the Firm," International Economic Review
      26: 305-322.

Addanki, St.unanth.1985. "Innovation and Mergers in U. S. Manufacturing
     Firms: A First Look," Harvard University, mimeo.

Asquith, P., R. F. Bruner, and D. W. Mullins. 1983. "The Gains to
     Bidding Firms from Mergers", Journal of Financial Economics. 11:121-
     139.

Auerbach, Alan and David Reishus. 1985. "Taxes and the Merger
     Decision," mimeo.

Auerbach, Alan and David Reishus. 1987. "The Effects of Taxation on
     the Merger Decision", this volume.

Berkovic, James and John Rust. 1985. "A Nested Logit Model of
     Automobile Holdings for One Vehicle Households," Trans. Res. -B 19B:
     275-285.

Bound, J. C. Cunimins, Z. Griliches, B. H. Hall, and A. Jaffe. 1984.
     Who Does R&D and Who Patents?", in R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Z.
     Griliches (ed.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Cosslett, Stephen R. 1981. "Maximum Likelihood Estimator for Choice-Based
     Samples," Econometrica 49:1289-1316.

Cuxnmins, Clint, Bronwyn H. Hall, Elizabeth S. Laderman, and Joy Mundy.
     1984. "The R&D Master File: Documentation," National Bureau of
     Economic Research, mimeo.

Debreu, Gerard. 1960. "Review of R. Luce, Individual Choice Behavior,"
     American Economic Review 50:186-188.

Gilson, Ronald J., Myron S. Scholes, and Mark A. Wolfson. 1985.
     "Taxation and the Dynamics of Corporate Control: The Uncertain Case for
     Tax Motivated Acquisitions," Stanford University, mimeo.

Griliches, Z. 1981. "Market Value, R&D. and Patents," Economics Letters
     7.

Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse. 1981. "Productivity and Growth at the



                               41
     Firm Level," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 826.

Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse. 1983. "Comparing Productivity Growth:
     An Exploration of French and U. S. Industrial and Firm Data," European
     Economic Review 21: 89-119.

Grossman, S. and J. Stiglitz. 1977. "On Value Maximization and
     Alternative Objectives of the Firm," Journal of Finance May 1977.

Hall, Bronwyn H. 1987. "The Relationship between Firm Size and Firm
     Growth in the U. S. Manufacturing Sector," Journal of Industrial
     Economics 35:583-606.

Hall, Bronwyn H. l987a. "The New R&D Master File: 1959-1985." Mimeo
     (in preparation).

Hall, Bronwyn H. l987b. "Equilibrium in the Market for Acquisitions,"
     Mimeo.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Clint Cummins, and Rebecca Schnake. 1986. TSP
     Version 4.1 Reference Manual. Stanford, California: TSP
     International.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Zvi Griliches, and Jerry A. Hausman. 1986. "Patents
     and R&D: Is There a Lag?", International Economic Review 27: 265-
     283.

Hausman, Jerry, and Daniel McFadden. 1984. "Specification Tests for
     the Multinominal Logit Model", Econometrica 52:1219-1240.

Jarrell, Gregg A.  1983. "Do Acquirers Benefit from Corporate
     Acquisitions?" University of Chicago, mimeo.

Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A
     Neoclassical Interpretation," Econometrica 50: 213-254.

Jensen, Michael and Richard Ruback. 1983. "The Market for Corporate
     Control," Journal of Financial Economics. 11:1-53.

Jensen, Michael. 1986. The Takeover Controversy: Analysis and
     Evidence," Harvard Business School Working Paper 9-786-001.

Lucas, Robert E. 1967. "Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply,"
     Journal of Political Economy 75: 321-334.

Lucas, Robert E. 1967.    "Optimal Investment Policy and the Flexible
     Accelerator," International Economic Review 8: 78-85.

Lucas, Robert E. and Edward C. Prescott. 1971. "Investment under
     Uncertainty," Econometrica 39: 659-681.

Mannering, F. and C. Winston. 1985. "A Dynamic Empirical Analysis of
     Household Vehicle Ownership and Utilization," Rand Journal of Economics
     16: 215-236.




                              42
Manski, Charles F. and Daniel McFadden. 1981. Structural Analysis of
     Discrete Data with Economic Applications. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
     The MIT Press.

Manski, C. F. and L. Sherman. 1981. "An Empirical Analysis of
     Household Choice among Motor Vehicles," Trans. Res. Rec. 202: 84-112.

McFadden, Daniel. 1973. "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative
     Choice Behavior," in Frontiers in Econometrics, P. Zarembka (ed.), New
     York: Academic Press, 1973.

McFadden, Daniel. 1978. "Modelling the Choice of Residential
     Location," in Spatial Interaction Theory and Residential Location, A.
     Karlqvist (ed.), Amsterdam: North Holland, 1978.

McFadden, Daniel. 1984. "Qualitative Response Models," in Handbook of
     Econometrics, Volume II, Z. Criliches and M. D. Intriligator
     (eds), Amsterdam: North Holland, 1984.

Mussa, Michael. 1974. "Market Value and the Investment Decision in an
     Adjustment Cost Model of Firm Behavior," Department of Economics,
     University of Rochester Discussion Paper 74-15 (July).

Poulsen, Annette B. and Gregg A. Jarrell. 1986. "Motivations for
     Hostile Tender Offers and the Market for Political Exchange,"
     Contemporary Policy Issues IV, Number 3: 30-45.

Ravenscroft, David and F. M. Scherer. 1986. "The Profitability of
     Mergers," mimeo, January 1986.

Roll, Richard. 1986. "The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers,"
     Journal of Business April 1986.

Ruud, Paul A. 1984. "Tests of Specification in Econometrics,"
     Econometric Reviews 3:211-242.

San Miguel, Joseph. 1977. "The Reliability of R&D Data in Compustat
     and 10-K Reports", Accounting Review LII: 638-641.

Schankerman, Mark, and M. Ishaq Nadiri. 1984. "Investment in R&D:
     Costs of Adjustment, and Expectations," in Z. Griliches, ed., R&D,
     Patents, and Productivity. Chicago, Illinois: University of
     Chicago Press.

Schary, Martha. 1986. "Exit, Investment and Technological Diffusion in
     a Declining Industry: An Empirical Study." Mimeo, October.

Schwartz, Steven. 1982. "Factors Affecting the Probability of Being
     Acquired," Economic Journal 92:391-398.

Securities and Exchange Commission, Office of the Chief Economist.
     1985. "Institutional Ownership, Tender Offers, and Long-Term
     Investments," SEC Study, April 1985.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-



                              43
     Theory Approach," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1981: 67-
     140.

Train, Kenneth. 1986. Qualitative Choice Analysis, Cambridge,
     Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

Wildasin, David E. 1984. "The q Theory of Investment with Many Capital
     Goods," American Economic Review 74: 203-210.




                             44
