                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       HOW COLLATERAL LAWS SHAPE LENDING AND SECTORAL ACTIVITY

                                        Charles W. Calomiris
                                          Mauricio Larrain
                                          José M. Liberti
                                         Jason D. Sturgess

                                        Working Paper 21911
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21911


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016

We thank Emily Breza, Murillo Campello, Qianqian Du (discussant), Scott Frame (discussant), Todd
Gormley, Li Jin (discussant), Martin Oehmke, Arito Ono (discussant), Tomasz Piskorski, Jacopo Ponticelli
(discussant), Philip Strahan, Greg Udell, Paolo Volpin (discussant), Daniel Wolfenzon, Baozhong
Yang (discussant), Zacharias Sautner (discussant), Stefan Zeume (discussant), and seminar participants
at EBRD, Laboratoire d’Excellence ReFI, Columbia-NYU Junior Corporate Finance Meeting, Columbia
Business School, NBER Law and Economics Meeting, CEPR Workshop on Corporate Financing (Oxford),
Catolica Lisbon-Nova SBE (Lisbon), Junior Faculty Roundtable at UNC Chapel Hill, Symposium
on Emerging Financial Markets (Columbia), Federal Reserve Board, ITAM Finance Conference (Mexico
City), MoFiR Workshop on Banking (Kobe), University of New South Wales (Sydney), IMF, China
International Conference in Finance (Shenzhen), Catholic University of Chile, University of Chile,
University Adolfo Ibañez, University Los Andes, American Finance Association (San Francisco) and
European Finance Association Meeting (Vienna) for helpful comments. Jason Lee provided excellent
research assistance. We are grateful for funding from the Jerome A. Chazen Institute of International
Business at Columbia Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, José M. Liberti, and Jason D. Sturgess. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Collateral Laws Shape Lending and Sectoral Activity
Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, José M. Liberti, and Jason D. Sturgess
NBER Working Paper No. 21911
January 2016
JEL No. G18,G21

                                             ABSTRACT

We demonstrate the central importance of creditors’ ability to use “movable” assets as collateral (as
distinct from “immovable” real estate) when borrowing from banks. Using a unique cross-country
micro-level loan dataset containing loan-to-value ratios for different assets, we find that loan-to-values
of loans collateralized with movable assets are lower in countries with weak collateral laws, relative
to immovable assets, and that lending is biased towards the use of immovable assets. Using sector-level
data, we find that weak movable collateral laws create distortions in the allocation of resources that
favor immovable-based production. An analysis of Slovakia’s collateral law reform confirms our findings.


Charles W. Calomiris                                José M. Liberti
Graduate School of Business                         DePaul University
Columbia University                                 1 E. Jackson Blvd.
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall                     DePaul Center 6131
New York, NY 10027                                  Chicago
and NBER                                            Illinois, 60604
cc374@columbia.edu                                  jliberti@depaul.edu

Mauricio Larrain                                    Jason D. Sturgess
Columbia University                                 DePaul University
3022 Broadway, 813 Uris Hall                        Finance Group
New York, NY 10027                                  Suite 5500
mlarrain@columbia.edu                               1 E Jackson Blvd
                                                    Chicago
                                                    IL 60604
                                                    jason.sturgess@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21911
I. Introduction

The ability of creditors to enforce their contracts with debtors is fundamental to the market for credit. A

debtor who cannot commit to repay her loan will find it difficult if not impossible to obtain one. Over the

past two decades, scores of academic articles have demonstrated the validity and importance of creditors’

rights for the supply of credit by showing how cross-country differences in the rights of creditors and

reforms within countries that improve creditors’ rights are associated with dramatic differences in the

supply of bank credit and economic growth.2 In this paper, we provide evidence on a new channel

through which legal systems affect debt contracting, and in turn, credit supply and real economic activity.

We demonstrate the central importance of creditors’ ability to use “movable” assets as collateral (as

distinct from “immovable” real estate) when borrowing from banks.


        “Movable” assets consist of all non-real estate assets (such as machinery, accounts receivable,

and inventory). According to the World Bank, creditors in emerging markets are usually reluctant to

accept movable assets as collateral (Fleisig et al., 2006). That is a major problem for firms that rely on

bank credit because movable assets are central to the production processes of many firms in developed

and emerging market countries, and in the absence of legal system shortcomings, movable assets are the

most important class of collateral used in bank credit. For example, within the United States, 63 percent

of collateralized loans made to small and medium-sized enterprises are collateralized by movable assets.3

2
  King and Levine (1993), Levine and Zervos (1998), La Porta et al. (1997, 1998), Taylor (1998), and Beck et al.
(2000) employed innovative statistical techniques to identify cross-country patterns. A later group of scholars—most
notably Rajan and Zingales (1998), Wurgler (2000), Cetorelli and Gamberra (2001), Fisman and Love (2004), and
Beck et al. (2008)—focused on the development of sectors as well as countries, and they reached the same
conclusion: finance leads growth. Research focusing on the growth of regions within countries by Jayaratne and
Strahan (1996), Black and Strahan (2002), Guiso et al. (2004), Cetorelli and Strahan (2006), Dehejia and Lleras-
Muney (2007), and Correa (2008) produced broadly similar results. There are also various articles focusing on how
creditors’ rights differences affect the structure of loans and the identity of lenders. See, for example, Demirguc-
Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Qian and Strahan (2007), Bae and Goyal (2009), and Liberti and Mian (2010).
3
  Specifically, 46% of collateralized loans are collateralized by machinery, and 17% collateralized by inventory and
accounts receivable. Data on collateralized lending for SMEs in the U.S. comes from the Federal Reserve Board’s
Survey of Small Business Finance (SSBF). The SSBF combines accounts receivable and inventory. Accounts
receivable and inventory are the two most fundamental forms of asset-based financing since they combine elements
of secured lending and short-term business loans. A firm would use the value of their accounts receivable and
inventory as collateral to secure financing to produce and sell their products and services. The financing is then
repaid by converting the inventory to cash, either directly or through the collection of accounts receivables (see
Udell, 2004). See Appendix Table A.2 for details.

                                                                                                                  1
In this paper, we argue that the root of the inability to make use of movables collateral in many emerging

markets reflects problems in legal regimes governing movables collateral use. Each country has a

collateral law for immovable assets and another law for movable assets. Although collateral laws for real

estate loans tend to be relatively well developed worldwide, creditors in many countries are reluctant to

lend against movable assets because their legal systems limit the usefulness of such assets as collateral. In

particular, legal systems for movables are weak in three dimensions: they limit the scope of movable

assets that can be used as collateral, they lack centralized registration systems to monitor the security

interests (to make sure no other lender has rights to the same collateral), and they allow enforcement in

the event of default only through courts.4


         We explore how the sophistication of a country’s collateral laws for movable assets affects loan

supply, reflected in the loan-to-value (LTV) ratios for loans secured by movables assets compared to

loans against immovable assets. We employ a novel cross-country micro-level dataset containing small

and medium business secured loans issued by an anonymous global bank (which we label GlobalBank) in

12 emerging market countries. One advantage of the dataset is that it provides information regarding the

liquidation value of the asset being pledged as collateral.5 This allows us to construct comparable LTVs,

using meaningful measures of asset value, for loans collateralized by different types of assets – something

that the previous literature has been unable to do, due to the lack of data on asset liquidation values.


         Another novel contribution of our study is our analysis of how different countries’ treatment of

movable assets as collateral shapes the allocation of resources across sectors. Because emerging market

finance is typically bank debt, and is often collateralized, constraints on LTV and debt capacity should

also constrain economic activity.6 Specifically, we analyze how collateral laws affect the sectoral


4
  Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) governs secured transactions for movable assets in the U.S.
According to the U.C.C., security interests over movables are well defined, easily registered, and can be seized
easily if default occurs without the necessity of a judicial procedure (see Section 9-607).
5
  As per GlobalBank credit manuals, the asset value is the fair market value that a willing and informed buyer would
pay in less than 180 days under normal (non-fire sale) conditions.
6
  According to the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, which are performed in over 100 countries, collateral is
required for bank loans in 75% of loans worldwide. Moreover, the lack of collateral is one of the primary reasons for

                                                                                                                   2
allocation of production between movable-intensive and immovable-intensive producers using sector-

level output data covering the universe of manufacturing firms in our sample of countries.


         We first investigate how the lending supply behavior of GlobalBank responds to differences in

the quality of collateral protection for movable assets. We identify within-country differences in LTV

across loans collateralized with movable and immovable assets for a single lender. Next, we examine how

these within-country differences in loan supply and LTV are affected by different legal treatment of

movable collateral. We measure cross-country differences in the quality of movable collateral laws using

World Bank data from Doing Business to focus specifically on each country’s legal treatment of the three

components of effectively secured transactions (creation, monitoring, and enforcement) over movable

collateral. We start by showing that movables-backed loans are more frequent in countries with strong

legal frameworks for movable collateral (which we label “strong-law countries”) than in weak-law

countries. Next, we show that LTVs for loans collateralized by movable assets are higher in strong-law

countries, but that LTVs for loans collateralized by immovable assets are similar across countries.

According to our difference-in-differences estimation, LTVs of loans collateralized with movable assets

are on average 27.6 percentage points higher, relative to LTVs for loans collateralized by immovable

assets, in strong-law countries relative to weak-law countries.


         One concern in interpreting our cross-sectional regressions is the potential influence of omitted

factors that could explain the observed relationship between collateral laws and debt contracting. We deal

with this concern in two ways. First, we control for country characteristics that could affect the LTVs of

movable and immovable assets differentially, such as the efficiency of contract enforcement, efficiency of

bankruptcy procedures, rule of law, and property rights. Our results are robust to controlling for these

variables. Second, we take advantage of the fact that one of the countries in our sample – Slovakia –

improved all three components of movable collateral law during our sample period. To provide further


the rejection of credit (Fleisig et al., 2006). Understanding the effects of movable collateral laws on production is
particularly important given that on average 78% of developing countries’ capital is in movable assets, and only
22% is in immovable assets (Alvarez de la Campa, 2011).

                                                                                                                   3
causal evidence on the effects of collateral laws, we examine the lending behavior in Slovakia around the

collateral law reform. Examining collateral in a within-borrower framework, we find that the LTVs for

movable assets rose substantially after the policy reform, relative to immovable assets. The magnitude of

this within-borrower change (20 percentage points) is similar to the magnitude of the cross-country

difference between weak- and strong-law countries. To address the concern that the Slovakia results could

be driven by other shocks or policies affecting movable and immovable assets differentially, we conduct a

placebo test using the experience of the Czech Republic, a country that did not reform its collateral law.

Given the similarities between the two countries, it is plausible that both were exposed to similar shocks.

We falsely assume that the Czech Republic reformed at the same time as Slovakia, but we reject that

assumption, finding no change over time in the LTVs for loans backed by movable assets in the Czech

Republic.


        To investigate the consequences of collateral laws for real economic activity, we study how

collateral law differences affect the sectoral allocation of resources among manufacturing firms. Our

measures of sectoral composition are from UNIDO data, which provide each country’s sector-specific

output for 22 sectors. The sample of countries covered by UNIDO is more extensive than the GlobalBank

sample of emerging market countries we employ in our analysis of lending. We measure exogenous

immovable asset-intensity of each manufacturing sector using data for the U.S. sectoral composition of

assets (ratio of value of land and buildings to total assets), which should be relatively free from distortions

related to ineffective movable collateral laws. Examining the within-country allocation of resources

across collateral law frameworks for the 12 GlobalBank countries, we find that weak-law countries

allocate 15.4% more production to immovable-intensive sectors than strong-law countries. We also find

that the investment rate in immovable-intensive sectors in weak-law countries is 3 percentage points

higher than in strong-law countries. Results for a broader sample of 76 countries are similar but of smaller

magnitude.




                                                                                                             4
        We recognize that it may be possible to object to our OLS results on sectoral allocation because

of concerns about endogeneity bias due either to omitted variables or reverse causality. With respect to

the possibility of reverse causality, it is conceivable that countries with a comparative advantage in real-

estate intensive sectors do not have as great a need for a strong movable law. We address that potential

problem in two ways. First, we show that there is no correlation between the collateral law index and a

measure of natural resource abundance, which shows that the most obvious source of reverse causality is

implausible empirically. Second, we employ differences in legal origin as an instrument for differences in

collateral laws, and find that, under the assumed exclusion restriction, the observed association between

collateral law quality and sectoral allocation appears to be the result of exogenous variation in collateral

laws.


        Instrumenting with legal origin provides strong evidence against reverse causality, but with

respect to concerns about omitted variables, it is possible that legal origin is correlated with other omitted

country characteristics that affect sectoral allocation, which would violate the exclusion restriction. We

consider, in particular, that the ability to collateralize using movable assets may be a proxy for other

protections of creditors’ rights. To address that concern, we control for differences in the efficiency of

contract enforcement, efficiency of bankruptcy procedures, rule of law, and property rights, and the

results remain unchanged. Not only does the inclusion of these controls not affect our regression findings

regarding the importance of the ability to collateralize with movables, we also find that our results are

stronger in countries with poorer legal efficiency. This reflects the fact that collateral rights for movables

often are most important in countries where courts operate poorly, because these collateral rights often

provide a means of avoiding lengthy court deliberations. Of course, one may be concerned that some of

these variables are endogenous, which would mean that adding them as controls does not fully eliminate

the possibility of omitted variables bias. To further address omitted variables bias concerns, we examine

sectoral shifts in production within Slovakia after its movable asset collateral reform. Consistent with our




                                                                                                            5
cross-sectional results, we find important sectoral shifts in production in favor of movables-intensive

producers after the reform.


         Finally, we also investigate which aspects of legal system differences are most important for

explaining our results. We find that the existence of collateral registries to register security interests over

movable assets and the possibility of enforcing security interests without court intervention – not the mere

existence of laws permitting the collateralization of movable assets – drive our results. When we control

for out-of-court enforcement for immovable assets, we find that the movable-enforcement coefficient

remains unchanged, while the immovable-enforcement coefficient is not statistically significant. This

suggests that out-of-court enforcement is more valuable for movable than immovable assets, because

movables can depreciate more quickly and disappear more easily.


         In summary, our paper makes three important and novel contributions. First, we highlight the

importance of movable assets in providing debt capacity and identify a new channel through which

collateral rights on movable assets drive important cross-country variation in debt contracting. Second, as

a result of data constraints, prior analyses employ proxies for the liquidation value of assets.7 Because we

have detailed data on asset liquidation values, we are the first paper to employ the actual estimated LTV

ratios employed by lenders for different asset classes as a measure of debt capacity. Finally, we are the

first to analyze how creditors’ rights influences on credit supply affect the composition of aggregate real

economic activity.


         Although we are the first to analyze the linkages among collateral laws, LTVs, and sectoral

allocation, a number of papers investigate how cross-country differences in the supply of credit is

explained by the existence and enforcement of secured creditors’ rights, especially with respect to




7
  For example, Benmelech et al. (2005) and Benmelech (2009) employ property-specific zoning assignments and
diversity of track gauges in 19th century American railroads, respectively, to capture variation in liquidation values.
One et al. (2015) estimate the liquidation value of real estate collateral using a hedonic model of land prices.

                                                                                                                     6
collateralization.8 Liberti and Mian (2010) show that collateral is a binding constraint on lending, and that

this constraint tends to bind more in relatively underdeveloped financial markets. Specifically, they show

that the spread in collateral between high and low-risk borrowers decreases with the degree of financial

development of the economies.9 Cerqueiro et al. (2014) study the effects of a 2004 Swedish law that

exogenously reduced the value of collateral. They find that, even in a country as developed as Sweden,

this change produced increases in interest rates on loans, tightened credit limits, reduced investments in

monitoring collateral values and borrowers, and higher delinquency rates on loans. Haselmann et al.

(2009) show in their study of legal reforms in Eastern Europe’s transition economies that changes in

collateral laws mattered more for the supply of credit than changes in bankruptcy laws.


         Our paper is also close in spirit to Campello and Larrain (2016), who provide a detailed case

study of a Romanian legal reform that permitted movable assets to be pledged as collateral. They show

that the reform broadened access to credit, particularly for firms operating in sectors making intensive use

of movable capital, resulting in a sharp increase in the employment and capital stock share of those firms.

They analyze the problem from the point of view of the firms, because they have access to balance sheet

data on firms’ total debt. Our paper complements their work by analyzing the problem from the point of

view of the creditors, which we can do because we have access to more granular loan-level data with


8
  There are also large theoretical and empirical literatures on the role of collateral in loan contracting, which we do
not review in detail here, including Lacker (2001), Bester (1985), Chan and Thakor (1987), Berger and Udell
(1990), Boot and Thakor (1994), Rajan and Winton (1995), Gorton and Kahn (2000), Longhofer and Santos (2000),
John et al. (2003), Djankov et al. (2003), Benmelech et al. (2005), Jimenez et al. (2006), Gan (2007), Djankov et al.
(2007), Ono and Uesugi (2009), Benmelech (2009), Benmelech and Bergman (2009, 2011), Berger et al. (2011,
2013), Godlewski and Weill (2011), Chaney et al. (2012), Rampini and Viswanathan (2013), Campello and
Giambona (2013), and Mann (2015). Some recent work has qualified some of the earlier discussions of the effects of
collateral rights by showing that increases in creditors’ rights to collateral that reduce debtors’ bargaining power –
particularly with respect to the disposition of collateral – can reduce the amount of lending through contractions in
demand, even when the supply of lending increases (Lilienfeld-Toal et al. 2012 and Vig 2013).
9
  It is worth noting that both Liberti and Mian (2010) and our paper use GlobalBank as a test laboratory. While
Liberti and Mian (2010) explore cross-sectionally how differences in financial development impact collateralization
rates, our paper analyzes cross-sectionally and within-country how differences in movable laws impact debt capacity
measured by LTV. This allows us to construct a precise link between the institution of a country (i.e., movable law)
and the asset pledged (i.e., movable asset). In addition, besides analyzing the effects on lending, we analyze the
effects on real economic activity. In terms of data, the sample of borrowers and countries in Liberti and Mian (2010)
is different to ours due to the filtering restrictions we apply. Also, we estimate LTV using the fair market liquidation
value, as is typical in real estate-backed loans, while the collateralization rate in Liberti and Mian (2010) employs
the net asset liquidation value, which assumes a shorter sale-horizon of 3 to 6 months.

                                                                                                                      7
information on the assets pledged as collateral. Moreover, we extend their work by analyzing the

consequences of movable collateral laws on aggregate economic activity.10


        We also contribute to the literature that examines different aspects of creditors’ rights.

Differences in creditors’ rights can reflect alternative bankruptcy rules (e.g., the rules governing

reorganization vs. liquidation), differences in the rights of secured vs. unsecured creditors, different

protections for various types of security interests (in real estate vs. movable assets), differences in the

ways collateral rights are enforced, and differences in the extent to which the judicial system enforces

these rules impartially and expeditiously. For example, Jappelli et al. (2005), Chemin (2010), and

Ponticelli (2013) show that the way rights are enforced, or not, by courts can be as important as the

existence of rights as a matter of law. Our results complement this literature by showing that out-of-court

enforcement can work as a substitute for an inefficient judiciary. That is, making courts less important

might be beneficial for financial contracting.


        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses data sources. Section III

describes our identification strategy. Section IV reports empirical findings related to GlobalBank’s

lending in 12 emerging market countries and the collateral reform in Slovakia. Section V provides

additional results for the GlobalBank lending analysis. Section VI examines the effects on the sectoral

allocation of resources. Section VII reports additional results for the sectoral analysis. Section VIII

concludes.


II. Data Sources


Our study employs data primarily from three sources: the detailed lending records of an anonymous

global bank, the World Bank’s Doing Business data (including components of those data that are not

publicly available), and UNIDO data on countries’ sectoral allocation of production.


10
  Love et al. (2015) use the World Bank’s firm-level surveys for a large sample of countries to explore the impact
of introducing collateral registries for movable assets on firms’ access to bank finance. They find that introducing
collateral registries increases firms’ access to bank finance, particularly for smaller firms.

                                                                                                                  8
        GlobalBank provided data on secured loans it makes to small and medium-sized enterprises

(SMEs) during the years 2002-2004 in 16 emerging market countries. In our study, we include loans that

are collateralized either by immovables (real estate assets) or by movables (machinery, inventory and

accounts receivable). We exclude loans collateralized by both types of collateral from our sample,

because for these loans we cannot gauge the relative contribution of each type of collateral. Four of the 16

countries (Brazil, Korea, South Africa, and Taiwan), however, had too few observations of real estate-

collateralized loans to be included in our study and so we were left with data for 12 countries (Chile,

Czech Republic, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Malaysia, Pakistan, Romania, Singapore, Slovakia, Sri

Lanka, and Turkey).11 We have access to all the asset-backed programs that GlobalBank developed in

emerging markets during the early 2000s as part of an “embedded bank” strategy. One of the main goals

of this strategy was for GlobalBank to act as a genuinely local bank in order to compete with local banks

in these regions.


        Given the cross-sectional nature of the main regression analysis, we include one loan per firm in

our sample; if there are multiple loans per borrower, we use the first observed loan. Loans and firms are

dropped from the sample as the result of the various sample exclusion criteria. We begin

with 7,056 single-collateral   loans    and 2,803 multiple-collateral    loans    contracted   with    a   total

of 8,379 firms in our sample of 16 countries. We drop 2,620 firms with 2,881 loans that are located in one

of the four excluded countries. For the other 12 countries, we begin with 4,691 single-collateral loans

and 2,287 multiple-collateral loans, which are made to 5,759 firms. We exclude 467 of the single-

collateral loans and 671 of the multiple-collateral loans in these 12 countries from our main tests because

they are collateralized by Supra-collateral, which we describe below. Our total sample of

loans collateralized either by movables or immovables for the 12 countries includes 4,224 loans (and

firms), 1,128 of which are collateralized by movable assets and 3,096 of which are collateralized by

immovable assets.

11
 We are unaware of the reasons why real estate-collateralized lending by GlobalBank to SMEs is absent in Brazil,
Korea, South Africa, and Taiwan.

                                                                                                              9
        We measure loan quantity as the term-loan amount or the amount actually drawn on a line of

credit. We define the liquidation value of the pledged asset as the fair market liquidation value of the

collateral as appraised by GlobalBank. This value does not include a discount due to asset fire sales or the

presence of constrained buyers, as in Shleifer and Vishny (1992). In terms of the internal process to

determine the liquidation value, an external independent assessor or appraiser determines the price that a

willing and informed buyer would pay to a willing and informed seller when neither party is under

pressure to conclude the transaction.12 Unfortunately, we are unable to observe interest rate data at the

individual loan-contract level because we obtained the data from GlobalBank’s risk-management division

located in New York. This division is not responsible for collecting and assessing interest rate data at the

loan-contract level.


        In addition to the loan categories already mentioned, we also include another category of loans

that we label Supra collateral loans, which adds another 467 loans (and firms) to our sample, bringing the

total sample to 4,691 loans. The Supra-collateral category, which is a formally a category of movable

assets, includes loans collateralized by cash deposits or other cash assets placed in GlobalBank, or by

foreign cash deposits, as well as loans backed by commercial letters of credit enforced abroad (related to

import/export lending), or by stand-by letters of credit or other credit guarantees enforced outside of the

borrowing firm’s country.13 Foreign deposits, local cash deposits, certificates of deposits and bonds are

forms of cash asset collateral that enjoy the legal right of recoupment or set-off, which means that the

bank effectively has immediate access to these forms of collateral without relying on collateral laws

governing movable assets. Standby letters and other letters of credit or guarantees typically are provided




12
   See Degryse et al. (2014) on how legal institutions across countries affect the relationship between the appraised
liquidation value and the minimum expected recovery value that the bank estimates for different types of collateral.
13
   There are several advantages of using cash as collateral. From the lender’s standpoint, cash collateral is a cost-
effective secured lending method since, in the case of default and if collateral is seized, repossession costs are
minimized. From the borrower’s standpoint, cash can be used to build and improve their credit ratings. Because the
type of borrowers in our data may have problems having access to unsecured credit, Supra-collateral may be used as
a means to solve these imperfections.

                                                                                                                  10
by subsidiaries of GlobalBank in a foreign country or by other acceptable counterparty banks with good

reputation and with which GlobalBank has daily operations.14


          To measure differences across countries in strength of movable collateral laws, we turned to the

World Bank’s Doing Business dataset to construct an index that captures the ability to use movable assets

effectively in loan contracts. The World Bank captures many different aspects of collateral laws through

various components that it measures, and its staff kindly agreed to share those individual component

measures for our sample of countries for the year 2005, which is the first year for which data are

available.


          The World Bank measures are based on a questionnaire administered to financial lawyers and

verified through analysis of laws and regulations as well as public sources of information on collateral

laws. Doing Business provides information on eight different features of collateral laws and gives each

feature a 0/1 score. We construct a movable collateral law index (“MC Law Index”) for each country by

summing the scores of seven of those components.15 Thus, the MC Law Index ranges from 0 to 7. A score

of 1 is assigned for the following features of the laws, each of which is important for the ability of

creditors to use movable assets as loan collateral:


     1. The law allows a business to grant a non-possessory security right in a single category of movable
        assets, without requiring a specific description of the collateral.
     2. The law allows a business to grant a non-possessory security right in substantially all its movable
        assets, without requiring a specific description of the collateral.
     3. A security right may be given over future or after-acquired movable assets and may extend
        automatically to the products, proceeds or replacements of the original assets.
     4. A general description of debts and obligations is permitted in the collateral agreement and in
        registration documents; all types of debts and obligations can be secured between the parties, and
        the collateral agreement can include a maximum amount for which the assets are encumbered.


14
   Letters of credit are regulated by the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and Uniform Customs and
Practice for Documentary Credits (UCP), which control the terms of the letter of credit and the payment procedure
for drawing upon it.
15
   Our results are invariant to including the eighth component in our MC Law Index, but we do not do so because we
believe that this component contains significant errors. The omitted component pertains to the following feature:
“Any business may use movable assets as collateral while keeping possession of the assets, and any financial
institution may accept such assets as collateral.” We found that this variable almost always took the value of one in
the dataset, and in the few cases where it took the value of zero, we were aware that this coding was incorrect.

                                                                                                                  11
    5. Secured creditors are paid first (for example, before tax claims and employee claims) when a
       debtor defaults outside an insolvency procedure.
    6. A collateral registry or registration institution for security interests over movable property is in
       operation, unified geographically and by asset type, with an electronic database indexed by
       debtors’ names.
    7. The law allows parties to agree in a movable collateral agreement that the lender may enforce its
       security right out of court.

         The first five features of the MC Law Index relate to the creation component of secured

transactions; they determine the scope of movable assets that can be pledged as collateral. The sixth

feature relates to the monitoring component; creditors must register the security interest in a collateral

registry to ensure that no other lender has rights over the same collateral. The seventh feature corresponds

to the enforcement component; it determines whether the creditor is allowed to repossess the collateral (in

the event of default) privately with the borrower, bypassing the court system.


         Because our loan data are available for the period 2002-2004, while our MC Law Index data are

derived from 2005, we performed an extensive independent search to ensure that no reforms to secured

lending laws in our 12 countries had occurred during the period, 2002-2005. For all but one of the 12

countries, we identified no changes during those years.


         The exception is Slovakia, which passed a major reform on the collateralization of movables in

late 2002. Slovakia introduced a new secured transactions law, based on the EBRD Model Law on

Secured Transactions. Prior to the passage of the law, creditors in Slovakia mostly relied on fiduciary

transfer of title to secure their obligations. The new law allowed the creation of security interests over

movable assets without having to transfer possession to the creditor. The law also gave creditors private

enforcement rights, including the ability to repossess collateral without having to go to court. The law

became effective on January 1st 2003, with the introduction of the Charges Register, a modern centralized

registry for security interests over movable assets, operated by Slovakia’s Chamber of Notaries. A

security interest could be registered in minutes at any local office through an electronic terminal for as

little as 30 euros. The reform was considered a success and became the subject of numerous press

accounts. Annual filings in the collateral registry increased from 7,508 in 2003 to 31,968 in 2007, a per

                                                                                                         12
annum increase of over 50 percent. In January 2003, The Economist went so far as to qualify the reformed

Slovak secured transactions law as “the world's best rules on collateral.”16


        We obtain data on the sectoral composition of output by country from the United Nations

Industrial Development Organization’s (UNIDO) Industrial Statistics dataset (INDSTAT-2). UNIDO

provides yearly information for 22 two-digit manufacturing industries (ISIC revision 3) for a large

number of countries for a large number of years. We use data on sectoral output measured in U.S. dollars.

We also obtain from UNIDO data on the sectoral investment rate, defined as the ratio between gross fixed

capital formation and output.17 We construct a single cross-section, averaging data for the period 2002-

2004.


        Data for Sri Lanka and Pakistan are not available from this data source. Thus, the sample

constructed to coincide with our GlobalBank sample consists of 220 observations corresponding to 10

countries and 22 sectors. We also report regression results on the sectoral composition of output and the

investment rate for a larger sample of 76 countries, which include many countries other than the 10 that

are in our GlobalBank dataset. As before, we use the UNIDO data on sectoral composition and

investment, and the World Bank data to construct our MC Law Index score for the countries included in

this larger sample.


III. Identification Strategy


In this section, we explain the identification strategies used in the two parts of our empirical analysis (the

GlobalBank lending analysis and the sectoral output analysis) to confront potential problems of

endogeneity bias related either to omitted variables or reverse causality.




16
   When we include Slovakia in the cross-sectional analysis of countries, we only include loan observations for the
pre-reform period. When we separately analyze the changes in lending behavior within Slovakia over time, we
include the entire Slovakian sample, in order to measure the effect of the reform on movables lending.
17
   Wurgler (2000) also uses gross investment data from UNIDO to study the link between financial markets and the
allocation of capital.

                                                                                                                13
A. GlobalBank Lending Analysis


For the lending analysis, we estimate the effect of collateral law strength on LTVs of movable-backed

loans relative to immovable-backed loans. To do so, we exploit two sources of variation: variation in

collateral law strength across countries and within-country variation across collateral types. In particular,

we compare the difference between LTVs of loans collateralized by movable and immovable assets in

countries with strong relative to weak collateral laws. Our identification assumption is that other country

characteristics affect LTVs of movable and immovable collateral equally.


        We do not consider reverse causality to be a legitimate endogeneity concern in the lending

analysis: it is implausible that the LTV of a given firm might affect the passage of the collateral law.

However, there could be an omitted variables problem: country characteristics correlated with movable

collateral law could affect LTVs of movable and immovable collateral differentially. For example, if

movable assets depreciate faster than immovable assets, movable assets might lose more value in a

protracted bankruptcy proceeding, which could lead to a lower LTV for movable-backed loans. To deal

with this concern, we control for four country variables that could affect movable and immovable assets

differentially: the efficiency of contract enforcement, the efficiency of the bankruptcy procedure, rule of

law, and property rights (in Section IV.A we explain how we select these variables). We recognize that

there could be other unobserved country characteristics that could affect movable and immovable assets

differentially. To address that problem, we take advantage of the fact that one of the countries in our

sample –Slovakia– passed a movable collateral reform in the middle of our sample period.


        To analyze Slovakia’s 2003 reform, we exploit two sources of variation: within-firm variation

across time and variation across collateral types. As long as unobserved country characteristics affecting

movable and immovable assets differentially did not change with the reform, the pre-post comparison will

remove the influence of those unchanging effects. Our identification assumption is that any other country

shocks at the time of the reform affected LTVs of movable and immovable collateral equally.



                                                                                                          14
        One potential concern is that Slovakia joined the European Union (EU) in 2004. To become an

EU member, a country has to implement and enforce all current EU rules. The potential problem is that

Slovakia may have implemented other policies affecting movable and immovable assets differentially at

the moment of the collateral reform. In fact, Slovakia did not implement either a bankruptcy or a judicial

reform at this time, which as explained above, are the sorts of policies that could plausibly have a

differential effect on the use of movable assets as effective collateral.18 Nevertheless, there could have

been other unobserved shocks affecting movable and immovable assets differentially at the time of the

collateral reform.


        To deal with that potential problem, we consider the experience of the Czech Republic,

Slovakia’s neighbor, which did not reform its collateral law in 2003. Given the many similarities of the

two countries (both were part of the same country until 1993, both have a similar industrial structure, and

both joined the EU in 2004), it is reasonable to assume that they would have been subject to similar

unobserved shocks around 2003. We therefore calculate the change in LTVs before and after 2003 in

Czech Republic, which should capture unobserved shocks affecting Slovakia around that time.


B. Sectoral Output Analysis


For the sectoral production analysis, we estimate the effect of movable collateral law strength on the

output share of real estate-intensive versus non-intensive sectors. We again exploit two sources of

variation: variation in collateral law strength across countries and within-county variation in real estate

intensity across sectors. Our identification assumption is that other country characteristics affect the

output share of real estate-intensive and non-intensive sectors equally.


        With respect to potential endogeneity bias for the sectoral analysis, both omitted variables and

reverse causality are legitimate concerns. Reverse causality is a concern because it is possible, in

particular, that countries with a comparative advantage in real-estate intensive sectors do not have as great

18
  Slovakia passed a new bankruptcy law in 2007 (four years after the collateral reform) and introduced a judicial
council in 2001 (two years before the collateral reform).

                                                                                                              15
a need to create strong movable collateral rights. The causality could therefore flow from an exogenously

higher output share in real-estate intensive sectors to a weaker collateral law.


        We address that potential problem in two ways. First, we analyze the plausibility of the reverse

causality argument. As a proxy for a country’s comparative advantage in real-estate intensive sectors, we

use a measure of natural resource abundance, defined as the real value of petroleum, coal, natural gas, and

metals produced per capita (Haber and Menaldo, 2011). The correlation between the MC Law Index and

natural resource abundance is small (-0.017) and statistically insignificant (p-value of 0.852). Thus, it is

not true that countries abundant in natural resources tend to have weaker movable collateral laws.


        Second, we address the reverse causality concern using legal origin as instrument for movable

collateral law. Clearly, legal origin precedes the establishment of any patterns related to industrial

specialization, which makes legal origin a useful instrument for the purposes of considering the potential

importance of reverse causality. To measure a country’s legal origin, we rely on the classification of La

Porta et al. (1997, 1998). In our sample, legal origin is a strong predictor of movable collateral law

strength. Specifically, legal origin is ordinally ranked in terms of their positive influence on collateral law

as follows: English (highest), German (middle), and French (lowest).19 When we instrument with legal

origin, the effect of movable collateral law on sectoral allocation remains large and statistically

significant.


        With respect to omitted variables bias, instrumenting with legal origin is less convincing for

resolving endogeneity concerns. A country’s legal origin might capture the effects of omitted country

characteristics that affect sectoral allocation, which would violate the exclusion restriction. As before, we

address the omitted variables problems by controlling for the same country variables we used in the

GlobalBank lending analysis. In addition, to deal with unobserved country characteristics, we examine the



19
  The French-legal origin countries are Chile, Romania, and Turkey; the German-legal origin countries are the
Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia; the English-legal origin countries are Hong Kong, India, Malaysia, and
Singapore.

                                                                                                            16
changes in the output shares of real-estate intensive sectors in Slovakia before and after its collateral

reform.


IV. Movable Asset Collateral Laws and GlobalBank’s Lending


A. Cross-country Analysis


We start by calculating the fraction of total GlobalBank loans collateralized by immovable assets in each

country. For each of the 12 countries in our sample, we calculate the frequency of immovable-backed

loans. We then sort the countries into two groups – above-median-MC Law Index score (“strong-law”)

countries and below-median-MC Law Index score (“weak-law”) countries. The average frequency of

immovable-backed loans is 76.6% in weak-law countries and 69.6% in strong-law countries. The

difference of 7 percentage points is statistically significant at the 1% level, which indicates that

GlobalBank lends more against immovable assets in countries that have weak laws for movable collateral.


          Next, we analyze the relationship between collateral laws and loan-to-value ratios. Figure 1 plots

the differences in the average LTVs between GlobalBank loans collateralized by immovable and movable

assets, against the MC Law Index. As the figure shows, loans collateralized by immovables have higher

average LTVs, and the greater the value of the MC Law Index score, the less the difference between the

LTVs for loans collateralized by immovables and movables. Figure 1 is consistent with the notion that a

greater legal ability to collateralize movable assets is associated with a greater supply of movable-

collateralized loans, relative to immovables.


                                            [Insert Figure 1 here]


          In Table 1, we compute the average LTV ratios for each of the two collateralized loan types in

each country, as well as the average for countries with weak and strong collateral laws. As Table 1 shows,

LTVs on loans collateralized by immovables are similar in weak-law and strong-law countries (0.817 for

weak-law countries versus 0.912 for strong-law countries). However, for loans collateralized by movable


                                                                                                         17
assets the average LTVs for the two groups are very different (0.454 versus 0.827).20 The fact that there is

a difference in average LTVs for immovables lending between weak-law and strong-law countries

indicates that weak-law countries may have broader creditors’ rights problems that affect LTVs for both

movables and immovables. The spread in LTVs across immovable and movable collateral is 0.085

(=0.912-0.827) in strong-law countries and 0.364 (=0.817-0.454) in weak-law countries, with the

difference across legal frameworks significant at the 1% level. However, the ability to collateralize loans

against movable assets is dissimilar; in weak-law countries, the inability to collateralize using movable

assets results in much lower LTVs for movable-backed loans.


                                              [Insert Table 1 here]


        In order to test the effect of movable collateral laws on LTVs, we run the following cross-

sectional difference-in-differences estimation:




where        is the loan-to-value for a loan made to firm i and Lawc is a strong-law indicator variable that

takes the value 1 if the country is above the median value of the MC Law Index score and 0 otherwise.

We use an indicator variable to reduce measurement error, since we believe that the equally weighted

index may not be a precise indicator of the quality of collateral laws for movables.21 Movablei is a

movable indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the loan is collateralized by a movable asset and 0



20
   Appendix Table A.1 provides detailed information on each country’s use of movable and immovable assets, and
the LTVs of loans collateralized by movables, immovables, or supra-collateral. Appendix Table A.2 gives a
breakdown of movable assets into two main sub-categories – machinery, and inventory plus accounts receivable –
which are employed in our discussion of robustness below. Interestingly, in emerging markets movables loans tend
to be backed more frequently by inventory and accounts receivable than by machinery, which is the opposite of the
tendency in the U.S. That pattern is especially true in weak-law countries. We believe that the relative under-
utilization of machinery reflects substitution into machinery leasing, which is a way for firms to borrow the
machinery (which remains the property of the lessor) without resorting to a bank loan. We also note that for both
types of countries, LTVs for machinery loans are a bit higher than for loans against inventory and accounts
receivable. This also may reflect the availability of machinery leasing, which is generally employed by less-
creditworthy borrowers, and therefore, may result in higher average LTVs for loans against machinery.
21
   Our results are robust to using a continuous variable measuring the MC Law Index score and to dividing countries
into finer categories, rather than above- and below-median levels of the MC Law Index (see Section V.C).

                                                                                                                18
otherwise. The specification includes a full set of country fixed effects (c).22 The coefficient of primary

interest is , which is identified from the within-country variation across collateral types. The coefficient

measures the difference between LTVs of loans collateralized by movable and immovable assets in

strong-law countries, relative to the same difference in weak-law countries. 23


         We include borrower-level characteristics to control for differences in the supply of collateral. Zi

includes the bank’s internal measure of firm size24, the bank’s internal risk rating, the ratio of net fixed

assets-to-total assets, the ratio of cash-to-total assets, the ratio of accounts receivables-to-total assets, and

the ratio of EBITDA-to-sales. Finally, we control for country characteristics related to the operation of the

legal system, interacted with the movable indicator, which could affect LTVs of movable and immovable

collateral differentially. Xc includes Time to Enforce a Contract, defined as the number of years required

to enforce a contract, Time to Resolve Insolvency, defined as the number of years required to resolve an

insolvency procedure, Rule of Law, which captures the extent to which agents have confidence in and

abide by the rules of society, and Property Rights, which captures the extent to which private economic

activity is facilitated by an effective legal system.25 We chose these four legal system control variables on

the basis of an analysis reported in Table A.3. There we considered a broad range of legal and

macroeconomic variables, and investigated the extent to which any of them was correlated with loan-to-

value ratios on loans. We find that only four of the measures (our four chosen controls) co-vary

significantly with LTVs.26 We include only two controls at a time in columns (3) and (4) of Table 2, given

the limited number of countries in our sample.


         Table 2 reports the LTV regression results, for different specifications. The Law*Movable

interaction term is positive, large, statistically significant, and stable across all three specifications.

22
   We cluster standard errors at the country level. Because we have a relatively small number of clusters, we
compute the standard errors using block bootstrapping (see Cameron et al., 2008).
23
   Because the Law term varies at the country level, the country fixed effects will absorb it.
24
   Firm size is an indicator variable that takes the value of 3, 2, 1 and 0, for firms with net sales >$25 million, <$25
million and >$5 million, <$5 million and >$1 million and <$1 million, respectively.
25
   The data for these country variables comes from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
26
   The other control variables we considered were: GDP per Capita, Private Credit to GDP, Creditor Rights,
Information Sharing, and Cost of Insolvency Procedure.

                                                                                                                     19
According to the results of control column (1), the difference between the LTV of movables and

immovables-collateralized loans is 27.6 percentage points higher in strong-law countries than in weak-

law countries. The economic significance is large: compared with the unconditional mean LTV for

movables in weak-law countries of 0.454, the results represent an increase in LTV of 60.8%

(=0.276/0.454). In column (2) we add sector fixed effects to absorb sectoral differences in the use of

collateral and LTVs and the results remain unchanged. In column (3) we control for other country

variables and the movable law coefficient decreases slightly in magnitude but remains highly significant.

The effects of Rule of Law, Property Rights, and Time to Enforce a Contract are not significant, while the

effect of Time to Enforce Insolvency is negative and marginally significant: the LTV of movable

collateral, relative to immovable collateral, is lower in countries with inefficient bankruptcy procedures.

Overall, these results imply large loan-supply effects associated with strong-law status, which are more

pronounced for movable-collateralized loans.


                                           [Insert Table 2 here]


        The results reported likely understate the degree to which loan supply is affected by movable

collateral laws for two reasons. First, in the absence of a good legal framework for collateralized lending

against movable assets, the composition of borrowers is likely to shift toward more seasoned credit risks

that are less dependent on collateral. As a result, the LTVs of movable-backed loans in weak-law

countries will tend to be affected by the unobservable better fundamental credit risk, which acts to

diminish the observed differences in LTVs on loans collateralized by movable assets for strong- and

weak-law countries. Second, improvements in collateral laws not only should increase LTVs, they also

should increase the price of movable assets pledged as collateral. Therefore, our results on LTV provide a

conservative estimate of the effects of collateral law on lending supply. Given the structure of our dataset,

we are not able to observe changes in the liquidation values of particular assets. We can say, however,

that the collateral price effect will unambiguously bias our estimates toward zero.




                                                                                                          20
B. Slovakia Reform Analysis


As we discussed in Section II, the Slovakian reform in 2003 dramatically shifted the ability to

collateralize movables. This enables us to perform a within-borrower analysis of the effect of this reform

on movables lending in that country. To do so, we run the following difference-in-differences estimation:




where LTVit is the loan-to-value for a loan made to firm i in quarter t and Postt is a reform indicator

variable that takes the value of 1 after January 1st 2003 and 0 otherwise. Each firm included in the sample

appears once in both the pre-reform and post-reform period.27 The specification includes a full set of firm

fixed effects (i) and quarterly time fixed effects (t). We are interested in the coefficient   , which is

identified from the within-firm variation across time. The coefficient measures the difference between

LTVs of loans collateralized by movable and immovable assets after the reform, relative to the same

difference before the reform. We include time-varying borrower-level characteristics, Zit, to control for

differences in the supply of collateral.28


        Table 3 reports the estimation results for Slovakia. Column (1) reports the results without firm

fixed effects for reference. According to column (2), the difference between the LTVs of movable- and

immovable-backed loans increases by 20.1 percentage points after the passage of the law.29 The average

LTV for movables (immovables) in Slovakia was 0.672 (0.876) prior to the reform. Hence, the results

suggest that the pre-reform difference in LTVs across immovables and movables almost entirely

disappeared post reform. The magnitude of the coefficient in Table 3 (0.201) is similar to the comparable

coefficient estimate from the cross-sectional regression in Table 2 (0.276).


                                             [Insert Table 3 here]


27
   As before, we use only the first loan observed in each period.
28
   We cluster standard errors at the firm level.
29
   The Movable indicator varies at the firm level and is therefore absorbed by the firm fixed effects in the
specifications of columns (2)-(4).

                                                                                                         21
        The third column in Table 3 reports a placebo test using the experience of the Czech Republic.

We falsely assume that this country reformed its movable collateral law at the same time than Slovakia.

The Czech Republic is the natural placebo candidate because both countries shared a legal environment

historically and they planned to enter the EU at the same time. The coefficient on the interaction term is

statistically insignificant in column (2), which shows that our results for Slovakia are not driven by other

policies shared by the two countries that are unrelated to movable collateral reform. The last column

reports an additional placebo test for the remaining countries in the GlobalBank sample, which did not

implement collateral reforms during the sample period. Here we verify that there was no general

worldwide change in GlobalBank’s lending rules for loans collateralized by movables after January 1,

2003. The interaction term in column (3) is also statistically insignificant, indicating that our results are

not driven by worldwide changes in GlobalBank’s lending rules or by global shocks affecting movable

relative to immovable collateral.


V. Movable Collateral Laws and GlobalBank’s Lending: Additional Results


A. Movable Collateral Law Components


The MC Law Index measures the strength of movable collateral laws in all three components of secured

transactions: creation, monitoring, and enforcement. In this section, we analyze which of these

components matter the most. In column (1) of Table 4, we focus on differences in the creation component

across countries, which reflect differences in the existence of laws permitting the collateralization of

movable assets.30 Although the effect is positive, it is not statistically significant. Column (2) focuses on

differences in monitoring, in particular it compares countries with and without electronic collateral

registries. The results show that the LTV of movable collateral, relative to immovable collateral, is higher

in countries with collateral registries in place. According to column (3), the LTV of movable relative to

immovable collateral is higher in countries that allow creditors to repossess collateral without court
30
  The creation component corresponds to questions 1-5 of the MC Law Index. We sum these five questions for each
country and create a dummy variable equal to 1 if the sum is above the median sum across countries and 0
otherwise.

                                                                                                            22
intervention.31 Column (5) shows that when we include all three components simultaneously, only the

perfection and enforcement components are significant. In sum, the existence of collateral registries and

the possibility of out-of-court enforcement – not the mere existence of laws – drive our results.


        In column (4) of Table 4 we consider whether our results for out-of-court enforcement of

movables collateral may reflect aspects of a country’s legal system that apply to immovable assets, as

well. To consider that possibility, we constructed an indicator variable for whether the countries in our

sample permitted the out-of-court seizure of immovable collateral.32 As column (4) shows, out-of-court

enforcement for immovables does not enter significantly in the regression, and its presence does not affect

our results for the importance of out-of-court seizure of movable assets. We interpret this as reflecting the

greater importance of timely seizure of movable assets, which – unlike real estate – can depreciate

quickly or disappear if they are not seized promptly.


                                              [Insert Table 4 here]


B. Supra-Collateral Analysis


Supra collateral insulates loan contracts from local legal imperfections, either through a foreign

enforcement of a foreign payment, a foreign-enforced guarantee, or a domestic right of setoff that does

not depend on movable collateral laws. The LTVs for Supra collateral lending are similar across strong-

and weak-law countries, although they are slightly higher in weak-law countries (83% versus 79%, the

difference is statistically insignificant). This suggests that, compared to the effect of the legal environment

on movables lending, there is less of an effect of the legal environment on Supra collateral lending.


        To analyze the effects of collateral laws on the LTVs for Supra collateral loans, we estimate:
31
   Seven of the 12 GlobalBank countries and 40 of the 76 extended-sample countries permit out-of-court
enforcement for movable collateral (see Appendix Table A.6).
32
   To construct this indicator, we relied on data in Djankov et al. (2008). We measure out-of-court enforcement for
immovables using the question of the survey on whether a country allows for an out-of-court procedure for real
estate collateral. We collected data from Deloitte (2013) and Lex Mundi (2012) for our sample countries not
included in Djankov et al. (2008). The indicators for out-of-court enforcement of movables and immovables are
positively correlated (0.44 in the GlobalBank sample, and 0.36 in a broader sample of 30 countries, which we
employ further in Table 10 below).

                                                                                                                23
where Suprai is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the loan is collateralized by Supra collateral and 0

otherwise. The coefficient of interest is now    , which measures the difference between LTVs of loans

collateralized by Supra and immovable assets in strong-law countries, relative to the same difference in

weak-law countries.


        The results reported in Table 5 for the difference between movable-collateralized and immovable-

collateralized loans are consistent with earlier findings. As before, loans backed by movables in strong-

law countries have LTVs that are 27.6 percentage points higher than loans backed by immovables,

relative to weak-law countries (column 2). We find that the difference between the LTVs of Supra and

immovable-backed loans is 8.3 percentage points lower in strong-law countries than in weak-law

countries. This result implies that while Supra collateral captures a higher LTV than immovable assets in

weak-law countries, this effect is overturned in strong-law countries. This likely reflects the fact that

countries with weak collateral laws for movables also suffer from a relatively lower ability to collateralize

against immovables. It seems that borrowers in weak-law countries tend to have weaker borrowing

options against all non-Supra collateral, which pushes LTV ratios for Supra loans higher than in strong-

law countries.


                                            [Insert Table 5 here]


C. Robustness Checks


Table 6 reports various robustness tests of our LTV results in Table 2. In column (1), we employ a

continuous measure of the MC Law Index as our measure of Law, rather than an indicator variable.

Although the coefficient’s size is different (consistent with the change in the mean of the regressor),

results remain highly significant. Columns (2) and (3) show that Table 2’s results are invariant to omitting

accounts receivable or machinery from our definition of movable assets. Results are somewhat larger

when machinery is omitted (in column 3), although the difference is not statistically significant. The

                                                                                                          24
larger coefficient magnitude for non-machinery movables may reflect selectivity bias in favor of higher-

quality borrowers who use machinery as collateral, given that less creditworthy firms have a greater

tendency to lease machinery (Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2009). Column (4) confines the loan sample to

manufacturing firms (the subject of Section VI below) and finds no significant difference in coefficients.


                                               [Insert Table 6 here]


        Table 7 explores whether dividing countries into finer categories (rather than above- and below-

median levels of the MC Law Index) affects our LTV results. Specifically, we divide countries into three

groups, those with a low-MC Law Index (the omitted category), a Middle-Law group, and a High-Law

group. We find that coefficients tend to be higher for the High-Law group than for the Middle-Law group.

Similarly, for the other variable analyzed in the next section (manufacturing production share), we also

find that much of the effects of Law is attributable to the differences between high-MC Law Index values

and all others. To conserve space and in recognition of that fact, our subsequent tables divide countries

according to Law by comparing the High-Law group to the rest of the sample.


                                               [Insert Table 7 here]


VI. Movable Collateral Laws and the Sectoral Allocation of Resources


To analyze the real consequences of collateral laws, we examine how economic activity varies across

sectors with different natural usage of immovable assets. As a way to identify the exogenous

(technologically given) composition of assets across sectors, we employ data on sectoral asset

composition for the U.S. Presumably, in the U.S., which enjoys an unusually good legal framework for

the collateralization of movable assets through the U.C.C., differences in the asset composition of sectors

is essentially unaffected by legal shortcomings in the ability to pledge movables as collateral. This

approach is akin to the Rajan and Zingales (1998) approach for measuring sectoral external financial

dependence and its effects on resource allocation, as well as the work of Buera et al. (2011) on the effects



                                                                                                         25
of financing constraints on sectoral resource allocation and productivity in finance-dependent sectors.33

We will make the operating assumption that the sectoral ranking of immovable intensity is common

across the U.S. and our sample of countries.


        We construct a sectoral index of real estate intensity as the median of the average ratio of the

value of land and buildings to total assets across publicly traded firms in the U.S. in each manufacturing

sector, during the period 1984-1996.34 Figure 2 reports the sectoral index for each of 22 two-digit

manufacturing sectors in our sample. Clearly, there are large cross-sectoral differences in the usage of

immovable assets within manufacturing sectors (roughly 6.5% in leather, 8.5% in machinery and

equipment, 14.5% in furniture, and 16.5% in tobacco).


                                             [Insert Figure 2 here]


        Using UNIDO data, we calculate each sector’s share in total output by dividing sectoral output by

aggregate manufacturing output.35 In order to match the time period used in the loan-level analysis, we

average the sectoral shares between 2002 and 2004.36 In Figure 3, we plot the MC Law Index against the

output share of immovable-intensive sectors. We define sectors as immovable-intensive if they are above

the median of the sectoral real estate intensity index. The figure shows that countries with weak collateral

laws tend to allocate a greater fraction of their production towards immovable-intensive sectors.


                                             [Insert Figure 3 here]


        Weak-law countries allocate on average 67.7% of their production to sectors intensive in real

estate, while strong-law countries allocate only 51.1%. The difference of 16.6 percentage points is

33
   The Rajan and Zingales (1998) approach has been criticized by Fisman and Love (2004). The Fisman and Love
critique of Rajan and Zingales’ method for measuring external financial dependence, however, does not apply to our
asset composition measure, since our measure focuses on asset composition, not internally generated funding, which
Fisman and Love argue is likely to capture demand shocks.
34
   As explained in Campello and Giambona (2013), the 1984-1996 period is the only time frame for which
Compustat decomposes the value of tangible assets into land and buildings (immovables) and machinery and
equipment (movables).
35
   As mentioned above, UNIDO does not provide information for Pakistan and Sri Lanka. As a result, when
analyzing our GlobalBank sample of countries, we are left with a sample of 10 countries.
36
   Consistent with the LTV analysis, we use UNIDO data in the pre-reform period only (2002) for Slovakia.

                                                                                                               26
statistically significant at the 5%-level. To analyze the effect of collateral laws on the sectoral allocation

of resources, we run the following regression:




where Sharesc is the ratio of sectoral output to total output of sector s in country c. REIs is a dummy equal

to 1 for sectors above the median of the sectoral index of real estate intensity and 0 otherwise. The

specification includes a full set of sector fixed effects (s).37 The coefficient of interest is              , which

measures the difference between the sectoral share of output allocated to immovable-intensive sectors in

countries with strong and weak collateral laws. Note that the regression is akin to a difference-in-

differences estimation, in which we calculate the difference between resources allocated to sectors with

different immovable intensities, between countries with different strengths of collateral laws. To account

for the fact that other country characteristics might affect the sectoral allocation, we add to the

specification the same set of country-level control variables used in Section IV.A; each interacted with the

real estate intensity indicator.


         Table 8 (columns 1-4) reports the sectoral regression results. The interaction term is negative and

statistically significant. According to the results, the output share of the representative immovable-

intensive sector in weak-law countries is 1.4 percentage points higher than in strong-law countries

(column 1). This is a large effect. Recall that there are 11 immovable-intensive sectors in each of the 10

countries. The results imply that in the aggregate, weak-law countries allocate 15.4% more of their

production to immovable-intensive sectors than strong-law countries (=1.4%*11). The effect is robust to

controlling for other country characteristics related to the legal system more broadly, which we employed

in Table 2 (based on the findings of Table A.3), such as the time to enforce a contract, the time to resolve




37
  We do not include country fixed effects in the regression because the outcome variables are shares. Country fixed
effects would affect all sectors within a country equally, which is not possible since by definition the shares sum up
to one.

                                                                                                                    27
insolvency, the rule of law, and property rights (columns 2 and 3).38 Table A.5 of the Appendix shows the

same regressions for the allocation of sectoral employment. The results are the same: the share of workers

employed in immovable-intensive sectors in weak-law countries is 14.3 percentage points higher than in

strong-law countries.


                                                  [Insert Table 8 here]


         Next we address endogeneity bias concerns related to reverse causality and omitted variables. To

address the concern of reverse causality, we employ legal origin interacted with REI as an instrument for

the interaction between Law and REI. In unreported results, we find that the first stage is strong.

Specifically, we find that legal origin is ranked in terms of their positive influence on collateral law as

follows: English (highest), German (middle), and French (lowest). Our IV results are reported in column

(4) of Table 8. We find that the IV coefficient estimates are slightly larger in magnitude than the OLS

results, but not statistically significantly so.


         Next, in columns (5)-(8) of Table 8, we run the same four regressions as in columns (1)-(4), but

with the sectoral investment rate (ratio of gross investment to output) as the dependent variable.39 In

theory, poor legal enforcement of movables collateral should bias production against the use of movables

assets, resulting in lower capital-to-labor and lower capital-to-output ratios for industries that are intensive

in movables. Although UNIDO does not report capital stock data, investment-to-output ratios should

track capital-to-output ratios because, in the steady state, investment equals the sectoral output growth

rate plus the sectoral depreciation rate on capital times the capital stock.40 Column (5) shows that the



38
   Claessens and Laeven (2003) argue that weaker property rights protections against the actions of competitors lead
firms to invest more in tangible assets relative to intangible assets. The fact that our tests are robust to controlling for
a measure of property rights ensures that our results are not reflecting these property rights differences.
39
   The only difference is that the investment-rate regressions include country fixed effects, because unlike the
sectoral shares, the sectoral investment rates within a country do not sum up to one.
40
   Note that, on average, sectors that are movable-intensive will tend to have higher depreciation rates for capital,
given that machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable depreciate faster than real estate. This means that our
coefficients are biased toward zero, because the estimates implicitly assume that the sum of the sectoral growth rate
and the sectoral depreciation rate on capital are identical across sectors.

                                                                                                                         28
investment rate in immovable-intensive sectors in weak-law countries is 3 percentage points higher than

in strong-law countries. This result is robust to controlling for other variables and to the IV estimation.


         Given the possibility that machinery (but not other movable assets) can be leased, we also

considered whether our findings on sectoral resource allocation might differ according to differences

within movables-intensive sectors in their relative intensity in their use of machinery, as opposed to other

movables. For each sector, we constructed indices measuring their relative intensity in machinery or in

other movables (accounts receivable plus inventory).41 In Appendix Table A.4 we report results showing

that the effect is slightly lower for machinery-intensive sectors, consistent with the ability to lease

machinery. However, the difference is not statistically significant.


         In addition, we examine how the change in movables collateral law in Slovakia affected the

sectoral allocation of resources. Due to the relatively small sample size in this panel study (10 years and

22 sectors divided between pre- and post-reform periods) our standard errors are large and our

coefficients are estimated imprecisely. The magnitude of the estimated sectoral shift, however, is

economically large. In Figure 4, we plot the evolution of the share of production allocated in sectors with

above-median real estate intensity. According to Panel A, before the 2003 reform, roughly 57% of

Slovakia’s manufacturing output was allocated in sectors that are intensive users of real estate. After the

reform, this share decreases steadily, reaching nearly 52% by 2007. In Panel B, we show a similar graph

for the average output share of immovable-intensive sectors in all countries except Slovakia. We can

observe that the output share is roughly constant before and after 2003. Because none of these countries

reformed their collateral laws during this period, this result suggests that the Slovakia results are not

driven by shocks affecting immovable-intensive sectors after 2003.


                                               [Insert Figure 4 here]



41
   Specifically, we constructed a sectoral machinery intensity index and an accounts receivable plus inventory
intensity index as the median of the average ratio of the value of machinery to total assets and the ratio of accounts
receivable plus inventory to total assets across publicly traded firms in the U.S., respectively.

                                                                                                                   29
VII. Movable Collateral Laws and the Sectoral Allocation of Resources: Additional Results


A. Extended-Sample of Countries


We extend our analysis beyond the sample of the GlobalBank countries. Because the World Bank’s

Doing Business dataset on movable collateral law is available beginning in 2005, we collected UNIDO

data for 2005-2010. To ensure consistent measurement of cross-country differences in the quality of

collateral law, we excluded countries where jumps in the MC Law Index occur during 2005-2010.42 There

are 90 countries for which data are available from the UNIDO and Doing Business datasets. We drop

three countries for which some sectoral output observations are missing and we also drop the U.S. given

that our immovable-intensity indicator is calculated using U.S. data. We dropped 10 countries for which

there was a jump in the MC Law Index. This leaves us with a sample of 76 countries.43


        We report the results in Table 9. The results for output and investment are qualitatively similar to

our results for the GlobalBank sample of countries, although the magnitudes of the estimates for the

interaction term are somewhat smaller – roughly two-thirds the size of the previous estimate

(=0.009/0.014). The estimates in column (1) of Table 9 imply that the output share of the representative

immovable-intensive sector is 0.9 percentage points higher in weak-law countries than in strong-law

countries. This estimate implies that in the aggregate, weak-law countries allocate 9.9% more of their

output to immovable-intensive sectors than strong-law countries (=0.9%*11). In column (4) of Table 9,

we report the IV results. As before, IV magnitudes tend to be larger, but not different from OLS estimates

at a high level of statistical significance. According to column (5), the investment rate in immovable-

intensive sectors in weak-law countries is 1.4% higher than in strong-law countries.


                                                  [Insert Table 9 here]

42
   To extend our sample backward in time – to the 12-country sample period of 2002-2004 – would have required us
to verify by hand (as we did for the 12 countries) that no changes in collateral law had occurred during 2002-2004
for the 90 countries in our sample. Doing so would have been impractical for many of the countries in the UNIDO
sample, due to lack of information. We define a jump as a change of two or more units in the MC Law Index. Our
results are robust to using a threshold of one or three units for defining a major jump.
43
   Table A.6 of the Appendix reports the list of the 76 countries.

                                                                                                               30
B. Movable Collateral Law Components


           Next, as in Section V.A, we analyze which components of the MC Law Index are driving the

results. As before, we divide the MC Law Index into its three components: creation, monitoring, and

enforcement. Columns (1)-(5) of Table 10 report the results for the sample of GlobalBank countries and

columns (6)-(10) for the extended sample of 76 countries. The results are similar for both sample of

countries (although as in Tables 8 and 9, magnitudes tend to be smaller for the extended sample) and are

consistent with the results reported in Section V.A: the effects of the monitoring and enforcement

components matter more than the creation component. We interpret this finding as indicating that

collateral laws on the books, per se, are a necessary but not sufficient condition for effective

collateralization. Having an electronic collateral registry to register security interests and allowing to

enforce security interests out of court allows agents to use more effectively the collateral law on books.

As in Table 4, we include a measure of out-of-court enforcement for immovables in columns (4) and (9)

of Table 10, and we find, as in Table 4, that this variable does not enter significantly, and its inclusion

does not affect the results for out-of-court enforcement of movables.


                                            [Insert Table 10 here]


C. Movable Collateral Laws and Judicial Efficiency


           Finally, we analyze how the effect of movable collateral laws varies with the degree of judicial

inefficiency of an economy. As showed above, the ability to repossess collateral without having to go to

court is one of the main factors through which collateral laws affect the sectoral allocation of resources.

Therefore, we expect the effect of movable collateral laws to be stronger in those countries with

inefficient judicial systems, where out-of-court enforcement is valued more. Moreover, if movable

collateral laws merely were capturing omitted variables related more generally to the quality of the legal

environment, then controlling for such differences would reduce the magnitude of movable collateral law

effects.


                                                                                                        31
        We divide the extended sample of 76 countries into two groups: above and below the median

value of the Time to Enforce a Contract variable. In column (2) of Table 11, we re-estimate the sectoral

output regression for the above-median judicial inefficiency countries. The magnitude of the interaction

term is large in magnitude and highly significant. For the below-median (relatively efficient) judicial

countries (column 3), the effect is small and not significant. A Chow Test rejects the null hypothesis of

equal coefficients across samples at the 1% level. This implies that out-of-court enforcement is working

as a substitute for an inefficient judicial system. This also provides further evidence contrary to the view

that the importance of movables collateral laws reflects omitted variables bias.


                                               [Insert Table 11 here]


VIII. Conclusions


In this paper, we highlight the importance of movable assets, as opposed to real estate assets, in providing

debt capacity for firms. Our paper is the first to connect differences in the legal environments across

countries with respect to movable collateral to the lending behavior of a global bank. We use a novel

cross-country micro-level dataset that has the unique feature of providing information regarding asset

liquidation values, which allows us to construct meaningful loan-to-value ratios for loans collateralized by

different types of assets. Our paper is also the first to show that collateralization laws in emerging market

countries that discourage the use of movable assets as collateral create distortions in the allocation of

resources that favor immovable-based production.


        We find that differences across countries in their legal systems’ ability to support the use of

movable assets as collateral for bank loans substantially affect the ability of borrowers to gain access to

credit. The consequences for reduced lending and constrained LTV ratios also are reflected in important

differences in production. In countries with poorly developed movable collateralization laws, firms in

sectors that exogenously rely more on movable assets in the production process tend to see a shrinkage in

their shares of production, compared to other firms. These effects are all economically large as well as


                                                                                                          32
statistically significant. Our study has important implications for understanding how legal system

deficiencies – specifically, the absence of effective means of collateralizing movable assets – can shape

bank loan supply, as well as firms’ choices of asset composition, and the sectoral distribution of economic

activity.




                                                                                                        33
References

Alvarez de la Campa, A., 2011, “Increasing Access to Credit through Reforming Secured Transactions in
the MENA Region,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5613.
Bae, K., and V. Goyal, 2009, “Creditor Rights, Enforcement, and Bank Loans,” Journal of Finance 64,
823-860.
Beck, T., R. Levine, and N. Loayza, 2000, “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and Causes,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.

Beck, T., A. Demirg -Kunt, and V. Maksimovic, 2008, “Financing Patterns Around the World: Are Small
Firms Different?,” Journal of Financial Economics 89, 467-87.
Benmelech, E., 2009, “Asset Salability and Debt Maturity: Evidence from 19th Century American
Railroads,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 1545-583.
Benmelech, E., M. Garmaise, and T. Moskowitz, 2005, “Do Liquidation Values Affect Financial
Contracts? Evidence From Commercial Loan Contracts and Zoning Regulation,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 120, 1121-154.

Benmelech, E., and N. Bergman, 2009, “Collateral Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics 91, 339-60.
Benmelech, E., and N. Bergman, 2011, “Bankruptcy and the Collateral Channel,” Journal of Finance 66,
337-78.
Berger, A., and G. Udell, 1990, “Collateral, Loan Quality and Bank Risk,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 25, 21-42.

Berger, A., W. Frame, and V. Ioannidou, 2011, “Tests of Ex Ante Versus Ex Post Theories of Collateral
Using Private and Public Information,” Journal of Financial Economics 100, 85-97.
Berger, A., T. Kick, M. Koetter, and K. Schaeck, 2013, “Does It Pay to Have Friends? Social Ties and
Executive Appointments in Banking,” Journal of Banking and Finance 37, 2087-105.
Bester, H., 1985, “Screening vs. Rationing in Credit Markets with Imperfect Information,” American
Economic Review 75, 850-55.
Black, S., and P. Strahan, 2002, “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability,” Journal of Finance 57,
2807-833.
Boot, A., and A. Thakor, 1994, “Moral Hazard and Secured Lending in an Infinitely Repeated Credit
Market Game,” International Economic Review 35, 899-920.
Buera, F., J. Kaboski, and Y. Shin, 2011, “Finance and Development: A Tale of Two Sectors,” American
Economic Review 101, 1964-2002.
Cameron, A., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller, 2008, “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference with
Clustered Errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 414-427.
Campello, M. and E. Giambona, 2013, “Real Assets and Capital Structure,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 48, 1333-370.
Campello, M., and M. Larrain, 2016, “Enlarging the Contracting Space: Collateral Menus, Access to
Credit, and Economic Activity,” Forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.



                                                                                                     34
Cerqueiro, G., S. Ongena, and K. Roszbach, 2014, “Collateralization, Bank Loan Rates and Monitoring,”
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Cetorelli, N., and M. Gambera, 2001, “Banking Market Structure, Financial Dependence and Growth:
International Evidence from Industry Data,” Journal of Finance 56, 617-48.

Ceterolli, N., and P. Strahan, 2006, “Finance as a Barrier to Entry: Bank Competition and Industry Structure
in Local U.S. Markets,” Journal of Finance 61, 437-61.
Chan, Y., and A. Thakor, 1987, “Collateral and Competitive Equilibria with Moral Hazard and Private
Information,” Journal of Finance 42, 345-63.
Chaney, T., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar, 2012, “The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate Shocks Affect
Corporate Investment,” American Economic Review 102, 2381-409.

Chemin, M., 2010, “Does Court Speed Shape Economic Activity? Evidence from a Court Reform in
India,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 11, 1-26.
Claessens, S. and L. Laeven, 2003, “Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth.” Journal of
Finance, 58, 2401-36.
Correa, R., 2008,. “Bank Integration and Financial Constraints: Evidence from U.S. Firms,” International
Finance Discussion Papers 925, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Degryse, H., V. Ioannidou, J. Liberti, and J. Sturgess, 2014, “When do Laws and Institutions Affect
Recovery Rates on Collateral?,” Working Paper.

Dehejia, R., and A. Lleras-Muney, 2007, “Financial Development and Pathways of Growth: State
Branching and Deposit Insurance Laws in the United States from 1900 to 1940,” Journal of Law and
Economics 50, 239-72.

Deloitte, 2013, Deloitte’s Guide to Cross-Border Secured Transactions, Deloitte Legal.
Demirg -Kunt, A., and V. Maksimovic, 1998, “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,” Journal of Finance
53, 2107-137.
Djankov, S., O. Hart, C. McLiesh, and A. Shleifer, 2008, “Debt Enforcement Around the World,” Journal
of Political Economy 116, 1105-149.
Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2003, “Courts,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118, 453-518.
Djankov, S., C. McLiesh, and A. Shleifer, 2007, “Private Credit in 129 countries,” Journal of Financial
Economics 84, 299-329.
Eisfeldt, A., and A. Rampini, 2009, “Leasing, Ability to Repossess, and Debt Capacity.” Review of
Financial Studies 22, 1621-57.
Fisman, R., and I. Love, 2004, “Financial Development and Intersectoral Allocation: A New Approach,”
Journal of Finance 59, 2785-807.
Fleisig, H., M. Safavian, and N. De La Pe a , 2006, Reforming Collateral Laws to Expand Access to
Finance, (Washington: World Bank).
Gan, J., 2007, “Collateral, Debt Capacity, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from a Natural
Experiment,” Journal of Financial Economics 85, 709-34.

                                                                                                         35
Godlewski, C., and L. Weill, 2011, “Does Collateral Help Mitigate Adverse Selection? A Cross-Country
Analysis,” Journal of Financial Services Research 40, 49-78.
Gorton, G., and J. Kahn, 2000, “The Design of Bank Loan Contracts,” Review of Financial Studies 13, 331-
64.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2004, “The Role of Social Capital in Financial Development,”
American Economic Review 94, 526-56.
Haber, S. and V. Menaldo, 2011, “Do Natural Resources Fuel Authoritarianism? A Reappraisal of the
Resource Curse,” American Political Science Review 105, 1-26.
Haselmann, R., K. Pistor, and V. Vig, 2010, “How Law Affects Lending,” Review of Financial Studies
23, 549-80.

Jayaratne, J., and P. Strahan, 1996, “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
Deregulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639-70.
Jappelli, T., M. Pagano, and M. Bianco, 2005, “Courts and Banks: Effects of Judicial Enforcement on Credit
Markets,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37, 223-44.
Jiménez, G., V. Salas, and J. Saurina, 2006, “Determinants of Collateral,” Journal of Financial Economics
81, 255-81.
John, K., A. Lynch, and M. Puri, 2003, “Credit Ratings, Collateral, and Loan Characteristics:
Implications for Yield,” Journal of Business 76, 371-409.
King, R., and R. Levine, 1993, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108, 717-37.
Lacker, J., 2001, “Collateralized Debt as the Optimal Contract,” Review of Economic Dynamics 4, 842-
59.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1997, “Legal Determinants of External
Finance,” Journal of Finance 52, 1130-150.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, “Law and Finance,” Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1113-155.
Levine, R., and S. Zervos, 1998, “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American Economic
Review 88, 537-58.

Lex Mundi, 2012, Security over Collateral Global Practice Guide, Lex Mundi Bank Finance and
Regulation Group.
Liberti, J., and A. Mian, 2010, “Collateral Spread and Financial Development,” Journal of Finance 65,
147-77.
Lilienfeld-Toal, U., D. Mookherjee, and S. Visaria, 2012, “The Distributive Impact of Reforms in Credit
Enforcement: Evidence from Indian Debt Recovery Tribunals,” Econometrica 80, 497-558.
Longhofer, S., and J. Santos, 2000, “The Importance of Bank Seniority for Relationship Lending,”
Journal of Financial Intermediation 9, 57-89.
Love, I., Martinez Peria, S. and S. Singh, 2015, “Collateral Registries for Movable Assets: Does their
Introduction Spur Firms’ Access to Bank Finance?” Journal of Financial Services Research 1-37.


                                                                                                       36
Mann, W., 2015, “Creditor Rights and Innovation: Evidence from Patent Collateral,” Mimeo UCLA
Anderson School.
Ono, A., and I. Uesugi, 2009, “Role of Collateral and Personal Guarantees in Relationship Lending:
Evidence from Japan’s SME Loan Market,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41, 935-60.

Ono, A., H. Uchida, G. Udell, and I. Uesugi, 2015, “Lending Pro-Cyclicality and Macro-Prudential
Policy: Evidence from Japanese LTV Ratios,” Working Paper.
Ponticelli, J., 2013, “Court Enforcement and Firm Productivity: Evidence from a Bankruptcy Reform in
Brazil,” Mimeo, University of Chicago, Booth School of Business.
Qian, J., and P. Strahan 2007, “How Laws and Institutions Shape Financial Contracts: The Case of Bank
Loans,” Journal of Finance 62, 2803-834.

Rampini, A., and S. Viswanathan, 2013, “Collateral and Capital Structure,” Journal of Financial
Economics 109, 466-92.
Rajan, R., and A. Winton, 1995, “Covenants and Collateral as Incentives to Monitor,” Journal of Finance 50,
1113-146.
Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic Review 88, 559-
86.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach.
Journal of Finance 47, 1343-366.
Taylor, A. M., 1998, “On the Costs of Inward-Looking Development: Price Distortions, Growth, and
Divergence in Latin America.” Journal of Economic History 58, 1-28.

Udell, G., 2004, Asset Based Finance (Proven Disciplines for Prudent Lending), The Commercial
Finance Association.

Vig, V., 2013, “Access to Collateral and Corporate Debt Structure: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,”
Journal of Finance 68, 881-928.
Wurgler, J., 2000, “Financial Markets and The Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial Economics
58, 187-214.




                                                                                                        37
 Figure 1: Collateral Law Strength and the Difference in Loan-to-Value of Immovable- and
                                  Movable-Backed Loans


The figure plots the relationship between a country’s movable collateral law index and the difference
between the average loan-to-value (LTV) of GlobalBank’s loans backed by immovable assets (real
estate) and movable assets (machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable). The average is taken
during the period 2002-2004.


                                                                                                             Czech Rep
                                                         .5
            Difference LTV immovable vs. movable collateral
                                             .4




                                                                                   Turkey                    India
                                  .3




                                                                              Chile

                                                                                                                         Romania

                                                                                                  Pakistan
                                                                                                             Slovakia
                         .2




                                                                                                                                        Singapore
                                                                  Sri Lanka
             .1




                                                                                                                                        Malaysia
                                                                                                                         Hungary
                                                                                                                                       Hong Kong

                                                              1                2             3           4            5            6               7
                                                                                            Movable Collateral Law Index




                                                                                                                                                       38
                                            (Land and Buildings)/Assets
                                            0     .05     .1     .15

            Leather and leather products

               Machinery and equipment

                     Electrical machinery

                        Wearing apparel

                            Basic metals

             Rubber and plastic products

               Paper and paper products

                  Publishing and printing

                          Motor vehicles

          Medical and optical instruments

                                 Textiles

               Fabricated metal products

             Non-metallic mineral metals

        Chemicals and chemical products

     Coke and refined petroleum products

                                Furniture
                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 2: Sectoral Index of Real Estate Intensity




                    Food and beverages

               Wood and wood products
                                                                          traded firms in the U.S. in each manufacturing sector during the period 1984-1996.




                       Tobacco products




39
                                                                          as the median of the average ratio of the value of land and buildings to total assets across publicly
                                                                          in the sample (International Standard Industrial Classification, Revision 3). The index is calculated
                                                                          The figure plots the sectoral index of real estate intensity for the 22 two-digit manufacturing sectors
          Figure 3: Collateral Law Strength and the Sectoral Allocation of Output


The figure plots the relationship between a country’s movable collateral law index and the average
ratio of output in immovable-intensive sectors to total manufacturing output. The sectoral data comes
from UNIDO, which includes all firms operating in each sector. The average is taken during the period
2002-2004. Immovable-intensive sectors are those above the median of the sectoral index of real estate
intensity.
            Output share allocated to immovable-intensive sectors
                                                              .9




                                                                        Chile
                                          .7        .8




                                                                                                India

                                                                        Turkey
                                                                                                                               Romania
                                 .6




                                                                                                Czech Republic
                                                                                     Slovakia
                                                                                                                 Hungary
                      .5




                                                                                                                                   Singapore
                                                                                                                                    Malaysia

                                                                                                                                   Hong Kong
            .4




                                                                    2            3        4               5                6                   7
                                                                                     Movable Collateral Law Index




                                                                                                                                                   40
  Figure 4: Evolution of Sectoral Allocation of Output and Employment in Slovakia and
                                     Other Countries


The figure plots the evolution of the ratio of output in immovable-intensive sectors to total manufac-
turing output in Slovakia (panel A) and the average ratio in the other nine countries (panel B), during
the period 1999-2007. The sectoral data comes from UNIDO, which includes all firms operating in
each sector. Immovable-intensive sectors are those above the median of the sectoral index of real
estate intensity. The vertical gray line depicts the year of the Slovakian collateral law reform (2003).
                       Output share of immovable-intensive sectors in Slovakia
                        .52              .54             .56              .58




                                                                                      1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007
                                                                                                                  Year


                                                                                             A. Sectoral Share of Output in Slovakia
                       Output share of immovable-intensive sectors in all countries
                         .52              .54             .56                .58




                                                                                      1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007
                                                                                                                  Year


                                                                                        B. Sectoral Share of Output in Other Countries




                                                                                                                                                     41
           Table 1: Loan-to-Value by Collateral Law Strength and Collateral Type
The table reports the average loan-to-value (LTV) for 4,224 borrowers from GlobalBank in 12 countries with
weak and strong collateral laws, by collateral type. The average is taken during the period 2002-2004. Strong-
law countries consist of countries above the median of the movable collateral law index. Collateral type is
either Immovable (real estate) or M ovable (machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable). There are 3,096
and 1,128 borrowers pledging immovable and movable assets, respectively.

                                                (1)     (2)    (3)     (4)        (5)
                                                Immovable       Movable        Difference
                     Collateral =                 Assets        Assets        Immovable
                                                                               - Movable
                                               Obs.    LTV     Obs.   LTV         LTV
                     A. Weak-law countries
                     Chile                     244     0.783    16    0.482     0.301
                     Czech Republic            364     0.784   141    0.271     0.513
                     India                     702     0.833   116    0.506     0.327
                     Pakistan                  42      0.838   47     0.619     0.219
                     Slovakia                  54      0.876   25     0.672     0.204
                     Sri Lanka                  51     0.989     5    0.835     0.154
                     Turkey                    251     0.804   178    0.477     0.327
                     B. Strong-law countries
                     Hong Kong                 989     0.928   420    0.861     0.068
                     Hungary                    57     0.902    46    0.814     0.088
                     Malaysia                  166     0.840    96    0.741     0.099
                     Romania                   30      0.877   19     0.625     0.252
                     Singapore                 146     0.894   19     0.737     0.157
                     C. Average weak- and strong-law countries
                     Weak-law countries        1,708   0.817   528    0.454     0.364
                     Strong-law countries      1,388   0.912   600    0.827     0.085




                                                                                                           42
                        Table 2: Effect of Collateral Laws on Loan-to-Value
This table presents the results from the following regression:

                    LT Vi = αc + αs + βM ovablei + γLawc ∗ M ovablei + δZi + λXc + εi ,

where LT Vi is the loan-to-value for a loan made by GlobalBank to firm i collateralized by assets that are either
immovable or movable. Lawc is a dummy equal to 1 for countries above the median of the movable collateral
law index and 0 otherwise. M ovable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if collateral is movable (machinery,
inventory, and accounts receivable) and 0 otherwise. Zi denotes a vector of firm-level controls. Xc is a
vector of country-level controls (Time to Enforce a Contract, Time to Resolve Insolvency, Rule of Law, and
Property Rights measured as dummy variables equal to one if above the median). The sample includes 4,224
borrowers in 12 countries during the period 2002-2004. The specification includes a full set of country fixed
effects (αc ). Columns (2)-(3) also include sector fixed effects (αs ). The standard errors are clustered using
block-bootstrapping at the country level.

              Dep. Variable: LTV                     (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)

              Movable                            -0.358***    -0.359***     -0.291***   -0.361***
                                                  (0.046)      (0.053)       (0.065)     (0.060)
              Law x Movable                       0.276***       0.277***   0.210***    0.238***
                                                   (0.047)        (0.057)    (0.062)     (0.063)
              Time Enforcement x Movable                                      0.015
                                                                             (0.055)
              Time Insolvency x Movable                                      -0.121*
                                                                             (0.071)
              Rule of Law x Movable                                                       0.062
                                                                                         (0.045)
              Property Rights x Movable                                                   -0.013
                                                                                         (0.041)
              Firm Controls
              Firm Ratings                          Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes
              Firm Size                             Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes
              Balance Sheet Data (4 Ratios)         Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes
              Fixed Effects
              Country                               Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes
              Sector                                No             Yes        Yes          Yes
              Observations                         4,224          4,224       4,224       4,224
              R-squared                             0.50           0.51        0.51        0.51




                                                                                                              43
             Table 3: Effect of Slovakia’s Collateral Law Reform on Loan-to-Value
This table presents the results from the following regression:

                               LT Vit = αi + αt + βP ostt ∗ M ovablei + γZit + εit ,

where LT Vit is the loan-to-value for a loan made by GlobalBank to firm i collateralized by assets that are
either immovable or movable. M ovable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if collateral is movable (machinery,
inventory, and accounts receivable) and 0 otherwise. P ostt is a dummy equal to 1 after January 1st 2003, the
implementation date for the Slovakia reform, and 0 otherwise. Zit denotes a vector of time varying firm-level
controls. To construct the pre- and post-reform samples we include all borrowers present in the pre-reform
period and follow them post-reform. We include one observation per borrower in each of the pre- and post-
reform periods. The sample in columns (1) and (2) is for borrowers in Slovakia only and includes 55 borrowers.
The placebo sample in column (3) is for borrowers in the Czech Republic only and includes 261 borrowers.
The placebo sample in column (4) includes borrowers from all countries excluding Slovakia and includes 2,018
borrowers. The main specification in columns (2)-(4) includes a full set of borrower fixed effects (αi ) and
quarterly time fixed effects (αt ). The standard errors are clustered at the borrower level in columns (1)-(3)
and clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country level in column (3).

                                                      (1)              (2)             (3)      (4)
                                                                              Sample
                                                                                  Czech      Excluding
               Dep. Variable: LTV                           Slovakia             Republic     Slovakia

               Movable                             -0.203***
                                                    (0.033)
               Post x Movable                      0.223***      0.201***          0.003       0.009
                                                    (0.050)       (0.074)         (0.026)     (0.011)
               Firm Controls
               Firm Ratings                           Yes              Yes             Yes     Yes
               Firm Size                              Yes              Yes             Yes     Yes
               Balance Sheet Data (4 Ratios)          Yes              Yes             Yes     Yes
               Fixed Effects
               Borrower                               No               Yes             Yes     Yes
               Time                                   Yes              Yes             Yes     Yes
               Observations                          110               110         522         4,036
               R-squared                             0.37              0.79        0.89         0.80




                                                                                                           44
                  Table 4: Effect of Collateral Law Components on Loan-to-Value
This table presents the results from the following regression:

                    LT Vi = αc + αs + βM ovablei + γLawcComponent ∗ M ovablei + δZi + εi ,

where LT Vi is the loan-to-value for a loan made by GlobalBank to firm i collateralized by assets that are
either immovable or movable. LawcComponent denotes each of the three components of the movable collateral
law index. Creation is a dummy equal to 1 for countries with the sum of the first five features of MC Law
Index above the median and 0 otherwise; Registry is a dummy equal to 1 for countries with an electronic
collateral registry and 0 otherwise; Out-of-Court is a dummy equal to 1 for countries that allow out-of-court
enforcement for movables and 0 otherwise; Out-of-Court Immov is a dummy equal to 1 for countries that
allow out-of-court enforcement for immovables and 0 otherwise. M ovable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
collateral is movable (machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable) and 0 otherwise. Zi denotes a vector of
firm-level controls. The sample includes 4,224 borrowers in 12 countries during the period 2002-2004. The
specification includes a full set of country fixed effects (αc ) and sector fixed effects (αs ). The standard errors
are clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country level.

        Dep. Variable: LTV                      (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)

        Movable                              -0.257***    -0.355***    -0.364***    -0.364***    -0.321***
                                              (0.054)      (0.050)      (0.052)      (0.053)      (0.038)
        Creation x Movable                     0.060                                                -0.066
                                              (0.089)                                              (0.061)
        Registry x Movable                                0.278***                                0.193***
                                                           (0.052)                                 (0.061)
        Out-of-Court x Movable                                         0.280***      0.252***     0.112***
                                                                        (0.056)       (0.052)      (0.038)
        Out-of-Court Immov x Movable                                                  0.038
                                                                                     (0.056)
        Firm Controls
        Firm Ratings                            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Firm Size                               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Balance Sheet Data (4 Ratios)           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Fixed Effects
        Country                                 Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Sector                                  Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Observations                           4,224        4,224        4,224        4,224         4,224
        R-squared                               0.51         0.51         0.51         0.51          0.51




                                                                                                                 45
             Table 5: Effect of Collateral Laws on Loan-to-Value: Supra Collateral
This table presents the results from the following regression:

      LT Vi = αc + αs + β1 M ovablei + β2 Suprai + γ1 Lawc ∗ M ovablei + γ2 Lawc ∗ Suprai + δZi + εi ,

where LT Vi is the loan-to-value for a loan made by GlobalBank to firm i collateralized by assets that are
immovable, movable, or supra collateral. Lawc is a dummy equal to 1 for countries above the median of the
movable collateral law index and 0 otherwise. M ovable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if collateral is movable
(machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable) and 0 otherwise. Supra is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
collateral is supra (bank guarantees, financial securities, and cash held with the bank) and 0 otherwise. Zi
denotes a vector of firm-level controls. The sample includes 4,691 borrowers in 12 countries during the period
2002-2004. The specification includes a full set of country fixed effects (αc ) and sector fixed effects (αs ). The
standard errors are clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country level.

                            Dep. Variable: LTV                     (1)          (2)
                            Movable                                         -0.359***
                                                                             (0.048)
                            Supra                                0.106***      0.031
                                                                  (0.023)     (0.028)
                            Law x Movable                                    0.276***
                                                                              (0.050)
                            Law x Supra                        -0.132***     -0.083**
                                                                (0.027)       (0.031)
                            Firm Controls
                            Firm Ratings                           Yes         Yes
                            Firm Size                              Yes         Yes
                            Balance Sheet Data (4 Ratios)          Yes         Yes
                            Fixed Effects
                            Country                                Yes         Yes
                            Sector                                 Yes         Yes
                            Observations                          4,691       4,691
                            R-squared                              0.22        0.46




                                                                                                                46
           Table 6: Effect of Collateral Laws on Loan-to-Value: Robustness Checks
This table presents the results from the following regression:

                        LT Vi = αc + αs + βM ovablei + γLawc ∗ M ovablei + δZi + εi ,

where LT Vi is the loan-to-value for a loan made by GlobalBank to firm i collateralized by assets that are either
immovable or movable. Lawc is a dummy equal to 1 for countries above the median of the movable collateral
law index and 0 otherwise. M ovable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if collateral is movable (machinery,
inventory, and accounts receivable) and 0 otherwise. Zi denotes a vector of firm-level controls. The sample for
the main tests includes 4,224 borrowers in 12 countries during the period 2002-2004. The specification includes
a full set of country fixed effects (αc ) and sector fixed effects (αs ). Column (1) employs the original movable
collateral law index, which ranges from 0 to 7. Columns (2) and (3) examine alternative movables classifications
by excluding accounts receivable (186 observations), and machinery (341 observations) respectively. Column
(4) includes only manufacturing firms (1,655 observations). The standard errors are clustered using block-
bootstrapping at the country level.

                                                   (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)
                                                                     Robustness
                                               Alternative      Alternative Asset Classification
                                               Collateral    Inventory    Acct. Rec.     Manufact.
            Dep. Variable: LTV                    Law         & Mach     & Inventory        only

            Movable                            -0.535***     -0.309***      -0.381***     -0.323***
                                                (0.119)       (0.026)        (0.056)       (0.056)
            Law x Movable                       0.062***      0.232***      0.311***       0.206**
                                                 (0.019)       (0.036)       (0.075)       (0.090)
            Firm Controls
            Firm Ratings                           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
            Firm Size                              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
            Balance Sheet Data (4 Ratios)          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
            Fixed Effects
            Country                                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
            Sector                                 Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
            Observations                          4,224          4,038        3,883         1,655
            R-squared                              0.49           0.38         0.38          0.47




                                                                                                              47
               Table 7: Effect of Collateral Laws: Alternative Divisions of Sample
This table presents results examining alternate cutoffs for the collateral law index from the following regression:

     LT Vi = αc + αs + βM ovablei + γ1 M iddleLawc ∗ M ovablei + γ2 HighLawc ∗ M ovablei + δZi + εi ,

where LT Vi is the loan-to-value for a loan made by GlobalBank to firm i collateralized by assets that are
either immovable or movable. Collateral law strength is measured into three groups, where Low Law denotes
a movable collateral law index of less than 5 (omitted coefficient), M iddle Law denotes a movable collateral
law index of 5 or 6, and High Law denotes a movable collateral law index of 7. M ovable is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if collateral is movable (machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable) and 0 otherwise. Zi denotes a
vector of firm-level controls. The sample includes 4,224 borrowers in 12 countries during the period 2002-2004.
The specification includes a full set of country fixed effects (αc ) and sector fixed effects (αs ). The standard
errors are clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country level.

                                                                   (1)           (2)
                            Dep. Variable:                                LTV
                            Movable                            -0.358***    -0.336***
                                                                (0.054)      (0.055)
                            Middle Law x Movable                0.238**
                                                                (0.095)
                            High Law x Movable                  0.281***     0.258***
                                                                 (0.060)      (0.060)
                            Firm Controls
                            Firm Ratings                          Yes           Yes
                            Firm Size                             Yes           Yes
                            Balance Sheet Data (4 Ratios)         Yes           Yes
                            Fixed Effects
                            Country                               Yes           Yes
                            Sector                                Yes           Yes
                            Observations                         4,224          4,224
                            R-squared                             0.50           0.49




                                                                                                                48
 Table 8: Effect of Collateral Laws on Sectoral Allocation of Output and Investment Rate:
                                    GlobalBank Sample

The table presents the results from the following regression:

                             Ysc = αc + αs + βLawc ∗ REIs + γXc ∗ REIs + sc ,
where Ysc is either the average ratio of sectoral output to total manufacturing output of sector s in country c
or the average ratio of gross fixed capital formation to output of sector s in country c. The average is taken
during the period 2002-2004. Lawc is a dummy equal to 1 for countries with movable collateral law index
above six and 0 otherwise. REIs is a dummy equal to 1 for sectors above the median of the sectoral index
of real estate intensity and 0 otherwise. Xc is a vector of country-level controls (Time to Enforce a Contract,
Time to Resolve Insolvency, Rule of Law, and Property Rights measured as dummy variables equal to one if
above the median). All specifications includes a full set of sector fixed effects (αs ) and specifications (4)-(6)
also include a full set of country fixed effects (αc ). The sample consists of the 10 GlobalBank countries and
22 sectors. Columns (1)-(2) and (4)-(5) report the results using OLS. Columns (3) and (6) report the results
using instrumental variables (IV), where the instrument for the interaction between Law and REI is the
interaction between legal origin and REI. The standard errors are clustered using block-bootstrapping at the
country level.

                                 (1)       (2)      (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
                                           Output Share                             Investment Rate
                                OLS        OLS       OLS         IV        OLS       OLS       OLS        IV

  Law x REI                   -0.014***   -0.012*   -0.010*   -0.021**   -0.030**   -0.022*   -0.029*   -0.045*
                               (0.003)    (0.005)   (0.004)    (0.008)    (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.014)   (0.021)
  Time Enforcement x REI                   0.001                                     -0.007
                                          (0.002)                                   (0.004)
  Time Insolvency x REI                    0.001                                     0.003
                                          (0.002)                                   (0.002)
  Rule of Law x REI                                  0.005                                     0.007
                                                    (0.019)                                   (0.014)
  Property Rights x REI                              0.001                                     0.001
                                                    (0.001)                                   (0.000)


  Fixed Effects
  Country                        No         No        No        No         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
  Sector                         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes

  Number of Countries             10         10       10          10        10         10        10        10
  Observations                   220        220       220        220       220        220       220       220
  R-squared                     0.376      0.368     0.443      0.374     0.539      0.600     0.505     0.533




                                                                                                                  49
 Table 9: Effect of Collateral Laws on Sectoral Allocation of Output and Investment Rate:
                                     Extended Sample

The table presents the results from the following regression:

                             Ysc = αc + αs + βLawc ∗ REIs + γXc ∗ REIs + sc ,
where Ysc is either the average ratio of sectoral output to total manufacturing output of sector s in country c
or the average ratio of gross fixed capital formation to output of sector s in country c. The average is taken
during the period 2002-2004. Lawc is a dummy equal to 1 for countries with movable collateral law index
above six and 0 otherwise. REIs is a dummy equal to 1 for sectors above the median of the sectoral index
of real estate intensity and 0 otherwise. Xc is a vector of country-level controls (Time to Enforce a Contract,
Time to Resolve Insolvency, Rule of Law, and Property Rights measured as dummy variables equal to one if
above the median). All specifications includes a full set of sector fixed effects (αs ) and specifications (4)-(6)
also include a full set of country fixed effects (αc ). The extended sample consists of 76 (52) countries for the
output share (investment rate) regressions and 22 sectors. Columns (1)-(2) and (4)-(5) report the results using
OLS. Columns (3) and (6) report the results using instrumental variables (IV), where the instrument for the
interaction between Law and REI is the interaction between legal origin and REI. The standard errors are
clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country level.

                                 (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
                                           Output Share                              Investment Rate
                                OLS        OLS        OLS         IV       OLS        OLS       OLS        IV

  Law x REI                  -0.009***    -0.008**   -0.008**   -0.012*   -0.017**    -0.014    -0.019   -0.025*
                              (0.004)      (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.019)   (0.012)
  Time Enforcement x REI                   0.001                                      -0.001
                                          (0.002)                                    (0.005)
  Time Insolvency x REI                    0.001                                      0.004
                                          (0.001)                                    (0.002)
  Rule of Law x REI                                   0.007                                     0.007
                                                     (0.017)                                   (0.012)
  Property Rights x REI                               0.000                                     0.001
                                                     (0.001)                                   (0.001)


  Fixed Effects
  Country                       No          No         No        No         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
  Sector                        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes

  Number of Countries            76          76        76          76       52          52      52         52
  Observations                 1,672       1,672      1,672      1,672     1,144      1,144    1,144     1,144
  R-squared                    0.451       0.444      0.452      0.451     0.797      0.787    0.519     0.796




                                                                                                                 50
                              Table 10: Effect of Collateral Law Components on Sectoral Allocation of Output

     The table presents the results from the following regression:

                                                   Sharesc = αs + βLawcComponent ∗ REIs + γXc ∗ REIs + sc ,
     where Sharesc is the average ratio of sectoral output to total manufacturing output of sector s in country c. The average is taken during the
     period 2002-2004. LawcComponent denotes each of the three components of the movable collateral law index. Creation is a dummy equal to 1 for
     countries with the sum of the first five features of MC Law Index above the median and 0 otherwise; Registry is a dummy equal to 1 for countries
     with an electronic collateral registry and 0 otherwise; Out-of-Court is a dummy equal to 1 for countries that allow out-of-court enforcement for
     movables and 0 otherwise; ; Out-of-Court Immov is a dummy equal to 1 for countries that allow out-of-court enforcement for immovables and 0
     otherwise.REIs is a dummy equal to 1 for sectors above the median of the sectoral index of real estate intensity and 0 otherwise. The specification
     includes a full set of sector fixed effects (αs ). The sample of columns (1)-(3) consists of the 10 GlobalBank countries and 22 sectors. The sample
     of columns (4)-(6) consists of 76 countries and 22 sectors. The standard errors are clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country level.

                                           (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)      (10)
                                                              Original Sample                                         Extended Sample

            Creation x REI                -0.012                                       -0.005    -0.008***                                         -0.005
                                         (0.008)                                      (0.004)     (0.002)                                         (0.004)
            Registry x REI                          -0.017**                           -0.009                -0.007***                             -0.004
                                                     (0.007)                          (0.006)                 (0.003)                             (0.002)
            Out-of-Court x REI                                  -0.015***   -0.012*   -0.007**                            -0.005**   -0.004***    -0.003*
                                                                 (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.003)                             (0.003)    (0.001)     (0.002)
            Out-of-Court Immov x REI                                         0.008                                                       0.001
                                                                            (0.008)                                                     (0.001)
            Fixed Effects
            Sector                        Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes       Yes

            Number of Countries           10            10         10          10        10         76          76            76          30        76
            Observations                  220          220         220        220       220        1,672       1,672         484        1,672
            R-squared                    0.372        0.378       0.377      0.378     0.379       0.452       0.451        0.451       0.393     0.452




51
   Table 11: Effect of Collateral Laws on Sectoral Allocation of Output: Role of Judicial
                                        Inefficiency

The table presents the results from the following regression:

                                     Sharesc = αs + βLawc ∗ REIs + sc ,

where Sharesc is the average ratio of sectoral output to total manufacturing output of sector s in country c.
The average is taken during the period 2002-2004. Lawc is a dummy equal to 1 for countries with movable
collateral law index above six and 0 otherwise. REIs is a dummy equal to 1 for sectors above the median of
the sectoral index of real estate intensity and 0 otherwise. The specification includes a full set of sector fixed
effects (αs ). The sample in column (1) includes 76 countries and 22 sectors. Column (2) includes countries
above the median of the variable Time to Enforce a Contract (42 countries). Column (3) includes countries
below the median of Time to Enforce a Contract (34 countries). The standard errors are clustered using
block-bootstrapping at the country level.

                                                 (1)             (2)               (3)
                     Dep. Variable: Share       Full       Above-median      Below-median
                                               Sample         Judicial          Judicial
                                                            Inefficiency      Inefficiency

                     Law x REI                -0.009***       -0.013***           -0.005
                                               (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.005)

                     Fixed Effects
                     Sector                      Yes             Yes               Yes

                     Number of Countries           76             42               34
                     Observations                1,672           924               748
                     R-squared                   0.451          0.449             0.476




                                                                                                               52
                   Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics for GlobalBank Sample
The table reports descriptive statistics for loan-to-value (LTV) for 4,691 borrowers from GlobalBank
in 12 countries, by collateral type. The average is taken during the period 2002-2004. Strong-law
countries consist of countries above the median of the movable collateral law index. Collateral type is
either Immovable (real estate), M ovable (machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable), or Supra.
There are 3,096, 1,128, and 467 borrowers pledging immovable, movable, and supra assets, respectively.

                                     Panel A: Immovable Asset Collateral
                    Country           Obs.    Mean    Median    Std Dev    25th    75th
                    Chile              244    0.783    0.735      0.136    0.726   0.888
                    Czech Republic     364    0.784    0.811      0.140    0.685   0.864
                    Hong Kong          989    0.928    0.952      0.092    0.935   0.992
                    Hungary             57    0.902    0.995      0.154    0.907   1.000
                    India              702    0.833    0.800      0.094    0.750   0.850
                    Malaysia           166    0.840    0.903      0.162    0.734   0.997
                    Pakistan            42    0.838    0.824      0.165    0.675   1.000
                    Romania             30    0.877    0.877      0.098    0.824   0.990
                    Singapore          146    0.894    0.986      0.148    0.829   1.000
                    Slovakia            54    0.876    0.855      0.098    0.778   0.995
                    Sri Lanka           51    0.989    0.992      0.012    0.973   1.000
                    Turkey             251    0.804    0.771      0.145    0.752   0.967
                    All               3,096   0.860    0.864      0.131    0.750   0.992

                                      Panel B: Movable Asset Collateral
                    Country           Obs.    Mean    Median    Std Dev    25th    75th
                    Chile               16    0.482    0.481      0.191    0.255   0.675
                    Czech Republic     141    0.271    0.175      0.220    0.113   0.315
                    Hong Kong          420    0.861    0.932      0.136    0.783   0.944
                    Hungary             46    0.814    0.868      0.193    0.767   0.924
                    India              116    0.506    0.378      0.311    0.203   0.828
                    Malaysia            96    0.741    0.874      0.268    0.309   0.938
                    Pakistan            47    0.619    0.854      0.372    0.177   0.988
                    Romania             19    0.625    0.723      0.173    0.527   0.824
                    Singapore           19    0.737    0.746      0.143    0.686   0.833
                    Slovakia            25    0.672    0.682      0.117    0.630   0.783
                    Sri Lanka            5    0.835    0.816      0.113    0.779   0.923
                    Turkey             178    0.477    0.452      0.192    0.342   0.593
                    All               1,128   0.652    0.748      0.295    0.342   0.928

                                          Panel C: Supra-Collateral
                    Country           Obs.    Mean    Median    Std Dev    25th    75th
                    Chile               69    0.840    1.000      0.235    0.671   1.000
                    Czech Republic     104    0.794    0.730      0.135    0.708   0.956
                    Hong Kong            4    0.814    0.950      0.306    0.647   0.981
                    Hungary              6    0.917    0.950      0.098    0.800   1.000
                    India                -      -        -          -        -       -
                    Malaysia           113    0.770    0.800      0.190    0.631   0.928
                    Pakistan           18     0.966    1.000      0.072    0.961   1.000
                    Romania             92    0.802    0.900      0.221    0.722   0.956
                    Singapore           35    0.796    0.820      0.181    0.666   0.969
                    Slovakia           23     0.832    0.910      0.178    0.771   0.997
                    Sri Lanka            -      -        -          -        -       -
                    Turkey              3     0.987    1.000      0.022    0.962   1.000
                    All                467    0.808    0.884      0.192    0.706   0.979

                                                                                                   A.1
                  Table A.2: Frequency and Loan-to-Value by Collateral Type
The table reports the frequency of different types of collateral for the United States, based on the Survey
of Small Business Finances (SSBF)*. The table also reports the frequency and average loan-to-value (LTV)
for 4,224 borrowers from GlobalBank in 12 countries with weak and strong collateral laws, by collateral
type. The average is taken during the period 2002-2004. Strong-law countries consist of countries above the
median of the movable collateral law index. Collateral type is either Immovable (real estate) or M ovable
(machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable). There are 3,096 and 1,128 borrowers pledging immovable
and movable assets, respectively. For the 1,128 movable asset loans, there are 341, 601, and 186 borrowers
pledging machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable respectively.

                                   Immovable Assets             Machinery              Inventory+AR
                                   Frequency     LTV        Frequency     LTV        Frequency    LTV


       United States                 37.03%       NA          45.69%      NA          17.27%       NA

       GlobalBank Countries
       - Full Sample                 73.10%      0.864        8.34%      0.736        18.56%      0.630
       - Weak-law                    76.39%      0.817         3.76%     0.653        19.86%      0.534
       - Strong-law                  69.82%      0.912        12.93%     0.819        17.25%      0.726




* Note on SSBF: The Survey of Small Business Finances, from the Federal Reserve Board, provides information
on small businesses in the United States. We use the latest version available: 2003. SSBF has separate
collateral information on six different types of loans, among which five (lines of credit, mortgages, motor
vehicle loans, machinery loans, and other loans) can be secured. Up to three loans for each type can be
reported in the survey, meaning a firm can report up to fifteen secured loans. We treat each loan as an
individual observation, and focus only on secured loans that are collateralized by one type of asset class.
To make a comparison with our study we examine inventory or accounts receivable, business equipment or
vehicles, and real estate in the SSBF survey and estimate frequencies by dividing the number of each collateral
type by the total number of the loans in that collateral class.




                                                                                                          A.2
                              Table A.3: Effect of Collateral Laws on Loan-to-Value: Alternate Control Variables
      This table presents the results from the following regression:

                                                  LT Vi = αc + αs + βM ovablei + γXc ∗ M ovablei + δZi + εi ,

      where LT Vi is the loan-to-value for a loan made by GlobalBank to firm i collateralized by assets that are either immovable or movable. Xc is a
      vector of country-level controls: GDP per Capita, Private Credit to GDP, Rule of Law, Property Rights, Creditor Rights, Information Sharing,
      Time to Enforce a Contract, Time to Resolve Insolvency, and Cost of Insolvency Procedure, measured as dummy variables equal to one if above
      the median. M ovable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if collateral is movable (machinery, inventory, and accounts receivable) and 0 otherwise. Zi
      denotes a vector of firm-level controls. The sample includes 4,224 borrowers in 12 countries during the period 2002-2004. The specification includes
      a full set of country fixed effects (αc ) and sector fixed effects (αs ). The standard errors are clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country
      level.

             Dep. Variable: LTV                 (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)

             Movable                         -0.243***   -0.261***     -0.318***   -0.304***   -0.277***   -0.139***   -0.129*    -0.129**    -0.292***
                                              (0.050)     (0.049)       (0.060)     (0.060)     (0.040)     -(0.080)   (0.073)     (0.052)     (0.067)
             GDP per Capita x Movable          0.060
                                              (0.140)
             Credit to GDP x Movable                       0.083
                                                          (0.119)
             Rule of Law x Movable                                     0.235***
                                                                        (0.078)
             Property Rights x Movable                                             0.219**
                                                                                   (0.094)
             Creditor Rights x Movable                                                           0.108
                                                                                                (0.107)
             Information Sharing x Movable                                                                   0.160
                                                                                                            (0.110)
             Time Enforcement x Movable                                                                                -0.189**
                                                                                                                        (0.095)
             Time Insolvency x Movable                                                                                            -0.256***
                                                                                                                                   (0.078)
             Cost Insolvency x Movable                                                                                                          0.121
                                                                                                                                               (0.114)
             Firm Controls
             Firm Ratings                       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
             Firm Size                          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
             Balance Sheet Data (4 Ratios)      Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
             Fixed Effects
             Country                            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes




A.3
             Sector                             Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
             Observations                      4,224       4,224         4,224       4,224       4,224       4,224      4,224       4,224       3,317
             R-squared                          0.43        0.44          0.48        0.48        0.44        0.46      0.47         0.49       0.45
Table A.4: Effect of Collateral Laws on Sectoral Allocation of Output: Alternative Sectoral
                                          Indices

The table presents the results from the following regression:

                               Sharesc = αs + βLawc ∗ SectoralIndexs + sc ,

where Sharesc is the average ratio of sectoral output to total manufacturing output of sector s in country
c. The average is taken during the period 2002-2004. Lawc is a dummy equal to 1 for countries with
movable collateral law index above six and 0 otherwise. RealEstate Intensity, (AccRec+Inv ) Intensity, and
Machinery Intensity are dummies equal to 1 for sectors above the median of the sectoral index of real estate
intensity, (accounts receivable + inventory) intensity, and machinery intensity, respectively, and 0 otherwise.
The specification includes a full set of sector fixed effects (αs ). The sample consists of the 10 GlobalBank
countries. The standard errors are clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country level.

                                           (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

   Law x RealEstate Intensity           -0.014**                          -0.025**    -0.022**    -0.027**
                                         (0.005)                           (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.009)
   Law x (AccRec+Inv) Intensity                     0.015**               0.026**                 0.021**
                                                    (0.006)               (0.010)                 (0.009)
   Law x Machinery Intensity                                    0.011*                0.019**       0.010
                                                                (0.006)               (0.008)      (0.007)

   Fixed Effects
   Sector                                 Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes

   Number of Countries                     10          10        10          10           10          10
   Observations                           220         220        220        220          220         220
   R-squared                             0.376       0.376      0.373      0.398        0.391       0.401




                                                                                                            A.4
          Table A.5: Effect of Collateral Laws on Sectoral Allocation of Employment

The table presents the results from the following regression:

                             Sharesc = αs + βLawc ∗ REIs + γXc ∗ REIs + sc ,

where Sharesc is the average ratio of sectoral employment to total manufacturing employment of sector s in
country c. The average is taken during the period 2002-2004. Lawc is a dummy equal to 1 for countries with
movable collateral law index above six and 0 otherwise. REIs is a dummy equal to 1 for sectors above the
median of the sectoral index of real estate intensity and 0 otherwise. Xc is a vector of country-level controls
(Time to Enforce a Contract and Time to Resolve Insolvency, measured as dummy variables equal to one if
above the median). The specification includes a full set of sector fixed effects (αs ). The sample includes 10
countries and 22 sectors. The standard errors are clustered using block-bootstrapping at the country level.

                                          (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)         (5)      (6)
                                                Original Sample                   Extended Sample
                                         OLS          OLS         IV       OLS         OLS        IV

          Law x REI                    -0.013**     -0.014*     -0.019*   -0.009*     -0.007*   -0.022**
                                        (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.010)   (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.009)
          Time Enforcement x REI                     -0.001                            -0.001
                                                    (0.002)                           (0.002)
          Time Insolvency x REI                      0.001                             0.002
                                                    (0.002)                           (0.001)
          Fixed Effects
          Sector                         Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes

          Number of Countries             10          10         10        66           66        66
          Observations                    220         220        220      1,289       1,289      1,289
          R-squared                      0.356       0.363      0.354     0.367       0.368      0.364




                                                                                                           A.5
                      Table A.6: List of Countries in Extended Sample
The table reports the names of the 76 countries included in the extended sample of the sectoral
analysis.

                   Country          Out-of-court        Country               Out-of-court
                                    Enforcement                               Enforcement
                                     Movables                                  Movables
              1    Afghanistan           0         39   Jordan                     1
              2    Albania               0         40   Kenya                      1
              3    Argentina             0         41   Kyrgyz Republic            1
              4    Armenia               1         42   Latvia                     1
              5    Australia             1         43   Lithuania                  1
              6    Austria               1         44   Macedonia                  0
              7    Azerbaijan            1         45   Madagascar                 0
              8    Botswana              1         46   Malaysia                   1
              9    Brazil                0         47   Mauritius                  0
              10   Bulgaria              1         48   Mexico                     0
              11   Cameroon              0         49   Morocco                    0
              12   Canada                0         50   Niger                      0
              13   Chile                 0         51   Norway                     1
              14   China                 0         52   Oman                       0
              15   Colombia              0         53   Paraguay                   0
              16   Congo                 0         54   Peru                       0
              17   Costa Rica            0         55   Poland                     1
              18   Czech Republic        1         56   Portugal                   0
              19   Denmark               1         57   Puerto Rico                1
              20   Ecuador               0         58   Republic of Korea          1
              21   Egypt                 0         59   Republic of Moldova        1
              22   Eritrea               0         60   Russian Federation         0
              23   Estonia               1         61   Senegal                    0
              24   Ethiopia              0         62   Singapore                  1
              25   Fiji                  0         63   Slovakia                   1
              26   Finland               1         64   Slovenia                   1
              27   France                0         65   South Africa               1
              28   Georgia               1         66   Spain                      1
              29   Germany               1         67   Sweden                     0
              30   Hong Kong             1         68   Thailand                   1
              31   Hungary               1         69   Tonga                      0
              32   Iceland               1         70   Tunisia                    0
              33   India                 0         71   Turkey                     0
              34   Iran                  0         72   Ukraine                    1
              35   Ireland               1         73   United Kingdom             1
              36   Israel                1         74   Uruguay                    1
              37   Italy                 0         75   Vietnam                    1
              38   Japan                 0         76   Yemen                      0




                                                                                             A.6
