                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE IMPLICATIONS OF RICHER EARNINGS DYNAMICS FOR CONSUMPTION
                             AND WEALTH

                                     Mariacristina De Nardi
                                          Giulio Fella
                                      Gonzalo Paz Pardo

                                      Working Paper 21917
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21917


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2016




Previously circulated as "The Implications of Richer Earnings Dynamics for Consumption,
Wealth, and Welfare." De Nardi gratefully acknowledges support from the ERC, grant 614328
“Savings and Risks” and from the ESRC through the Centre for Macroeconomics. Fella is
grateful to UCL for their generous hospitality while he was working on this paper. We thank
Serdar Ozkan for assistance in generating the synthetic W2 data set and Marco Bassetto, Richard
Blundell, Tony Braun, Jeremy Lise, Fabrizio Perri, Fabien Postel-Vinay, Ananh Sehsadri and
Gustavo Ventura for helpful comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Moritz Kuhn for
providing us with additional statistics from the Survey on Consumer Finances data set. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, any agency of the Federal Government, or the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Mariacristina De Nardi, Giulio Fella, and Gonzalo Paz Pardo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Implications of Richer Earnings Dynamics for Consumption and Wealth
Mariacristina De Nardi, Giulio Fella, and Gonzalo Paz Pardo
NBER Working Paper No. 21917
January 2016, Revised July 2016
JEL No. D14,D31,E21,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

Earnings dynamics are much richer than those typically used in macro models with heterogenous
agents. This paper provides multiple contributions. First, it proposes a simple non-parametric
method to model rich earnings dynamics that is easy to estimate and introduce in structural
models. Second, it applies our method to estimate a nonparametric earnings process using two
data sets: the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and a large, synthetic, data set that matches the
dynamics of the U.S. tax earnings. Third, it uses a life cycle model of consumption to compare
the consumption and saving implications of our two estimated processes to those of a standard
AR(1). We find that, unlike the standard AR(1) process, our estimated, richer earnings process
generates an increase in consumption inequality over the life cycle that is consistent with the data
and better fits the savings of the households at the bottom 60%of the wealth distribution.


Mariacristina De Nardi                           Gonzalo Paz Pardo
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                  University College London
230 South LaSalle St.                            Drayton House
Chicago, IL 60604                                30 Gordon St
and University College London                    London WC1H 0AX
and Institute For Fiscal Studies - IFS           United Kingdom
and also NBER                                    gonzalo.pardo.13@ucl.ac.uk
denardim@nber.org

Giulio Fella
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road
London E1 4NS
United Kingdom
and and Centre for Macroeconomics - CFM
and Institute for Fiscal Studies - IFS g.fella@qmul.ac.uk
1         Introduction

Macroeconomic models with heterogeneous agents are ideal laboratory economies to quan-
titatively study a large set of issues that include household behavior under uncertainty, in-
equality, and the effects of taxes, transfers, and social insurance reforms. For instance, Scholz,
Seshadri and Khitatrakun (2006) study the adequacy of savings at retirement, Storesletten,
Telmer and Yaron (2004) study the evolution of consumption inequality over the life cycle,
and Conesa, Kitao and Krueger (2009) study the optimal taxation of capital. Many of these
quantitative models adopt earnings processes that imply that the persistence of earnings
shocks is independent of age and earnings histories, and that positive and negative income
changes are equally likely (for instance, a common assumption is that earnings follow a linear
process with normal innovations).
        Earnings risk, consumption, and wealth accumulation are tightly linked. The magnitude
and persistence of earnings shocks determine how saving and consumption adjust to buffer
their impact on current and future consumption and the extent to which people can self-insure
by using savings. Appropriately capturing earnings risk is therefore important to understand
consumption and wealth accumulation decisions as well as the welfare implications of income
fluctuations and the potential role for social insurance.
        A growing body of empirical work provides evidence that households’ earnings dynamics
feature substantial asymmetries and non-linearities and devises flexible statistical models
that allow for these features. For instance, recent work takes advantage of new methodologies
(Arellano, Blundell and Bonhomme, 2015) or large data sets (Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan and
Song, 2015) to show that earnings changes display substantial skewness and kurtosis and that
the persistence of shocks depends both on age and current earnings.1
        Unfortunately, the complexity of these rich earnings processes makes it computationally
    1
     Guvenen et al. (2015) document these features using Social Security Administration tax earnings (W2)
data for a large panel of individuals, while Arellano et al. (2015) show that similar features hold in the PSID
too.

                                                      2
very costly to incorporate them in the rich structural models of household’s decision making
that are needed to study consumption and saving decisions and their implications for con-
sumption, wealth, and welfare inequality, both in the cross-section and over the life cycle. For
this reason, rich earnings processes matching a large number of observed conditional and un-
conditional earnings moments have not been introduced in structural models of household’s
decision making over the life cycle so far.
       This paper provides multiple contributions. First, it proposes a new, non-parametric, way
to model life-cycle earnings dynamics that is both consistent with the new empirical findings
and easy to estimate and introduce in structural quantitative models of optimal households’
decision making. The method is sufficiently flexible to accommodate non-linearities, het-
eroskedasticity and deviations from normality. While the usual approach involves first esti-
mating a parametric, linear Markov process for (the stochastic component of) earnings
and then discretizing it, our proposed method estimates non-parametrically an age-specific
Markov chain directly from the data. More specifically, in our main case—that assumes
that earnings follow a Markov chain of order one—our method starts by computing the age-
specific transition matrix from the percentile rank of the earnings distribution at age t to
that at age t + 1. Then, it discretizes the marginal distribution of earnings at each age by
replacing the (heterogeneous) values of earnings in each rank percentile with their average.
The result is a non-parametric representation of the earnings process that follows a Markov
chain with an age-dependent transition matrix and a fixed number of age-dependent earnings
states. Our method can be generalized to allow for Markov chains of order higher than one.2
       Second, this paper applies our method both to the PSID and to a large synthetic panel
generated simulating the parametric earnings process estimated by Guvenen et al. (2015) on
W2 data.3 The advantage of the PSID is that it is a well known data set, that includes more
information about earners than the W2 data. (For readability, we refer to our “synthetic W2”
   2
    In Section 8 we show that our findings are robust to allowing for a Markov chain of order two.
   3
    Our synthetic data set fits, by construction, all of the moments that these authors use in their estimation
procedure and allows us to sidestep the problem that accessing the W2 tax data is very involved.
                                                      3
data simply as “W2” data in the rest of the paper.) Conversely, unlike the PSID, the W2 data
set is extremely large and does not feature top-coding or under-representation of very high
earners. For this reason we apply our non-parametric estimation method to both data sets.
We find that our approximation replicates very well the first four unconditional moments of
log earnings and the conditional moments of log earnings growth in both datasets. In both
cases the estimated earnings process features important non-linearities, heteroskedasticity,
negative skewness and kurtosis. In particular, we find that that our non-linear earnings
process implies much lower persistence at low and high earnings levels and for the young
than implied by the (near-) unit root processes commonly used in the quantitative macro
literature with heterogeneous agents (e.g. Huggett, 1996).
   Third, and importantly, this paper studies the implications of these features of earnings
dynamics for consumption and wealth in the context of a standard life cycle model of savings
and consumption with incomplete markets. More specifically, we compare the implications of
our flexible estimated process, featuring an age-specific Markov chain, to those of a discretized
AR(1) process calibrated to match the US earnings Gini and to approximate the life-cycle
profile of earnings inequality.
   Our main findings are the following. Unlike the AR(1), our non-linear earnings process
generates an increase in consumption inequality over the life cycle that is in line with the
observed data. We show that approximately half of the improvement in fitting the growth
of the consumption variance between ages 25 and 55 is due to the combination of age-
dependent persistence and innovation variances, as well as skewness and kurtosis. The
remaining fraction is accounted for by the dependence of conditional moments on current
earnings.
   In addition, our rich earnings process generates a better fit of the wealth holdings of the
bottom 60% of individuals. Even our process, however, fails to improve on the standard
AR(1) process in terms of fitting the right tail of the wealth distribution. This is a frequent


                                               4
drawback of life-cycle models with no entrepreneurs or transmission of bequests (De Nardi,
2004; Cagetti and De Nardi, 2006, 2009).4
       Finally, we compare the forecasting performance of our flexible Markov chain to that of
standard AR(1) processes including the random walk process commonly used in the liter-
ature. The first-order Markov chain estimated on the W2 data has a lower forecast error
up 3 to 4 years ahead. Even 5 to 6 years out its forecast error never exceeds that of the
best-performing AR(1) process by more than 10%. We also look at the implications of es-
timating a Markov Chain of order 2 and we find that it outperforms the forecasting ability
of all first-order processes at all horizons. Thus, we conclude that our flexible earnings rep-
resentation of the W2 data implies a good representation of the data even at long horizons.
Furthermore, our main results for consumption and wealth inequality are very similar when
we use a Markov chain of order 1 or 2.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature.
Section 3 describes the main features of the data on earnings dynamics and inequality in
consumption and wealth that our model seeks to match. Section 4 details our non-parametric
estimation method. Section 5 highlights the implications of our estimated earnings process
over the life cycle and in the cross-section, both for the W2 tax data and the PSID. Section 6
introduces our standard quantitative model of savings and consumption over the life cycle
and its calibration. Section 7 discusses the main implications of various earnings processes in
terms of consumption and savings in the model and decomposes their determinants. Section
8 shows that allowing earnings to follow a second-order Markov chain does not affect our
results. Section 9 concludes. Appendix A discusses key features of both the PSID and our
W2 data set. Appendix B shows how well our non-parametric earnings processes match the
PSID and W2 data.
   4
    In computations available upon request, we verify that this result is not sensitive to increasing the value
of the CRRA coefficient up to a rather high value of 4.




                                                      5
2         Related literature

Our goal is to take a standard life cycle model with exogenously incomplete markets (as
in Huggett (1996)) and study how the various earnings processes that we consider affect
consumption, wealth, and their inequality, both over the life cycle and in the cross-section.
Thus, our work connects with two branches of the literature. First, it relates to the literature
on quantitative models with heterogeneous agents, which have been used, for instance, to
study inequality and the effects of government policy reforms. Second, it relates to the
literature on earnings dynamics and its effects on consumption choices. Both branches of
the literature are vast.
        The literature on quantitative models with heterogeneous agents typically assumes a very
parsimonious specification of the earnings process; namely that the logarithm of earnings fol-
low a linear process with Gaussian innovations. This process is then typically discretized
using some variant of the methods described in Tauchen (1986) or Tauchen and Hussey
(1991). An important set of applications of the literature on quantitative models with het-
erogeneous agents studies consumption (e.g., Storesletten et al., 2004; Krueger and Perri,
2006; Jonathan Heathcote, 2010) and wealth (e.g., Castañeda, Dı́az-Giménez and Rı́os-Rull,
2003; De Nardi, 2004; Cagetti and De Nardi, 2009) inequality and their evolution over the
life cycle.5
        It has been argued, however, that incorporating non-Gaussian shocks is important to
properly capture earnings dynamics. Geweke and Keane (2000) show that allowing for non-
Gaussian innovations to log-earnings results in better accounting of transitions between low
and high earnings states relative to the AR(1) model with Gaussian innovations in Lillard and
Willis (1978).6 Bonhomme and Robin (2009) also adopt a specification of the (marginal)
    5
     See Quadrini and Rı́os-Rull (2014), Cagetti and De Nardi (2008) and De Nardi (2015) for a discussion
of what features of the wealth data various versions of these models are able to match.
   6
     They find that the distribution of log earnings shocks is leptokurtic, which means that it has fat tails:
there is a small but relevant number of individuals who suffer large short-run earnings shocks. A Gaussian
AR(1) fails to capture this feature of the data, thus overestimating persistence of log earnings.

                                                      6
earnings distribution that allows for non-Gaussian innovations to the first-order Markov
stochastic component of earnings, with transition probabilities derived from a one-parameter
Plackett copula. They too find evidence against normality in the marginal distribution of
earnings shocks, which is leptokurtic. Our empirical method is closely related to theirs in that
it does not impose Gaussianity and features first-order Markov dynamics. Castañeda et al.
(2003) were the first to study the implications for wealth inequality of an earnings process
that, like ours, does not impose normality and state-independent persistence. Differently
from ours, though, their earnings process is calibrated to match certain moments of the
wealth distribution, rather than only estimated from earnings data, and is age-invariant
while ours is allowed to be age-dependent.7
       Meghir and Pistaferri (2004) relax the assumption of i.i.d. log earnings innovations and
model the conditional variance of log earnings shocks by allowing for autoregressive con-
ditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) in the variance of log earnings. In this context, the
current realizations of the variance are thus informative about future earnings.8 They find
evidence of ARCH-type variances for both the permanent and transitory shocks and for
individual-specific variances. Blundell, Graber and Mogstad (2015) use Norwegian panel
data and find that a better description of earnings dynamics requires allowing for hetero-
geneity by education levels and accounting for non-stationarity. Their preferred specification
for log earnings includes an idiosyncratic constant term, an idiosyncratic experience profile,
an AR(1) persistent shock component and an MA(1) transitory shock component. All com-
ponents considered are allowed to have a skill-dependent distribution and the variances of
shocks are allowed to be age-dependent and hence non-stationary. Our process also allows
for heteroskedasticity, though not of the ARCH type, and non-stationarity.
       Arellano et al. (2015) model a log earnings process composed by the sum of a transitory
stochastic component and a first-order Markov process which, like ours, allows for significant
   7
    Age dependence is irrelevant anyway in Castañeda et al. (2003) as their model is infinite horizon.
   8
    They also allow the variance of log earnings innovations to depend on year effects, the education of the
individual, and unobservable individual factors.
                                                     7
non-linearities in age and previous earnings levels. Guvenen et al. (2015) study the evolution
of male earnings over the life cycle using a large Social Security Administration panel data
set. Using non-parametric methods they find that labor earnings do not conform to the
standard assumptions in most of the empirical literature surveyed in Blundell (2014); namely,
that the stochastic component of earnings is the sum of linear processes with i.i.d, normal
innovations. In particular, they find that earnings shocks display strong negative skewness
and very high kurtosis. They also show that cross-sectional moments change with age and
previous earnings levels. Finally, they estimate a complex set of parametric processes that
match a large number of moments in the data, including higher order moments.
   Finally, Browning, Ejrnaes and Álvarez (2010) and Altonji, Smith and Vidangos (2013)
estimate very flexible earnings models. Both models are not tractable for our purpose.
Browning et al. (2010) show that it is necessary to include individual-level heterogeneity in
earnings processes to account for many important features of the data. They compare a
standard unit-root model for log earnings with a more complex ARMA(1,1) process with
large heterogeneity, where individual-specific parameters are derived from three stochastic
latent factors. This richer process significantly improves the fit of the earnings process to
the data. Altonji et al. (2013) consider a multivariate model of earnings and jointly model
log wages, job changes, unemployment transitions and hours worked by explicitly allowing
these processes to interact (for instance, wages depend on job tenure, while job changes
depend on the expected wage should the individual remain in the same job). Their model
provides important insights on the evolution of earnings and job tenure. Furthermore, it
further stresses the importance of allowing for heterogeneity and state dependence when
approximating earnings dynamics.
   Recent developments in this literature are discussed in Meghir and Pistaferri (2011). The
consequences of these richer earnings processes on consumption, savings and welfare remain,
however, an important open question. Unfortunately, the number of state variables needed


                                              8
to include these kind of processes in a structural model is very large and generates both
computational and modeling issues because it is not obvious how the discretization of each
of these variables should be performed to preserve their relationships and dynamics.
        Finally, a recent paper by Civale, Dı́ez-Catalán and Fazilet (2016) adapts Tauchen’s
(1986) method to discretize stationary AR(1) processes with non-Gaussian innovations and
explores the implications for the equilibrium capital stock in an economy à la Aiyagari (1994).



3         Facts about earnings, consumption and wealth

The earnings shocks experienced by US workers display important deviations from the as-
sumptions of log-normality and independence from age and earnings realizations as docu-
mented by Arellano et al. (2015) for the PSID and Guvenen et al. (2015) for W2 tax data.
The top panel of Figure 1 reports our computations for the conditional moments of log earn-
ings growth from the PSID data. The bottom panel reports the same moments estimated
on the panel dataset that we generate by simulating the parametric process estimated by
Guvenen et al. (2015) on W2 data. To capture the non-linearity and asymmetry in the
data, Guvenen et al. (2015) fit a flexible process consisting of a mixture of AR(1) plus a
heterogeneous income profile and estimate it by simulated method of moments.9
        The figure shows that the conditional variance of log earnings growth is U-shaped across
all age groups: individuals with the largest and smallest earnings are the ones that suffer from
higher earnings risk. Furthermore, the variance declines until age 35 and starts increasing
after age 45.
        The figure also shows that log earnings growth has strong negative skewness and very
high kurtosis, and that these moments depend both on age and previous earnings. A negative
skewness means that individuals face a higher risk of negative relative to positive changes in
    9
     The parameterization is the one denoted “benchmark” or “AR(1)” and reported in column (2) in Table
III of their paper. Further details about this process, as well as the PSID data, are provided in Appendix A.


                                                     9
                                                                                                                                              PSID data
                                                           Standard deviation                                                                  Skewness                                                                        Kurtosis
                                                                                          Skewness of log earnings change




                                                                                                                                                                         Kurtosis of log earnings change
                                                                                                                             2
Std dev of log earnings growth




                                                                       20−24
                                            0.9                        25−29                                                                                                                               40
                                                                       30−34
                                                                                                                             0
                                            0.8                        35−39
                                                                       40−44
                                                                       45−49
                                                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                            0.7                        50−54                                                −2
                                                                       55−59
                                            0.6                                                                                                                                                            20
                                            0.5                                                                             −4
                                            0.4                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                            −6
                                            0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                  0                  50             100                                          0                  50             100                                          0                  50             100
                                                      Percentile of previous earnings                                                Percentile of previous earnings                                                Percentile of previous earnings


                                                                                                                                       W−2 synthetic panel
Standard deviation of log earnings growth




                                                           Standard deviation                                                                  Skewness                                                                        Kurtosis
                                                                                          Skewness of log earnings change




                                                                                                                                                                         Kurtosis of log earnings change

                                                                                                                             1
                                            0.8
                                                                       25−29
                                                                       30−34
                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                       35−39                                                 0
                                                                       40−44
                                                                       45−49
                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                            −1
                                            0.6                        50−54
                                                                       55−59
                                                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                            −2
                                            0.4                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                            −3

                                                                                                                            −4                                                                             10
                                            0.2
                                                                                                                            −5                                                                             0
                                                  0                  50             100                                          0                  50             100                                          0                  50             100
                                                      Percentile of previous earnings                                                Percentile of previous earnings                                                Percentile of previous earnings


                                                  Figure 1: Conditional moments of log earnings changes by age (PSID and W2 data)




                                                                                                                                               10
earnings. The skewness is more negative for individuals in higher earnings percentiles and
for individuals between 35 and 45 years of age. This indicates that individuals face a larger
downward risk as they approach middle age.10
       The kurtosis is a measure of the peakedness of the distribution of log earnings changes. A
high kurtosis means that most of the people experience relatively small earnings shocks in a
given year but that at the same time a small proportion of individuals face very large earnings
shocks. The kurtosis of earnings growth gets as large as 30 (compared to 3 for a standard
normal distribution). Kurtosis is hump-shaped by earnings percentile and increases until age
35-45 to then decrease thereafter. Our graphs thus indicates large deviations between the
moments observed in the data and those implied by the linear earnings processes.
       Overall, the moments in the PSID data are both qualitatively and quantitatively very
close to those computed from our W2 panel. However, it should be noted that the W2 panel
is much larger and is not affected by top-coding or differential survey responses, and thus
provides better information on the earnings-rich. For instance, the increase in the variance
of earnings beyond the 95th percentile is more pronounced in the W2 data set. Similarly, the
negative skewness and the kurtosis are much more pronounced for the highest percentiles in
the W2 data set.
       The decrease in the conditional variance as individuals get older in the W2 data is also
documented in Sabelhaus and Song (2010), who in addition find a substantial decline over
time, particularly after 1990.
       Turning to wealth and consumption inequality, the top line of Table 1 summarizes the
main statistics for the US.11 Overall, wealth is very unequally distributed, with a Gini co-
efficient of 0.72 (the corresponding value for the earnings distribution is 0.51 (Quadrini and
Rı́os-Rull, 1997)). Using different time periods yields a slightly higher concentration of wealth
  10
     Graber and Lise (2015) account for this kind of earnings behavior in the context of a search and matching
model with a job ladder.
  11
     The data on wealth are from Wolff (1987) and come from the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances. We
use the consumption data from the CEX sample derived by Heathcote, Perri and Violante (2010), and we
use their sample A and variable definitions.
                                                     11
in the hands of the richest few.
   As discussed by Quadrini and Rı́os-Rull (2014), Huggett (1996), Cagetti and De Nardi
(2008), and De Nardi (2015), the standard life cycle model with incomplete markets and
discretized AR(1) earnings shock cannot match the large concentration of wealth in the
hands of the richest few and generates too many people at zero (or negative) wealth. An
important question is whether a better representation of earnings risk can help match wealth
inequality and along which dimensions.

                                  Percentage held by           the top    At negative or
                          Gini 1% 5% 20% 40%                   60% 80%         zero
          Wealth          .72 28 49      75     89              96     99       6%
  Non-durable consumption .31   5  15    40     62              79     92       —


              Table 1: Wealth and consumption distribution statistics, U.S. data


   The second line in Table 1 displays the distribution of equivalized consumption of non
durables and services for the entire US adult population in 1989. The consumption Gini that
we compute is in line with the estimates in the literature (around 0.29 for 1989 in Fisher,
Johnson and Smeeding (2013)) and so is the shape of the distribution (our implied 90/10
and 50/10 ratios are 4.23 and 2.12 respectively, which are in line with those in Meyer and
Sullivan (2010)). Consumption inequality is thus significant, but much lower in magnitude
than both earnings and wealth inequality. Relatedly, Figure 2 reports the estimated age
profile of the cross-sectional variance of log, adult-equivalent consumption from a number
of studies. As is well known from the seminal work of Deaton and Paxson (1994), it is
increasing but flatter than the profile of the variance of log earnings. There are multiple
estimates in the literature of the age profile for the variance of consumption. The steeper
profile in Figure 2 (DP) corresponds to the estimate from CEX data over the the period
1980-90 computed by Deaton and Paxson (1994). As first pointed out by Slesnick and Ulker
(2004) and Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2005) (HSV) the rise in inequality by age
is substantially smaller when estimated from CEX data over a longer time period. Heathcote
                                             12
                                                                            0.3
                                                                                        HSV
                                                                                        AH
                                                                                        HPV
                                                                                        DP
                                                                           0.25




                            Variance of log consumption (age h - age 25)
                                                                            0.2




                                                                           0.15




                                                                            0.1




                                                                           0.05




                                                                              0




                                                                           -0.05
                                                                                25        30   35    40         45   50   55   60
                                                                                                          age




                                                                                     Figure 2: Variances of log consumption


et al. (2010) (HPV) and Aguiar and Hurst (2013) (AH) confirm these findings.12
       Storesletten et al. (2004) showed that the canonical heterogeneous agent model with a
(near-) unit root in earnings and pay-as-you-go social security generates a rise in consump-
tion dispersion consistent with the estimates from Deaton and Paxson (1994). Yet, such a
model cannot match the much lower increase documented by later studies unless the process
for earnings has an idiosyncratic deterministic time trend, or Heterogeneous Income Profile
(Guvenen, 2007; Primiceri and van Rens, 2009). Huggett, Ventura and Yaron (2011) show
that heterogeneity in earnings growth rates can be explained by the endogenous response of
life-cycle, human-capital investment to heterogeneity in initial human capital levels. Intu-
itively, heterogeneity in individual, life-cycle trend growth generates a substantially smaller
rise in consumption dispersion as the individual-specific trend growth is known to consumers,
though not to the econometrician.
  12
    All the estimates reported in Figure 2 control for cohort effects, with the exception of Aguiar and Hurst
(2013) that control for cohort and normalized time effects. Heathcote et al. (2005) and Heathcote et al.
(2010) find a marginally smaller increase when controlling for time effects.




                                                                                                      13
4     The discretized earnings processes

The most common earnings process used in quantitative models of consumption and saving
is a discrete approximation (based on Tauchen, 1986, and its variants) to an AR(1) process
for the logarithm of earnings (e.g. Huggett, 1996). We are going to compare the implications
of such a process with those of two alternative earnings processes estimated by applying our
non-parametric methodology on the PSID and the W2 data. In a nutshell, our methodology
estimates a discrete Markov chain directly from the data and is much more flexible; i.e., it
does not impose symmetry or linearity.


4.1    Benchmark earnings process

The benchmark earnings process is based on Huggett (1996)’s calibration, where the labor
endowment process is an AR(1) with persistence parameter γ = 0.96 and Gaussian shocks
with variance σ2 = 0.045. The initial endowment of the first cohort of agents is also normally
distributed, with variance σy20 = 0.38. Huggett’s choice of value for the variance of shocks σ2
is based on similar estimates in previous literature (e.g. Lillard and Willis (1978) or Carroll,
Hall and Zeldes (1992)). The variance of the initial condition σy21 is chosen to match the
earnings Gini for young agents (Lillard (1977), Shorrocks (1980)). Given both variances, γ
is calibrated to match an overall earnings Gini for US males of 0.42.
    We then follow the discretization strategy applied by Huggett (1996), which is based
on Tauchen (1986): The state space for log earnings is divided in 18 equidistant points,
that range between −4σy1 and 4σy1 . To better approximate the upper tail of the earnings
distribution, a further point is included ad hoc, situated at 6σy1 . The small number of
individuals that are situated in this upper point earn about 40 times median earnings. The
rest of the grid ranges between 8% of median earnings and 11 times median earnings. The
computation of the transition matrix relies on the fact that, conditional on earnings at age
h − 1, earnings at age h are drawn from a normal distribution with mean γyh−1 and standard
                                              14
deviation σ .
       There are two main differences between our benchmark earnings process and the original
one in Huggett (1996). First, Huggett studies agents from age 20 to 65, while we define
working the life as spanning from age 25 to 60 for comparability with our W2 data. Second,
we borrow the life-earnings profile from Hansen (1993), since the exact values used by Huggett
into his model are not readily available.


4.1.1      Non-parametrically estimated processes for the PSID and W2 earnings
           data

We estimate two non-parametric earnings processes, one from the PSID data and one from
the Social Security W2 panel that we generate from the empirical processes estimated by
Guvenen et al. (2015). Appendix A discusses the PSID data and our W2 data. The main
difference with respect to the discretization method in the previous section is that the al-
ternative discretization we propose is very flexible and therefore capable of matching the
asymmetries and non-linearities in the PSID and W2 data.
       We first purge the original earnings data from time and age effects and then discretize
                                                    i
the residual stochastic component of earnings. Let yht denote the logarithm of labor earnings
                                                                    i
for an individual i at time h and age t. We assume the process for yht takes the following
form

                                      i                     i
(1)                                  yht = dh + f (θ, t) + ηht ,

                                                                                    i
where dh is a dummy for year h and f (θ, t) is a quartic function of age. The term ηht captures
the stochastic component of earnings.13
                                                                                i
       We assume that the distribution of the stochastic component of earnings ηht is i.i.d.
across individuals but do not impose any additional restriction other than assuming that
  13
    We do not need to include yearly dummies when using W2 data because they are already extracted in
the original estimation procedure.

                                                 15
                         i
conditionally on age t, ηht follows a Markov chain of order one, with age-dependent state
space Z t = {z̄1 , . . . , z̄N }, t = 1, . . . , T and an age dependent transition matrix Πt , which has
size (N × N ). That is, we assume that the dimension N of the state space is constant across
ages but we allow its possible realizations and its transition matrix to be age-dependent.
   We determine the points of the state-space and the transition matrices at each age in the
following way.

   1. We recover the stochastic component of earnings as the residual of running the regres-
      sion associated with equation (1).

   2. Fix the number of bins, N, at each age. At each age, we order the realized log earnings
      residuals by their size and we group them into bins, each of which contains 1/N of the
      number of observations at that age.

      Because the PSID and the our W2 data greatly differ in their sample size, we choose
      N in the two data sets as follows.

         • Due to the limited sample size of the PSID data, we have to strike a balance
            between a rich approximation of the actual earnings dynamics by earnings level
            (that is, a large number of bins) and keeping the sample size in each bin sufficiently
            large. We have thus evaluated many possibilities. In our main specification we
            report the results for bins representing deciles, with the exception of the top and
            bottom deciles, that we split in 5. Therefore, bins 1 to 5 and 14 to 18 include 2%
            of the agents at any given age, while bins n = 6, . . . , 13 include 10 % of the agents
            at any given age. This implies a total of 18 bins.

         • Our W2 dataset is simulated to contain 18 million observations (500,000 individ-
            uals over 36 years), which implies that we are not constrained by issues of insuf-
            ficient sample size. For this data set, we thus report results for a discretization
            with 103 gridpoints, which aims at accurately capturing the earnings dynamics
                                                  16
           of the earnings-rich. The bottom 99 gridpoints correspond to the bottom 99 per-
           centiles of the earnings distribution, while the top 1% is divided into 4 bins. More
           specifically, we separate in a special bin the top 0.01%, we create another bin for
           the rest of the top 0.05% and we divide the remaining people of the top percentile
           in two bins.

  3. The points of the state space at each age t are chosen so that point ztn is the mean
      in bin n at age t. We have considered specifications in which the summary statistic of
      each bin is the median instead of the mean, with no impact on the results.

  4. The initial distribution at model age 0, is the empirical distribution at the first age we
      consider.

                   t
  5. The elements πmn of the transition matrix Πt between age t and t+1 are the proportion
      of individuals in bin m at age t that are in bin n at age t + 1. The use of transition
      matrices is well established in the study of income mobility (e.g. Jäntti and Jenkins
      (2015)). The main difference is that while studies of income mobility are usually
      concerned about intra- or inter-generational mobility across relative rankings in the
      earnings distribution, we are interested in capturing mobility across earnings levels.

   For this procedure to provide consistent estimates of the population earnings distribution
over the life cycle, we need a large enough number of individuals in the sample for every age
group. This is not a problem for our W2 data, that we simulate, but is an issue for PSID
data. To solve this problem, we assume that age t actually includes people aged t − 1, t
and t + 1. Specifically, we create, for every age t in the sample, a fictitious t-year-old cohort
which is formed of all individuals in the sample who are t − 1, t and t + 1 years old. We
then apply the method described above to this fictitious cohort to derive the state space for
agents of age t. Since we repeat this for every age, most observations in the original data
base are used three times.
                                               17
    To keep comparability between the AR(1) earnings process and our estimated processes,
we use the same age-efficiency profile in all cases. Hence, we discard the age-efficiency profile
that we extract from the PSID and W2 data and we use those data sets to estimate earnings
mobility. Furthermore, average earnings in each of the three economies are normalized to 1
so that the total amount of resources that are exogenously entering the economies are the
same.
    Appendix B extensively discusses how well our non-parametric estimation method matches
the observed moments both in the PSID and the W2 data, including for the same number
of earnings bin. The main conclusion from that comparison is that our method does a very
good job of matching the vast majority of moments in the data, and especially so for the
earnings process with 103 bins.



5       What are the implications of our earnings processes?

5.1     Moments across the life-cycle

Figure 3 shows the average earnings profile that we assume for all three processes, calibrated
using the age-efficiency profile in Hansen (1993). The earnings process is calibrated so that
average earnings across all agents (including retired individuals) are normalized to 1.
    Table 2 reports the cross-sectional Gini coefficient of earnings for the overall working
population, and the Gini coefficients for the first and last age group of the simulated processes
(25 and 60 years old).




                                               18
                                              1.5




                                              1.4




                                              1.3




                        normalized earnings
                                              1.2




                                              1.1




                                               1




                                              0.9
                                                 25     30     35    40               45   50   55    60
                                                                          age group




                                                      Figure 3: Average earnings by age

                Process                                       Overall Gini Gini at 25                Gini at 60
                Benchmark AR(1)                                 0.4160      0.3371                    0.4398
                PSID Process                                    0.3307      0.2637                    0.3870
                W2 Process                                      0.4120      0.3456                    0.4980


                                                      Table 2: Earnings process statistics


   The table shows that, compared to the benchmark AR(1) economy, whose earnings pro-
cess is chosen to match the level and the rise of the Gini coefficient by age, our earnings
process estimated on the PSID generates a significantly lower Gini coefficient both in the
whole cross-section of working ages and at younger and older ages. This is likely due to the
features of the PSID data we discussed earlier (lack of over-sampling of high earners, lower
response rate of high earners, etc.). The W2 process, instead, is much more successful in
terms of replicating the actual level of overall inequality and generates earnings inequality
around the age of retirement that is higher than that generated by the other two processes.
   Figure 4 reports the earnings Gini by age computed in our W2 and the 1989 Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF). The SCF oversamples and re-weights the rich and thus provides
a more accurate representation of inequality (Bricker, Krimmel, Henriques and Sabelhaus
(2016)) than many survey data sets. The graph shows that the earnings Gini by age generated
                                            19
by our W2 data set is consistent with the one in the SCF data set.
                                        0.9
                                                 1989 data
                                                 W2 process



                                        0.8




                                        0.7




                        earnings gini
                                        0.6




                                        0.5




                                        0.4




                                        0.3
                                           25   30            35   40   45       50   55   60   65   70
                                                                         age group




                    Figure 4: Earnings Gini by age, W2 data and SCF data


   Figure 5 reports the variances of log earnings by age for the 25-60 years old workers. This
figure confirms the findings implied by the Gini coefficients. The PSID process generates
less inequality than the benchmark, but displays, consistently with the data, a significant
variance increase across the life-cycle. It should be noted, in fact, that in the benchmark
AR(1), the variance of shocks during the lifetime is constant and that the realized increase in
the variance of the earnings process over the life cycle is driven by the fact that the variance
of initial conditions is assumed to be smaller than the variance of the process itself. The W2
process generates a higher amount of inequality at every age and a very significant variance
growth towards later ages (which is consistent with the one in our W2 data, see Appendix B).
This explains the large Gini coefficient of earnings at age 60 that we observed earlier.




                                                                         20
                                                                    1.1
                                                                                  AR(1)
                                                                                  PSID NL
                                                                                  W2 NL
                                                                     1



                                                                    0.9



                                                                    0.8




                                                         variance
                                                                    0.7



                                                                    0.6



                                                                    0.5



                                                                    0.4



                                                                    0.3
                                                                       25              30         35            40                                                 45       50        55               60
                                                                                                                           age




                                                                          Figure 5: Variance of log earnings by age

5.2    Earnings persistence and mobility

Despite showing a level of overall earnings inequality similar to the benchmark AR(1), the
W2 earnings process displays lower persistence and higher levels of mobility, particularly at
earlier ages. The PSID, which is less unequal and known to be affected by measurement
error (Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004), generates even less persistent earnings.
                                             1                                                                                                           1.1
                                                                                                            W2 NL
                                                                                                            PSID NL
                                                                                                            AR(1)                                         1
                                           0.95
             autocorrelation coefficient




                                                                                                                           autocorrelation coefficient




                                                                                                                                                         0.9
                                            0.9

                                                                                                                                                         0.8

                                           0.85

                                                                                                                                                         0.7

                                            0.8
                                                                                                                                                         0.6


                                           0.75
                                                                                                                                                         0.5                                                        W2 NL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSID NL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR(1)
                                            0.7                                                                                                          0.4
                                               25   30    35                40          45   50        55             60                                       1        2   3    4     5        6           7   8   9         10
                                                                                 age                                                                                                 earnings decile




Figure 6: Autocorrelation coefficient by age (left panel) and previous earnings decile (right panel)



   The left panel in Figure 6 plots the autocorrelation coefficient of earnings by age. In
the AR(1) this coefficient is constant across the life-cycle by construction, while our flexible
earnings processes capture significant changes in persistence as individuals get older. Namely,
both PSID and W2 point to a lower level of persistence when individuals are young. In
                                        21
addition, earnings become less persistent at later ages in the W2 process.
       Our processes also allow persistence to depend on the level of previous earnings. In both
the PSID and W2 processes, persistence is significantly lower for earnings in the lowest decile
(right panel in Figure 6) and largest for earners between the median and the 90th percentile.
The interaction between age and previous earnings decile is reported in Figure 7.14
                                Persistence by age and previous earnings                                                     Persistence by age and previous earnings




                1                                                                                       1



               0.8                                                                                     0.8



               0.6                                                                                     0.6



               0.4                                                                                     0.4
               10                                                                                      10
                     8                                                                            60          8                                                                          60
                                                                                             55                                                                                     55
                            6                                                       50                                   6                                                     50
                                   4                                       45                                                     4                                       45
                                                                  40                                                                                                 40
                                          2                35                                                                              2                  35
                                                     30                                                                                                  30
                                                                age                                                                                                age

                     previous earnings decile                                                                 previous earnings decile
                                                                           Persistence by age and previous earnings




                                                      1



                                                    0.8



                                                    0.6



                                                    0.4
                                                    10
                                                            8                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                               55
                                                                       6                                                              50
                                                                                4                                            45
                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                         2                   35
                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                  age

                                                            previous earnings decile




Figure 7: Autoregressive coefficient by previous earnings decile and age (top left: W2; top right:
PSID; bottom: AR(1))



       The lower persistence displayed by the PSID is consistent with previous studies that
point to the existence of both a transitory component and noticeable measurement error in
PSID data (for example, Bound, Brown, Duncan and Rodgers (1994) find that measurement
error explains 22 percent of the variance of the rate of growth of earnings). Figure 8 shows
  14
    Given that in our process there is no within-bin variation of earnings, persistence parameters condi-
tional on earnings are very imprecisely estimated and parameters conditional on age and earnings cannot be
computed.
   We overcome this by fitting a polynomial yt ' f (yt−1 , t) and approximating the persistence parameter
ρ = ∂y∂yt−1
         t
            with its derivative f 0 (yt−1 , t) evaluated at average earnings for each decile. We use a 6-degree
Hermitian polynomial when conditioning only on yt−1 , and tensor products of a (3,2)-degree Hermitian
polynomial on earnings and age when conditioning on both.
                                                                                                  22
                                           0.95
                                                                                   W2 NL
                                                                                   PSID NL                                             1
                                                                                   W2 NL, SE=0.25



                                            0.9
                                                                                                                                      0.9




             autocorrelation coefficient




                                                                                                         autoregressive coefficient
                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                           0.85


                                                                                                                                      0.7


                                            0.8
                                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                      W2 NL
                                                                                                                                                                                      PSID NL
                                                                                                                                                                                      W2 NL, SE=0.25


                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                           0.75



                                                                                                                                      0.4

                                            0.7
                                               25   30   35   40         45   50   55               60                                      1   2   3   4    5          6     7   8       9            10
                                                                   age                                                                                      Earnings decile




Figure 8: Autoregressive coefficient by age (left panel) and by previous earnings decile (right panel),
including large ME process



that the implied persistence by age of the PSID process can be reconciled with a W2 process
with a transitory shock/measurement error i.i.d. component of standard deviation equal to
0.25 (8 times larger than the one in our standard data set), which is the estimate reported
by Storesletten et al. (2004). Section 8 relaxes the assumption that earnings follow a first-
order Markov process and shows that allowing for a second-order Markov structure does not
significantly alter our findings.


5.3     Skewness

An important feature of earnings risk in the data is that it is not symmetrically distributed.
As we have seen earlier, earnings shocks display substantial negative skewness, implying that
large earnings drops are more likely than large earnings increases. Instead, a standard AR(1)
with Gaussian innovations has constant, zero, skewness over the life cycle. This is reflected
in Figure 9, which plots the conditional distributions of earnings faced by a person with
average earnings at age 25 as this person ages. For instance, the top left panel shows the
future distributions of earnings that a 25-year-old individual will face throughout his lifetime,
conditional on being born with average earnings. At any given age, by construction, there is
a 90% probability that this individual will have earnings between both prediction bands, and
therefore also a 5% probability of earning more than the upper bound and a 5% probability
                                                                                                    23
of earning less than the lower bound. As the figure illustrates, the probability of getting a
very low earnings realization is larger in the W2 economy, while the probability of drawing
a very high earnings realization is similar in both economies.
   Skewness is significantly higher, in absolute value, before age 50.


                                                                          Age 25                                                                                 Age 30
                                           500                                                                                         500
                   % of initial earnings




                                                                                                               % of initial earnings
                                           220                                                                                         220

                                           100                                                                                         100

                                           50                                                                                          50

                                           20                                                                                          20

                                                     30        35        40     45        50    55   60                                     30   35        40        45         50        55   60
                                                                              age                                                                                    age

                                                                          Age 35                                                                                 Age 40
                                           500                                                                                         500
                   % of initial earnings




                                                                                                               % of initial earnings
                                           220                                                                                         220

                                           100                                                                                         100

                                           50                                                                                          50

                                           20                                                                                          20

                                                35        40             45         50         55    60                                     40        45             50              55        60
                                                                              age                                                                                    age


                                                                          Age 45                                                                                 Age 50
                                           500                                                                                         500
                   % of initial earnings




                                                                                                               % of initial earnings




                                           220                                                                                         220

                                           100                                                                                         100

                                           50                                                                                          50

                                           20                                                                                          20

                                                45                  50                   55          60                                     50    52            54         56         58       60
                                                                              age                                                                                    age


                                                                          Age 55
                                           500
                   % of initial earnings




                                           220
                                                                                                                                                           AR(1) 90% confidence

                                           100                                                                                                             W2 90% confidence

                                                                                                                                                           Median
                                           50

                                           20

                                                55        56             57         58         59    60




Figure 9: Distributions of future earnings, conditional on average earnings at a certain age (log
scale for vertical axis)




                                                                                                          24
6        The model

The model is based on Huggett (1996)’s paper. There is an infinitely lived government and
overlapping generations of individuals who are equal at birth but receive idiosyncratic shocks
to labor income throughout their working lives. The model period is one year.


6.1       Demographics

Each year, a positive measure of agents is born. Agents start working life at age 25 with no
assets and a random productivity draw. At 30, each agent has (1 + n) children. Working life
ends at 60 when agents retire.
       Agents face a positive probability of dying throughout their lifetimes. This probability
grows with age and is 1 at age 85; i.e., agents die for sure before turning 86 years old.
       We restrict attention to stationary equilibria, hence variables are only indexed by age t.


6.2       Preferences and technology

Preferences are time separable, with a constant discount factor. The intra-period utility is
CRRA: u(ct ) = c1−σ
                t   /(1 − σ).
       Agents are endowed with one indivisible unit of labor which they supply inelastically at
zero disutility. The efficiency of their labor supply is subject to random shocks and follows a
Markov chain of order 1 with (possibly) age-dependent state spaces and transition matrices.
       We consider an open economy where prices (the risk free rate of return r and the wage
per efficiency unit of labor w) are fixed.15
  15
    We also computed the results for the general equilibrium closed economy, with a standard Cobb-Douglas
production function, where the discount rate is calibrated to match a capital-income ratio of 3 in each
economy. The general equilibrium effects are minor. For this reason, we report only partial equilibrium
results.




                                                   25
6.3    Markets and the government

Asset markets are incomplete. Agents can only invest in the risk-free asset and cannot
borrow. Since, there are no annuity markets to insure against the risk of premature death,
there is a positive flow of accidental bequests in each period. These are distributed in equal
amount b among all agents alive in the economy.
   The government taxes labor earnings and capital income to finance an exogenous stream
of public expenditure and a pension system. Income from capital and labor income are taxed
at flat rates τk and τl respectively. Retired agents receive a lump-sum pension p from the
government until they die.


6.4    The household’s problem

For any given period, a t-year old agent chooses consumption c and risk-free asset holdings
for the next period a0 , as a function of the state variables x = (t, a, y). The term t indicates
the agent’s age, a indicates current asset holdings of the agent, and y stands for the earnings
process realization. For given prices, the optimal decision rules are functions (c(x) and a0 (x))
that solve the dynamic programming problem described below.


  (i) From age t = 1 to age t = 36 (from 25 to 60 years of age), the agent is working and
      has a probability of dying before the next period 1 − st . The problem he solves is:
                                                                       
                                                                0   0
      (2)           V (t, a, y) = max
                                    0
                                      u(c) + βst Et V (t + 1, a , y )
                                  c,a
                                                
                       s.t. a0 = 1 + r (1 − τk ) a − c + (1 − τl )wy + b, a0 ≥ 0.

      The evolution of y 0 follows the stochastic process described above. At every age t, y
      can lie in an age-specific grid yt and its evolution towards yt+1 is determined by an
      age-specific transition matrix Qyt .

 (ii) From tr to T (from 61 to 86) agents no longer work and live off pensions and interest.
                                                26
      Their value function satisfies:
                                                                 
      (3)                 W (t, a) = max
                                       0
                                         u(c) + st βW (t + 1, a0 )
                                        c,a
                                                      
                           s.t. a = 1 + r (1 − τa ) a − c + p + b, a0 ≥ 0.
                                 0




      The terminal period value function W (T + 1, a) is set to equal 0 (agents do not derive
      utility from bequeathing).


   The definition of equilibrium is standard.


6.5    The model calibration

A model period is one year. The coefficient of relative risk aversion is set to 1.5. The discount
factor β is calibrated as the average of the discount factors that match a capital to income
ratio of 3 in each of the three economies.
   The fixed interest rate is 6% and the wage per efficiency unit of labor is normalized to 1.
   The population growth rate n is set to 1.2% per year. The survival probabilities st are
from Bell, Wade and Goss (1992). Government spending is 19% of GDP (g) (as in the the
Council of Economic Advisors (1998) data), while capital tax rate τk is taken from Kotlikoff,
Smetters and Walliser (1999), (see Table 3). The labor tax rate adjusts to balance the
government budget constraint.



                                      σ         n    g   τk
                                     1.5      0.012 0.19 0.2


                                Table 3: Calibration parameters


   The social security pension benefit p equals 40% of the average earnings of a person in
the economy (as in De Nardi (2004)).

                                                  27
                                                                             Average consumption
                                                           1.2


                                                           1.1




                        Values, mean income normalized=1
                                                            1


                                                           0.9


                                                           0.8


                                                           0.7


                                                           0.6                                     Binned PSID process
                                                                                                   Benchmark
                                                                                                   Binned W2 process
                                                           0.5
                                                              20   30   40       50         60      70          80       90
                                                                                      Age




                                                             Figure 10: Average consumption profiles


7       The results from the model

7.1     Consumption

7.1.1    The consumption implications

The model generates a hump shaped pattern of average consumption over the lifetime
(Figure 10), as in the data for the US (Carroll and Summers, 1991) and the UK (Attanasio
and Weber, 2010). Given that we have imposed a common average income profile for the three
earnings processes, any differences in the average consumption profiles stem from differences
in precautionary saving due to differences in the riskiness of the respective processes. The
average consumption profile has a higher initial level, grows at a slower rate and peaks at
a lower level for the benchmark AR(1) process, reflecting the lower riskiness of the process
and therefore lower precautionary saving. Precautionary saving in middle life (between age
45 and 60) is also more important for the W2 process, likely reflecting the much higher level
and rate of growth of earnings uncertainty it implies over those ages (see Figure 5).
    Figure 11 plots the evolution the variance of log consumption over the working
life implied by our three earnings processes and structural model, compared with the more


                                                                                  28
                                                                               0.3
                                                                                        NL W2
                                                                                        HSV
                                                                                        AH
                                                                                        HPV
                                                                              0.25      AR(1)
                                                                                        NL PSID




                         variance of log consumption (var in t - var at 25)
                                                                               0.2




                                                                              0.15




                                                                               0.1




                                                                              0.05




                                                                                 0




                                                                              -0.05
                                                                                   25      30     35   40         45   50   55   60
                                                                                                            age




                                                                                     Figure 11: Variances of log consumption


recent estimates from the literature reported in Figure 2. The rate of increase of consumption
inequality over the working life is informative about agents’ ability to insure against earnings
risk. For this reason, it provides a useful benchmark against which to assess the ability of
the model to capture the degree of insurability of earnings shocks in the data.
   The benchmark AR(1) earnings process fails to generate a realistic age profile of con-
sumption dispersion. Its growth rate is roughly double that implied by most of the estimates
in the literature. At the other extreme, the PSID process fails to generate a sufficient increase
in dispersion over the life-cycle. The W2 process, on the other hand, accurately replicates
the increase in consumption dispersion over the life cycle. In particular, it matches very
closely the overall increase in the data reported by Aguiar and Hurst (2013) (AH) and is
very similar to that from the other sources.
   The finding that estimated richer earnings processes imply a profile of consumption dis-
persion in line with the data is quite remarkable. As we have discussed in Section 3, standard
models with linear earnings processes generate a profile similar to the one for the benchmark
AR(1) in Figure 11 in the absence of heterogeneity in life cycle earnings profiles. Our findings
reveal that the age profile of the variance of consumption can alternatively be accounted for
by the response of saving to a richer earnings dynamics.
                                                                                                        29
                                          Percentage held by   the top
                          Gini        1% 5% 20% 40%            60% 80%
                   U.S. Data (Non-durable consumption)
                           .31         5    15   40     62       79       92
                   Benchmark AR(1)
                           .35         5    17   43     65       81       93
                   W2 Process
                           .33         4    15   41     64       80       92
                   PSID Process
                           .25         4    13   35     57       75       90


                       Table 4: Consumption distribution, data vs model


   Finally, Table 4 reports the cross-sectional consumption distribution both in the data
and generated by the model for different earnings processes. The distribution generated by
the W2 process is remarkably close to that in the data. On the other hand, the distribu-
tions generated by the benchmark AR(1) and the PSID process respectively overstate and
understate the extent of overall inequality in the data.


7.1.2     Accounting for consumption inequality

Our rich earnings process deviates from the standard linear process for earnings, such as
the benchmark AR(1), commonly used in the heterogeneous-agents literature in a number
of ways. In particular, it has:

  1. Lower persistence—ρ = 0.87 versus 0.96 for the benchmark AR(1)—if one were to
        estimate an AR(1) process on the W2 data;

  2. Age-dependent persistence;

  3. Age-dependent variance of innovations;

  4. Non-normal innovations (negative skewness and high kurtosis);

  5. Earnings-dependent conditional moments.
                                        30
      In order to understand the contribution of each of these factors to the substantially lower
growth in consumption variance over the life cycle we conduct a series of counterfactual ex-
periments, simulating the model under progressively richer stochastic processes for earnings.
      More specifically, we implement our series of experiments in the following way. First, we
estimate a parametric AR(1) process

                                                            i.i.d.
(4)                             ηi,t = ρt ηi,t−1 + i,t , i,t ∼ (0, σt )

for residual earnings on our W2 data, incrementally introducing properties 1 to 4 above.
Namely, we start by assuming that ρt and σt are constant with i,t normally distributed and
progressively relax each of these assumptions. Second, we use each of these estimated AR(1)
processes to simulate a large panel of individual earnings histories. This panel constitutes
our counterfactual dataset for the experiment in question. Third, we apply our method and
estimate a first-order, age-dependent Markov chain on the panel thus generated to obtain
a discretized process that matches the features of the data. Finally, we feed the estimated
Markov chain to the model. In all cases, we recalibrate the discount factor to maintain the
wealth-income ratio at its target value of 3. Figure 12 plots the consumption variance profile
for the various experiments.
      Note, that features 1 to 4 can be introduced while maintaining the AR(1) structure
as they do not imply any non-linearity in previous earnings (properties 2 and 3 introduce
non-linearities only in age/time). Conversely, property 5 cannot be accounted for within an
AR(1) framework. So, the contribution of property 5 obtains as the residual of our findings
for our W2 process and a generalized AR(1) process encompassing properties 1 to 4.
      For our first experiment we estimate a standard AR(1) process with normal initial con-
dition and innovations on our W2 dataset and constant ρt and σt in equation (4). The only
difference compared to our benchmark AR(1) is thus due to different estimated parameter
values; namely, the parameter estimates are σy20 = 0.48, γ = 0.87 and σ2 = 0.19 against


                                                   31
                                                                                0.4
                                                                                       Markov 1 (103)
                                                                                       AR(1) 87
                                                                                       AH
                                                                               0.35    AR(1) Huggett
                                                                                       AR(1) age r ho
                                                                                       AR(1) rhosigma
                                                                                       AR(1) costsk




                          variance of log consumption (var in t - var at 25)
                                                                                0.3



                                                                               0.25



                                                                                0.2



                                                                               0.15



                                                                                0.1



                                                                               0.05



                                                                                 0
                                                                                  25       30           35   40          45   50   55   60
                                                                                                                   age




Figure 12: Age profile of consumption inequality for different specifications of the earnings process
– W2.

σy20 = 0.38, γ = 0.96 and σ2 = 0.045 for the benchmark AR(1). The black solid line in Figure
12 plots the consumption variance profile for this experiment. Comparing it to the profile
for the benchmark AR(1) (black solid line with circles) and for our flexible case (dashed line)
shows that the different evolution of the consumption variance cannot be accounted for by
the differences in the values of persistence we use for the same parametric functional form.
In fact, the parameter values estimated on our W2 dataset imply an even higher growth in
the consumption variance until age 45 relative to the benchmark AR(1).
   In our second experiment, we estimate an AR(1) process with age-dependent ρt but age-
independent variance. Figure 6 plots the age-dependent ρt . The red line in Figure 12 displays
the consumption variance profile for this case. While the below-average persistence early in
life flattens the profile until about age 30, the above-average persistence between age 30 and
50 implies a dramatically higher rate of growth in that age bracket.
   The third experiment allows also the variance of innovations σt in equation (4) to be age-
dependent while maintaining normality. The green line in Figure 12 plots the consumption
variance profile for this case. Relative to the previous experiment, allowing for heteroskedas-
ticity dramatically reduces the rate of growth of the consumption variance. Intuitively, the
standard permanent income mechanism implies that the variance of consumption is an in-

                                                                                                                  32
                                                    1
                                                                                         Autoregressive parameter
                                                                                         Variance of innovation
                                                   0.9


                                                   0.8


                                                   0.7




                            Variance,persistence
                                                   0.6


                                                   0.5


                                                   0.4


                                                   0.3


                                                   0.2


                                                   0.1


                                                    0
                                                     25   30   35   40         45   50              55
                                                                         age




                Figure 13: Age-dependent values of ρ (solid line) and σε2 (dashed line).


creasing function of earnings persistence—which affects the response of consumption to an
earnings innovation—and the variance of earnings innovations itself. In the data, earnings
persistence and the variance of earnings innovations are negatively correlated over the life
cycle, as illustrated by Figure 13 that plots the estimated autoregressive coefficient and the
innovation variances at the different ages. Comparing the red and green lines in Figure 12
reveals that, until age 57, the effect of the U-shaped pattern of the innovation variance over
the life cycle more than offsets the effect of the hump-shaped pattern of earnings persistence.
As a result, the rate of growth of consumption dispersion between age 25 and its peak at age
55 falls by about 3 log points relative to the benchmark AR(1) case.
      Finally, our fourth experiment relaxes the assumption that the innovations i,t in equation
(4) are normally distributed. It does so by assuming that i,t is a mixture of two independent
normal shocks. After normalizing the mixture probability, the means and variances of the
two normal distributions are exactly identified by the first four centered moments of i,t , as
shown in Civale et al. (2016). Under the assumption that skewness and kurtosis are age-
invariant, our estimates are respectively -1.13 and 11.3116 . The blue line in Figure 12 plots
the associated consumption variance profile. The fact that shocks have negative skewness and
 16
      The corresponding numbers for the PSID data are very close: -1.12 and 13.18.


                                                                     33
high kurtosis induces individuals to increase their precautionary saving and further reduces
the rate of growth of the consumption variance. Relative to the benchmark AR(1) the overall
rate of growth between age 25 and 55 falls by about 8 percentage points. This accounts for
half of the difference between our flexible process and the benchmark AR(1). Allowing for
age-varying skewness and kurtosis does not change this pattern in a meaningful way. For
this reason we do not report results for that case.17
       The remaining difference in the rate of growth between age 25 and 55 is due to the
fact that our flexible process allows conditional moments to vary with the previous earnings
realization, as documented in Figure 1.
       We check the robustness of our results by conducting the same accounting exercise in
the PSID data. Figure 14—the counterpart of Figure 12 for the W2 process—plots the age
profile of consumption dispersion for the various cases. Comparing the two figures reveals
that the qualitative implications of each of the extra features of the earnings process are the
same in the W2 and the PSID data. The main quantitative difference is that a larger fraction
of the difference in the growth rate of consumption dispersion between the benchmark AR(1)
and the PSID is due to the difference in estimated persistence in earnings. This is because
estimating a standard AR(1) process on the PSID data returns an estimate for ρ of 0.8,
compared to 0.87 for the W2 data. This much lower persistence in the PSID data is due to
the fact that transitory shocks/measurement error are much larger in the PSID than in the
W2 data. The difference in earnings persistence implies a much lower (and counterfactual)
rate of growth of consumption dispersion of 5 log points (black solid line in Figure 14).18
Nonetheless, the qualitative similarity with the W2 data is reassuring about our findings.




  17
    The results are available upon request.
  18
    These findings are consistent with those in Storesletten et al. (2004) (see their Figure 5), who show that
changes in persistence in the range of 0.87 to 0.96 have little effect on the rate of growth of consumption
dispersion over the life cycle, while reductions in persistence below those values have a larger effect.
                                                     34
                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                          NL PSID
                                                                                          AR(1) 0.8
                                                                                          Huggett AR(1)
                                                                                          AR(1) rhovar
                                                                                0.25      AR(1) rhosigma
                                                                                          AR(1) costsk




                           variance of log consumption (var in t - var at 25)
                                                                                 0.2




                                                                                0.15




                                                                                 0.1




                                                                                0.05




                                                                                   0




                                                                                -0.05
                                                                                     25       30           35   40         45   50   55   60
                                                                                                                     age




Figure 14: Age profile of consumption inequality for different specifications of the earnings process
– PSID.

7.2       Wealth

7.2.1      The wealth implications

We now compare the key statistics of the wealth distributions generated by our benchmark
AR(1) earnings process with those of our non-parametrically estimated earnings processes19 .
       The benchmark AR(1) calibration suffers from the limitations that have already been
analyzed in the literature. Although it matches the wealth Gini coefficient we observe in the
data, it does so by generating too many people with zero assets (the left tail is too fat) and
not enough concentration at the top (the right tail is too thin). For instance, the number
of people with zero assets20 is 14%, while the richest 1% only hold 12% of total wealth,
compared with 28% in the data.
       Both the PSID process and the W2 better match the left tail of the distribution. They
generate a substantially smaller fraction of agents with zero assets (3% and 5% respectively)
and better fit the holdings of the poorest 60% of people: in the distribution generated by the
W2 process, the poorest 60% hold 12% of total net worth, which is very close to the actual
  19
     Source for US data: De Nardi (2004), except for bequest-output ratio, which is taken from Villanueva
(2005)
  20
     Given that all newborns in the model start life with zero wealth by assumption, we do not include them
in any of the model computations of the fraction of agents with zero wealth.

                                                                                                                 35
   Capital- Bequests-           Percentage wealth in the top    Percentage with
   output     output  Wealth                                      negative or
    ratio      ratio   Gini  1% 5% 20% 40% 60% 80%                zero wealth
   U.S. data
     3.0       2.6%    .72   28 49      75    89     96     99          6
   Benchmark AR(1)
     2.9       2.8%    .72   12 35      74    93     99    100         14
   W2 Process
     3.1       2.7%    .65   10 30      67    88     96 99.58           5
   PSID Process
     2.9       2.6%    .62    9   28    63    85     96    99.4         3


                             Table 5: Wealth distribution statistics

data. In the distribution derived from the PSID process they hold 15%, compared to only
7% implied by the benchmark AR(1) earnings process.
   However, our computations show that even our more flexible earnings processes do not
improve the fit of the right tail of the distribution. Although Castañeda et al. (2003) have
shown that a highly skewed earnings process can generate a long right tail for the wealth
distribution, it turns out that even the W2 process, which as shown earlier has a higher
degree of earnings inequality and negative skewness than our PSID process, generates too
little wealth concentration among top earners.
   Summarizing, our empirical method, applied to W2 data, performs approximately as
well as the benchmark AR(1) in the right tail, outperforming it in the left tail. This is
remarkable given that neither of our empirical processes have been calibrated to match any
particular moments of the wealth distribution. The inclusion of inter-generational links and
bequest transmission, as in De Nardi (2004), is likely to take these results closer to the actual
data, particularly by improving the fit of the right tail of the distribution. It should also be
considered that we are not taking inter-vivos transfers into account, which may represent an
additional source of wealth, particularly at earlier ages.
   The absence of these important mechanisms in our model can also explain why the W2

                                               36
                                      0.85
                                                                                 Benchmark
                                                                                 Binned PSID
                                                                                 Binned W2
                                       0.8                                       Data (Kuhn-RR)




                                      0.75



                                       0.7




                        wealth Gini
                                      0.65



                                       0.6



                                      0.55



                                       0.5



                                      0.45
                                          20   30    40    50          60   70   80               90
                                                                 age

                       Source for the data (1989): Kuhn and Rı́os-Rull (2015)


                                               Figure 15: Wealth Gini by age


process underestimates the actual level of inequality at each age (Figure 15). In this case, it
is the AR(1) benchmark which delivers the largest wealth Gini at every age, but, as argued
earlier, this is generated by pushing too many agents towards zero. Besides, it implies a
conterfactually large drop in wealth Gini from ages 20 to 60.


7.2.2   Accounting for the wealth distribution

As for consumption, one wants to understand the contribution of the various novel features of
the earnings process to the differences in the wealth distributions relative to the benchmark
AR(1) process. For this reason, we conduct the same set of experiments as in Section 7.1.2.
Table 6 reports wealth distribution statistics for each of these counterfactual simulations
using the W2 data. For ease of comparison, the first three rows in the table are the same as
in Table 5.
   The better fit of the the bottom 60% of the wealth distribution by the W2 is due to
the following factors. Three percentage points of the fall in wealth holdings by the top 40%
(from 93 to 90 percent) are due to the lower average persistence; i.e., ρ = 0.87 instead
of ρ = 0.96 for the benchmark AR(1). Introducing both age-dependent persistence and

                                                                37
  Capital- Bequests-                Percentage wealth in the      top       Percentage with
  output     output    Wealth                                                 negative or
   ratio      ratio     Gini     1% 5% 20% 40% 60%                  80%       zero wealth
  U.S. data
    3.0       2.6%       .72     28 49      75    89     96          99            6
  Benchmark AR(1), ρ = 0.96
    2.9       2.8%       .72     12 35      74    93     99          100          14
  W2 Process
    3.1       2.7%       .65     10 30      67    88     96         99.58          5
  AR(1) with ρ=0.87
    3.0       2.5%       .68     10 32      70    90     98         99.99          9
  AR(1) with age-varying ρ and σ
    3.0       2.5%       .68     10 32      70    90     98         99.97         10
  AR(1) with age-varying ρ, σ, skewness and kurtosis
    3.0       2.5%       .68     11 33      70    90     98         99.99         10


                    Table 6: Wealth distribution decompositions, W2 earnings.


heteroskedasticity of the innovations does not change these findings, nor does introducing a
constant level of skewness and kurtosis. The remaining difference is accounted for by the
fact that our flexible process allows moments to vary with the previous earnings realization.
While this feature accounts for only 2 percentage point in the share of wealth held by the
top 40%, it generates a large reduction—from 10 to 5 per cent—in the share of individuals
with zero wealth.
   As for consumption, the implications of non-linearities in earnings are not confined to
the process estimated on the W2 data but carry out to the process estimated on the PSID
data. Table 7—the counterpart of Table 6—reports the key statistics of wealth distributions
under progressively richer earnings processes estimated on the PSID. Comparing the two
tables shows that the implications of non-linearities for the wealth distribution are extremely
similar across the two datasets.




                                               38
  Capital- Bequests-                Percentage wealth in the    top       Percentage with
  output    output     Wealth                                               negative or
   ratio      ratio     Gini     1% 5% 20% 40% 60%                 80%      zero wealth
  U.S. data
    3.0      2.6%        .72     28 49      75    89     96         99           6
  Benchmark AR(1), ρ = 0.96
    2.9      2.8%        .72     12 35      74    93     99        100          14
  PSID Process
    2.9      2.6%        .62      9   28    63    85     96        99.4          3
  AR(1) with ρ=0.8
    3.0      2.6%        .62      7   25    62    86     97       99.75          6
  AR(1) with age-varying ρ and σ
    3.0      2.7%        .62      7   25    62    86     97       99.74          7
  AR(1) with age-varying ρ, σ, skewness and kurtosis
    3.0      2.6%        .61      7   25    62    85     96       99.65          5
                 Table 7: Wealth distribution decompositions, PSID earnings.


7.2.3   Saving functions

In order to disentangle the effects of the mechanics of the earnings processes from their
endogenous effects on savings, we switch the policy functions in our simulated economies.
More specifically, we simulate artificial economies using the AR(1) earnings process and the
saving policy functions that solve the W2 dynamic programming problem (and vice versa).
We still impose that these simulations respect no-borrowing and the budget constraints.
   Table 8 shows that the number of individuals at the borrowing constraint varies very
little as we change the earnings process but not the policy function. On the other hand,
the share of borrowing constrained individuals does change significantly when changing the
savings function for a given earnings process. Individuals engage in more precautionary
saving under the W2 earnings process, which implies that fewer households are close to the
borrowing constraint.
   To provide some insight on the changes in saving behavior at the individual level gen-
erating these results, Figure 16 shows the saving rates of a 30-year-old individual with zero
wealth conditional on his last earnings realization. Under both earnings processes, agents
                                             39
                                AR(1) earnings process                                     W2 earnings process
         AR(1) savings function         15%                                                       12%
          W2 savings function            5%                                                        3%
               Table 8: Proportion of working-age individuals with zero wealth

                                     0.6
                                                                                              AR(1)
                                                                                              W2



                                     0.5




                                     0.4
                       Saving rate




                                     0.3




                                     0.2




                                     0.1




                                      0
                                           5   10        25               50         100    250
                                                    Current earnings ($ thousands)




         Figure 16: Saving rate by previous earnings for a 30-year-old with no wealth.



with zero wealth that receive a low earnings realization do not save as they expect their
earnings will be higher next period. In contrast, agents with larger earnings realizations
save significantly more in the W2 than in the AR(1) economy (an individual with average
earnings, for example, saves 16% of his earnings in the former and 7% in the latter). This
differential behavior is due to the earnings implications that the W2 and AR(1) individuals
face when they receive a positive earnings shock and, in particular, to the large negative
skewness and high kurtosis of the W2 process (see Figure 1 and the discussion in Section
5.3).




                                                              40
8     Second-order Markov process for earnings

8.1    Relative persistence

The main limitation of our approach is that it does not allow for a purely transitory shock,
while MaCurdy (1982) and Abowd and Card (1989) document, using survey data sets, that
the process for earnings is well approximated as a linear combination of a unit-root and a
transitory process. Following this result, several papers in the heterogeneous-agent literature
on consumption inequality (starting with Storesletten et al. (2004)) model earnings as the
sum of a permanent and a transitory component, or use a (near unit-root) AR(1) process
whose persistence comes from an estimated process that allows for a purely transitory shock
(while the transitory component is ignored in the model).
    By construction the forecasting performance of our non-linear, first-order Markov process
is better than that of a linear AR(1) at one-period horizon. Yet, by not allowing for a
purely transitory component, our process may underestimate earnings persistence, raising
the question of how well it forecasts at longer horizons. In this section, we examine this
question and compare the forecasting ability of the unit-root AR(1) process that is commonly
used in the literature with those of our Markov chain of order one and with a Markov chain
of order 2.
    Apart from the longer memory, our method is unchanged when we allow for a Markov
chain of order 2. Namely, denoting by N the number of quantiles partitioning the marginal
earnings distribution at each age, the age-dependent transition probability matrices have
dimension (N 2 × N ). Their elements are constructed as the proportion of individuals moving
from any possible two-period history sequence of quantiles into a quantile next period. For
tractability, we partition the marginal earnings distribution into N=18 quantiles, namely the
top and bottom five 2% percentiles and the 9 intermediate deciles (this is the same partition
we adopted for the PSID). As before, we attribute to each individual in a particular bin the


                                              41
                                                        1


                                                       0.9


                                                       0.8




                  root mean squared prediction error
                                                       0.7


                                                       0.6


                                                       0.5


                                                       0.4


                                                       0.3


                                                       0.2
                                                                                                              Markov 1
                                                                                                              AR(1) 0.96
                                                       0.1                                                    AR(1) 0.88
                                                                                                              Markov 2
                                                                                                              Random walk

                                                        0
                                                             1   2   3   4       5           6        7   8     9           10
                                                                             Prediction years ahead



             Figure 17: Root Mean Squared Forecast Error by process and horizon


average earnings level in that bin.
   Figure 17 shows the root mean forecast errors for log earnings at different horizons for
the various processes we consider; namely, (1) a random walk; (2) an AR(1) estimated on
our W2 dataset with ρ = 0.88; (3) our discretized first-order process with 103 grid points
(Markov 1); (4) a discretized second-order Markov process with 18 grid points (Markov 2).
   The AR(1) with ρ = 0.88 has by far the worse performance. The discretized first-
order process perform better than the AR(1) with ρ = 0.96 and the random walk up to
respectively 3 and 4 periods ahead. Even 5 to 6 years out its performance is never worse
that 10% compared to the best of the other two processes. Finally, the Markov 2 process
outperforms all others processes at all horizons.


8.2    Model simulation

This section reports the implications of the second-order Markov process for consumption
and wealth and compares them to their counterpart for the first-order process.



                                                                                     42
                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                        Markov 1 (103)
                                                                                        Markov 2 (18)
                                                                                        AH
                                                                                        AR(1) 0.96

                                                                                0.25




                           variance of log consumption (var in t - var at 25)
                                                                                 0.2




                                                                                0.15




                                                                                 0.1




                                                                                0.05




                                                                                  0
                                                                                   25       30           35   40         45   50   55   60
                                                                                                                   age




                 Figure 18: Life-cycle growth of the variance of log consumption


8.2.1    The consumption and implications

Figure 18 plots the age profile of log consumption inequality for the M2(18) process against
the profile for the M1(103) and the empirical estimates in Figure 2. The growth rate of
consumption dispersion over the life-cycle is similar for both processes and in line with the
literature.
    Finally, Table 9 compares the implications of the two alternative discretizations for the
wealth distributions. Again, the differences between the first and second-order Markov pro-
cess are negligible.
    Due to these findings on consumption and wealth and to the one that our proposed
discretization method performs well also at longer horizons (on the W2 data set), we conclude
that the differences in the consumption and wealth distributions implied by our estimated
non-linear earnings process relative to the benchmark AR(1) are driven mainly by its non-
linearity and asymmetry and not by a misspecified autocorrelation structure.



9       Conclusions

Our main findings are the following. First, allowing for non-linearity and asymmetry in
earnings reveals that earnings are significantly less persistent at low and high earnings levels

                                                                                                               43
   Capital- Bequests-            Percentage wealth in the top   Percentage with
   output    output     Wealth                                    negative or
    ratio     ratio      Gini  1% 5% 20% 40% 60% 80%              zero wealth
   U.S. data
     3.0      2.6%        .72  28 49     75    89     96     99        6
   W2 Process (Markov 1, 103)
     3.1      2.7%        .65  10 30     67    88     96 99.58         5
   Markov 2 with 18 gridpoints
     2.8      2.6%        .66  10 31     68    88     96 99.65         6


                             Table 9: Wealth distribution statistics

relative to an AR(1) process, like the one used by Huggett (1996), which is rather typical of
the quantitative macro literature with heterogeneous agents. Second, our flexible earnings
process, when introduced in a standard quantitative model of consumption and savings over
the life cycle, generates a much better fit of the growth in consumption dispersion as a
function of age and of the wealth holdings of the bottom 60% of people. On the other hand,
the model still generates too little wealth concentration at the top of the wealth distribution,
just as the the model with AR(1) earnings process. This is a frequent drawback of life-cycle
models with no entrepreneurship or transmission of bequests (De Nardi, 2004), (Cagetti and
De Nardi, 2006), and (Cagetti and De Nardi, 2009).
   Finally, and importantly, our proposed discretization method also performs well at longer
horizons. In addition, our results are robust to allowing for a second order Markov chain
that outperforms, both in the short and the long run, the earnings predictive ability of all
other earnings processes typically used in quantitative macro models.




                                               44
References

Abowd, John and Card, David (1989), ‘On the covariance structure of earnings and hours
  changes’, Econometrica 57(2), 411–45.

Aguiar, Mark and Hurst, Erik (2013), ‘Deconstructing life cycle expenditure’, Journal of
  Political Economy 121(3), 437–492.

Aiyagari, S. R. (1994), ‘Uninsured idiosyncratic risk, and aggregate saving’, Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics 109(3), 659–684.

Altonji, Joseph G., Smith, Anthony A. and Vidangos, Ivan (2013), ‘Modeling earnings dy-
  namics’, Econometrica 81(4), 1395–1454.

Arellano, Manuel, Blundell, Richard and Bonhomme, Stéphane (2015), Earnings and con-
  sumption dynamics: A non-linear panel data framework. unpublished manuscript.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Weber, Guglielmo (2010), ‘Consumption and saving: Models of
  intertemporal allocation and their implications for public policy’, Journal of Economic
  Literature 48, 693–751.

Bell, Felicitie C., Wade, Alice H. and Goss, Stephen C. (1992), ‘Life tables for the United
  States Social Security Area: 1900-2080’, (Social Security Administration, Office of the
  Actuary).

Blundell, Richard (2014), ‘Income Dynamics and Life-cycle Inequality: Mechanisms and
  Controversies’, The Economic Journal 124(576), 289–318.

Blundell, Richard, Graber, Michael and Mogstad, Magne (2015), ‘Labor income dynamics
  and the insurance from taxes, transfers and the family’, Journal of Public Economics
  127, 58–73.


                                             45
Bonhomme, Stéphane and Robin, Jean-Marc (2009), ‘Assessing the equalizing force of mobil-
  ity using short panels: France, 1990–2000’, The Review of Economic Studies 76(1), 63–92.

Bound, John, Brown, Charles, Duncan, Greg J and Rodgers, Willard L (1994), ‘Evidence
  on the validity of cross-sectional and longitudinal labor market data’, Journal of Labor
  Economics pp. 345–368.

Bricker, Jesse, Krimmel, Jacob, Henriques, Alice and Sabelhaus, John (2016), ‘Measuring
  income and wealth at the top using administrative and survey data’, Mimeo.

Browning, Martin, Ejrnaes, Mette and Álvarez, Javier (2010), ‘Modelling income processes
  with lots of heterogeneity’, Review of Economic Studies 77, 1353–1381.

Budria, Santiago, Diaz-Gimenez, Javier, Quadrini, Vincenzo and Rios-Rull, Jose-Victor
  (2002), ‘New facts on the distribution of earnings, income and wealth in the U.S.’, Federal
  Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 26, 2–35.

Cagetti, Marco and De Nardi, Mariacristina (2006), ‘Entrepreneurship, frictions and wealth’,
  Journal of Political Economy 114(5), 835–870.

Cagetti, Marco and De Nardi, Mariacristina (2008), ‘Wealth inequality: Data and models’,
  Macroeconomic Dynamics 12(S2), 285–313.

Cagetti, Marco and De Nardi, Mariacristina (2009), ‘Estate taxation, entrepreneurship, and
  wealth’, American Economic Review 99(1), 85–111.

Carroll, Christopher D. and Summers, Lawrence H. (1991), Consumption growth parallels
  income growth: Some new evidence, in B. DouglasBernheim and John B.Shoven, eds,
  ‘National Saving and Economic Performance’, University of Chicago Press, pp. 305–348.

Carroll, Christopher D, Hall, Robert E and Zeldes, Stephen P (1992), ‘The buffer-stock


                                             46
  theory of saving: Some macroeconomic evidence’, Brookings papers on economic activity
  pp. 61–156.

Castañeda, Ana, Dı́az-Giménez, Javier and Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor (2003), ‘Accounting for
  the U.S. Earnings and Wealth Inequality’, Journal of Political Economy 111(4), pp. 818–
  857.

Civale, Simone, Dı́ez-Catalán, Luis and Fazilet, Fatih (2016), Discretizing a process with
  non-zero skewness and high kurtosis. Mimeo, University of Minnesota.

Conesa, Juan Carlos, Kitao, Sagiri and Krueger, Dirk (2009), ‘Taxing capital? not a bad
  idea after all!’, American Economic Review 99, 25–48.

Council of Economic Advisors (1998), ‘Economic Report of the President’, (Washington:
  United States Government Printing Office).

De Nardi, Mariacristina (2004), ‘Wealth inequality and intergenerational links’, Review of
  Economic Studies 71, 743–768.

De Nardi, Mariacristina (2015), ‘Quantitative models of wealth inequality: A survey’, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 21106.

Deaton, Angus and Paxson, Christina (1994), ‘Intertemporal choice and inequality’, Journal
  of Political Economy 102(3), 437–67.

Fisher, Jonathan D, Johnson, David S and Smeeding, Timothy M (2013), ‘Measuring the
  trends in inequality of individuals and families: Income and consumption’, The American
  Economic Review 103(3), 184–188.

Geweke, John and Keane, Michael (2000), ‘An empirical analysis of earnings dynamics among
  men in the psid: 1968-1989’, Journal of Econometrics 96, 293–356.


                                             47
Graber, Michael and Lise, Jeremy (2015), ‘Labor market frictions, human capital accumula-
  tion and consumption inequality’, mimeo, University College London.

Guvenen, Fatih (2007), ‘Learning your earning: Are labor income shocks really very persis-
  tent?’, American Economic Review 97(3), 687–712.

Guvenen, Fatih, Karahan, Fatih, Ozkan, Serdar and Song, Jae (2015), What do data on
  millions of U.S. workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk? Working paper, University
  of Minnesota.

Haider, S. J. (2001), ‘Earnings instability and earnings inequality of males in the united
  states: 1967-1991’, Journal of Labor Economics 19(4), 799–836.

Hansen, Gary D. (1993), ‘The cyclical and secular behaviour of labour input: Comparing
  efficiency units and hours worked’, Journal of Applied Econometrics 8(1), 71–80.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Perri, Fabrizio and Violante, Giovanni L (2010), ‘Unequal we stand:
  An empirical analysis of economic inequality in the united states, 1967-2006’, Review of
  Economic dynamics 13(1), 15–51.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Storesletten, Kjetil and Violante, Giovanni L (2005), ‘Two views of
  inequality over the life cycle’, Journal of the European Economic Association 3(2-3), 765–
  775.

Huggett, Mark (1996), ‘Wealth distribution in life-cycle economies’, Journal of Monetary
  Economics 38(3), 469–494.

Huggett, Mark, Ventura, Gustavo and Yaron, Amir (2011), ‘Sources of lifetime inequality’,
  American Economic Review 101(7), 2923–54.

Jäntti, Markus and Jenkins, Stephen P. (2015), Income mobility, in Anthony B.Atkinson


                                            48
  and FrançoisBourguignon, eds, ‘Handbook of Income Distribution’, Vol. 2 of Handbook of
  Income Distribution, Elsevier, pp. 807–935.

Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, Giovanni L. Violante (2010), ‘The macroeconomic
  implications of rising wage inequality in the united states’, Journal of Political Economy
  118(4), 681–722.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Smetters, Kent and Walliser, Jan (1999), ‘Privatizing social security in
  the united states - comparing the options’, Review of Economic Dynamics 2(3), 532–574.

Krueger, Dirk and Perri, Fabrizio (2006), ‘Does income inequality lead to consumption in-
  equality? evidence and theory’, The Review of Economic Studies 73(1), 163–193.

Kuhn, Moritz and Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor (2015), ‘2013 update on the us earnings, income
  and wealth distributional facts: a view from macroeconomics’, Working paper.

Lillard, Lee A. (1977), ‘Inequality: earnings vs. human wealth’, American Economic Review
  67, 42–53.

Lillard, Lee A. and Willis, Robert J. (1978), ‘Dynamic aspects of earning mobility’, Econo-
  metrica 46(5), 985–1012.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. (1982), ‘The use of time series processes to model the error structure
  of earnings in a longitudinal data analysis’, Journal of Econometrics 18, 83 – 114.

Meghir, Costas and Pistaferri, Luigi (2004), ‘Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity’,
  Econometrica 72(1), 1–32.

Meghir, Costas and Pistaferri, Luigi (2011), ‘Earnings, consumption and life cycle choices’,
  Handbook of Labor Economics 4, 773–854.

Meyer, Bruce D and Sullivan, James X (2010), ‘Consumption and income inequality in the
  us since the 1960s’, University of Chicago manuscript.
                                             49
Primiceri, Giorgio E. and van Rens, Thijs (2009), ‘Heterogeneous life-cycle profiles, income
  risk and consumption inequality’, Journal of Monetary Economics 56(1), 20 – 39.

Quadrini, Vincenzo and Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor (1997), ‘Understanding the US distribution
  of wealth’, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 21(2), 22–36.

Quadrini, Vincenzo and Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor (2014), Inequality in macroeconomics, in
  A.B.Atkinson and F.Bourguignon, eds, ‘Handbook of Income Distribution, vol. 2B’, Else-
  vier, chapter 15.

Sabelhaus, John and Song, Jae (2010), ‘The great moderation in micro labor earnings’,
  Journal of Monetary Economics 57(4), 391–403.

Scholz, John Karl, Seshadri, Ananth and Khitatrakun, Surachai (2006), ‘Are americans
  saving optimally for retirement?’, Journal of Political Economy 114, 607–643.

Shorrocks, Antony F. (1980), Income stability in the United States, in N.Klevmarken and
  J.Lybeck, eds, ‘The statics and dynamics of income’, Tieto Ltd.

Slesnick, Daniel T. and Ulker, Aydogan (2004), Inequality and the life cycle: Age, cohort
  effects and consumption. Mimeo.

Storesletten, Kjetil, Telmer, Christopher I. and Yaron, Amir (2004), ‘Consumption and risk
  sharing over the life cycle’, Journal of Monetary Economics 51(3), 609–633.

Tauchen, George (1986), ‘Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate and
  Vector Autoregressions’, Economics Letters 20(2), 177–181.

Tauchen, George and Hussey, Robert (1991), ‘Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining
  Approximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models’, Econometrica 59(2), 371–96.

Villanueva, Ernesto (2005), ‘Inter vivos transfers and bequests in three OECD countries.’,
  Economic Policy 20(43), 506–565.
                                            50
Wolff, Edward N. (1987), ‘Estimates of household wealth inequality in the u.s., 1962-1983’,
  Review of Income and Wealth 33(3), 251–257.




A         Appendix: The PSID and W2 data

A.0.1       PSID data

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) follows a large number of US households
over time and reports information about their demographic characteristics and sources of
income. The PSID was initially composed of two major subsamples. The first of them,
the SRC (Survey Research Center) or core subsample, was designed to be representative
of the US population and is a random sample itself. The second, the SEO (Survey of
Economic Opportunity) subsample, was created to study the characteristics of the most
deprived households. Later, Immigrant and Latino subsamples were also added to the PSID.
       From 1968 to 1997, the survey was yearly. After 1997, it started having a biennial
structure. Since the model period is one year, we restrict ourselves to the yearly part of
the survey (1968-1997). We only consider the SRC or core subsample because the SEO
oversamples the poor. After dropping the SEO and Latino samples we are left with a random
                                                                                                       21
sample, which makes computations simpler since weights are not needed Haider (2001)                         .
       Because our binning strategy requires a large amount of data per age group, we drop
individuals still working after age 60 and we assume that people retire at 60. For compara-
bility with the W2 dataset that we derive from the econometric processes in Guvenen et al.
(2015), that start age age 25, we also drop individuals below age 25.
       In line with previous literature, we restrict our study to male heads of household. A
valid observation is formed by two values for individual labor income: this year’s and next
  21
    In our case, we are creating a dataset of pairs of income observations from the PSID panel. It must be
taken into account that the weighting of our final dataset can be affected by attrition and by the fact that
we are neglecting observations of yearly income under 900 $ (expressed in 1982 dollars)

                                                    51
year’s. Neither of the two income values can be missing. We deflate labor income by CPI-
U (taken from FRED economic data, where index 100=1982-1984). We do not consider
earnings observations with values under 900$. This avoids the problem of taking logs of very
small numbers and is in line with usual practice in previous literature (De Nardi (2004) or
Guvenen et al. (2015), for instance).
   Labor income does not include unemployment or workers’ compensation, nor earnings of
the spouse, because adding them would reduce the sample period to 1977-1992, due to data
availability issues.
   The major shortcomings the PSID data are that the sample size is not very large (and the
earnings-rich are not oversampled), that they are less likely to respond to surveys, and that
earnings are top-coded. As a result, our right tail of the income distribution from this data
set is not accurately estimated (Budria, Diaz-Gimenez, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2002)). This
is an important limitation because the earnings risk faced by the high earners is potentially
an important determinant of their saving behavior and wealth concentration in the upper
tail (Castañeda et al. (2003)).


A.0.2    W2 data

The original data used by Guvenen et al. (2015) come from the Master Earnings File (MEF)
of the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) records and contain information for every
individual in the US who has ever been issued a Social Security number. They also include
some demographic information (sex, race, date of birth...) and earnings from the employee’s
W2 forms, that U.S. employers are legally required to report to the SSA since 1978. Labor
earnings are measured annually, and they include all wages, salaries, bonuses and exercised
stock options. The data are uncapped. Therefore, due to their very nature, the W2 tax
data, in contrast to the PSID data, does not suffer from small sample size, under-sampling
of the rich, differential survey response, or top-coding. It does not, however, contain good


                                             52
information on the earnings of the self-employed, due to both the nature of the W2 data
(that caps the recorded amount of wages that the self-employed pays to himself) and the fact
that Guvenen et al. (2015) drop all observations that derive more than 10% of their earnings
from self-employment.
   Unfortunately, the original W2 data are not publicly available, but Guvenen et al. (2015)
have estimated a flexible, and rather complex, parametric process using the simulated method
of moments and shown that it fits the data well. We use their estimates to simulate a
W2 data set. More specifically, the parameterization that we simulate is their “benchmark
model” reported in column (2) of Table III in their paper. The model assumes that the
stochastic component of earnings is the sum of: (i) an individual-specific linear time trend
(heterogeneous income profile); (ii) a mixture of AR(1) processes where each component
receives an innovation in a given year with age-dependent probability; and (iii) an i.i.d.
transitory shock.
   Let ỹti denote the stochastic component of earnings for individual i at age t = 1, 2, . . . .
The specification of the parametric model is:

                            ỹti = (αi + β i t) + yti

                            yti = zti + xit + νti + εit

                            zti = .259zt−1
                                       i      i
                                           + ηzt , z0i ∼ N (0, .133)

                            xit = .425xit−1 + ηxt
                                               i
                                                  , xi0 ∼ N (0, .089)

                            νti = νt−1
                                   i      i
                                       + ηνt ,          ν0i = 0

                            εit ∼ N (0, .029).

   The vector (α, β) has a bivariate normal distribution with zero mean and the covariance
                                                                                   i
matrix implied by σα = .552, σβ ×10 = .13 and corrαβ ×100 = −.49. The innovations ηjt ,j =
z, x, v to the three AR(1) components are mutually exclusive with respective probabilities
                     i     ∗i
pj . More formally, ηjt = ηjt × I{sit ∈ Ipj } with sit a standard uniform random variable.

                                                  53
The indicator function I{sit ∈ Ipj } takes value one if sit falls in the interval Ipj , with Ipz =
[0, pz ], Ipx = (pz , pz + px ], Ipν = (pz + px , 1], where pz + px ≤ 1 and pν = 1 − pz − px .
The (mixing) probabilities depend on age and on the previous realization of the stochastic
component of earnings according to


                    i                           t           i             t    i
               pj (yt−1 , t) = .067 + .038 ×      − .203 × yt−1 + .071 ×    × yt−1
                                               10                        10

and are truncated when they fall outside the [0, 1] interval.
                                                                        ∗i
    Finally, the innovations to the AR(1) components have distribution ηjt ∼ N (µj , σji ), with
                                                                                      2
                                                                                     σjj
individual-specific standard deviation distributed according to log σji ∼ N (σ̄j −    2
                                                                                         , σjj ), j   =
z, x and σνi = σν . The parameter values are µz = −.426, µx = .021, µν = .060, σ̄z = .847,
σ̄x = .361, σzz = .107, σxx = 1.94 and σν = .087.
    Our W2 panel is obtained by simulating the above process to generate a panel of 500,000
individuals histories between ages 25 and 60.



B      Appendix: How well does our non-parametric esti-

       mation of earnings processes fit the PSID and W2

       data?

In this section we analyze the fit of our process of several features of the data. We start
by analyzing how well we approximate one-year empirical moments and then discuss the
consequences of our binning procedure and our one-step Markov chain assumption in presence
of measurement error and when considering longer time horizons.




                                                  54
                                                  Variance                                               Third standardized moment
                                                                                                  0
                                 1.2             W-2 data
                                                 18-gridpoint discretization                    -0.2
                                                 103-gridpoint discretization
                                  1




                                                                                     skewness
                      variance                                                                  -0.4

                                 0.8
                                                                                                -0.6

                                 0.6                                                            -0.8

                                 0.4                                                              -1
                                    20      30       40           50            60                  20      30      40      50       60
                                                    age                                                            age

                                         Fourth standardized moment
                                  5


                                 4.5
                      kurtosis




                                  4


                                 3.5


                                  3
                                   20       30       40           50            60
                                                    age




                     Figure 19: W2: Unconditional moments of log earnings


B.1     Fit of empirical moments

Because we allowed for a different number of earnings bins for the two data sets (18 for the
PSID and 103 for the W2 data set), here we also report results for the case in which we allow
for a smaller bin size in the W2 data set (18 points) so that the results across the two data
sets can be compared keeping the coarseness of the earnings binning constant.
   We first show results for the unconditional moments of log earnings by age and then for
conditional moments of earnings growth, also by age.
   We do not report results for the unconditional first moment because, since the data is
detrended, it is an average of OLS residuals and therefore mean zero by definition.
   Both the 18-gridpoint and 103-gridpoint discretizations successfully replicate uncondi-
tional variances over the life cycle and generate a negative skew and high kurtosis for log earn-
ings (Figure 19). The 18-gridpoint discretization underestimates both the negative skew and
                                             55
the kurtosis of the log earnings distribution, while the 103-gridpoint discretization matches
very closely the kurtosis profile, but overestimates the negative skew. The comparison of our
PSID process with PSID data yields very similar results (see Figure 20).

                                       Variance                                   Third standardized moment
                      0.7                                                   0
                                         PSID data
                     0.65                                                −0.2
                                         Binned PSID process
                      0.6
                                                                         −0.4
                     0.55
                                                                         −0.6
                      0.5
                                                                         −0.8
                     0.45
                                                                          −1
                      0.4
                     0.35                                                −1.2

                                                                         −1.4
                        20      30       40        50          60            20    30        40        50     60


                              Fourth standardized moment
                       6

                      5.5

                       5

                      4.5

                       4

                      3.5
                         20     30       40        50          60




                   Figure 20: PSID: unconditional moments of log earnings


   In order to analyze the conditional moments of log earnings and for comparability with
Guvenen et al. (2015), we group individuals in 5-year cohorts. Still, our graphs are not fully
comparable to Section 3 of their paper, since we condition on the earnings of the previous
year instead of the earnings of the previous 5 years. As in their paper, log earnings growth
is defined as the difference between detrended earnings in two consecutive years.
   Now the division in quantiles now serves two purposes. As earlier, it defines the size
of the bins, but now it also determines the conditioning variable for the computation of
the moments. In the “103-gridpoint discretization”, we compute all moments conditional on
each of the 103 bins in which we divide the overall population, while in the “18-gridpoint
discretization” they are conditional on the 18 bins.
   We first consider the conditional mean (Figures 21, 22 and 23). Both discretizations
replicate the fact that individuals who are situated in a low earnings quintile can expect

                                                                    56
             Figure 21: 18-gridpoint discretization: conditional mean of earnings growth
                                                              Synthetic W−2 data                                                  Binned synthetic W−2 process
                                                1                                                                        1
                                                                                     25−29
                                                                                     30−34
                                                                                     35−39
                                                                                     40−44
                                                                                     45−49
                                                                                     50−54




                        Log earnings growth




                                                                                                 Log earnings growth
                                               0.5                                                                      0.5
                                                                                     55−59




                                                0                                                                        0




                                              −0.5                                                                     −0.5
                                                     0    20       40       60      80     100                                0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                         Percentile of previous earnings                                          Percentile of previous earnings




            Figure 22: 103-gridpoint discretization: conditional mean of earnings growth
                                                              Synthetic W−2 data                                                  Binned synthetic W−2 process
                                               1.5                                                                      1.5
                                                                                     25−29
                                                                                     30−34
                                                1                                    35−39                               1
                                                                                     40−44
                                               0.5                                   45−49                              0.5
                                                                                     50−54
                        Log earnings growth




                                                                                                 Log earnings growth



                                                                                     55−59
                                                0                                                                        0


                                              −0.5                                                                     −0.5


                                               −1                                                                       −1


                                              −1.5                                                                     −1.5


                                               −2                                                                       −2
                                                 0        20       40       60      80     100                                0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                         Percentile of previous earnings                                          Percentile of previous earnings




larger earnings increases.
      With respect to the conditional variance (Figures 24, 25 and 27), the empirical process
is also successful. For clearer illustration, we have included how our processes replicate the
standard deviation we observe for individuals at ages 35-40 (Figure 26).
      With respect to the third standardized moment, all discretizations closely match the
negative skew that we observe in the data and the fact that it is larger for individual with
higher previous earnings (Figures 28 29, 31). This can also be seen in the example in Figure
30.
      Finally, both synthetic processes (see Figures 32, 33, 34, 35) match the high kurtosis in
the data, with just a slight underestimation in the 18-gridpoint case.

                                                                                             57
                 Figure 23: PSID: conditional mean of earnings growth
                                                                                    PSID data                                                                                        Binned PSID process
                                                               1.2                                                                                                    1.2
                                                                                                      25−29
                                                                1                                     30−34                                                            1
                                                                                                      35−39
                                                               0.8                                    40−44                                                           0.8
                                                                                                      45−49
                                                                                                      50−54




                  Log earnings growth




                                                                                                                    Log earnings growth
                                                               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                      55−59
                                                               0.4                                                                                                    0.4

                                                               0.2                                                                                                    0.2

                                                                0                                                                                                      0

                                                              −0.2                                                                                                   −0.2

                                                              −0.4                                                                                                   −0.4

                                                              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                                                                     0     20       40       60      80       100                                                           0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                                          Percentile of previous earnings                                                                       Percentile of previous earnings




Figure 24: 18-gridpoint discretization: conditional standard deviation of earnings growth
                                                                              Synthetic W−2 data                                                                                Binned synthetic W−2 process
                                                              0.9                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                                                      25−29
                                                                                                      30−34
                  Standard deviation of log earnings growth




                                                                                                                         Standard deviation of log earnings growth




                                                              0.8                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                      35−39
                                                                                                      40−44
                                                              0.7                                     45−49                                                          0.7
                                                                                                      50−54
                                                              0.6                                     55−59                                                          0.6

                                                              0.5                                                                                                    0.5

                                                              0.4                                                                                                    0.4

                                                              0.3                                                                                                    0.3

                                                              0.2                                                                                                    0.2

                                                              0.1                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                    0     20       40       60      80      100                                                            0     20       40       60      80     100
                                                                         Percentile of previous earnings                                                                        Percentile of previous earnings




Figure 25: 103-gridpoint discretization: conditional standard deviation of earnings growth
                                                                              Synthetic W−2 data                                                                                Binned synthetic W−2 process
                                                              0.9                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                                                      25−29
                                                                                                      30−34
                  Standard deviation of log earnings growth




                                                                                                                         Standard deviation of log earnings growth




                                                              0.8                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                      35−39
                                                                                                      40−44
                                                              0.7                                     45−49                                                          0.7
                                                                                                      50−54
                                                              0.6                                     55−59                                                          0.6

                                                              0.5                                                                                                    0.5

                                                              0.4                                                                                                    0.4

                                                              0.3                                                                                                    0.3

                                                              0.2                                                                                                    0.2

                                                              0.1                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                    0     20       40       60      80      100                                                            0     20       40       60      80     100
                                                                         Percentile of previous earnings                                                                        Percentile of previous earnings




                                                                                                                58
      Figure 26: Conditional standard deviation for 35-40 year-old age group
                                                                          18 gridpoints                                                                                        103 gridpoints
                                                     0.8                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                       W−2 synthetic data
                                                                       Binned synthetic W−2 process                                                         0.8
                                                     0.7




               Standard dev of log earnings change




                                                                                                                      Standard dev of log earnings change
                                                                                                                                                            0.7
                                                     0.6

                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                            0.4

                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                                            0.3

                                                     0.2                                                                                                    0.2

                                                     0.1                                                                                                    0.1
                                                           0       20       40       60      80      100                                                          0     20       40       60      80     100
                                                                  Percentile of previous earnings                                                                      Percentile of previous earnings




        Figure 27: PSID: conditional standard deviation of earnings growth
                                                                            PSID data                                                                                      Binned PSID process
                                                      1                                                                                                       1
                                                                                               20−24
                                                                                               25−29
                                                     0.9                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                                               30−34
                                                                                               35−39
               Std dev of log earnings growth




                                                                                                                      Std dev of log earnings growth




                                                     0.8                                       40−44                                                        0.8
                                                                                               45−49
                                                                                               50−54
                                                     0.7                                                                                                    0.7
                                                                                               55−59

                                                     0.6                                                                                                    0.6


                                                     0.5                                                                                                    0.5


                                                     0.4                                                                                                    0.4


                                                     0.3                                                                                                    0.3

                                                           0       20       40       60      80      100                                                          0     20       40       60      80     100
                                                                  Percentile of previous earnings                                                                      Percentile of previous earnings




Figure 28: 18-gridpoint discretization: conditional third moment of earnings growth
                                                                        W−2 synthetic data                                                                             Binned synthetic W−2 process
                                                          1                                                                                                   1

                                                      0.5                                                                                                    0.5

                                                          0                                                                                                   0
               Skewness of log earnings change




                                                                                                             Skewness of log earnings change




                                                     −0.5                                                                                                   −0.5

                                                      −1                                                                                                     −1

                                                     −1.5                                                                                                   −1.5

                                                      −2              25−29                                                                                  −2

                                                     −2.5             30−34                                                                                 −2.5
                                                                      35−39
                                                      −3              40−44                                                                                  −3
                                                                      45−49
                                                     −3.5                                                                                                   −3.5
                                                                      50−54
                                                      −4              55−59                                                                                  −4

                                                     −4.5                                                                                                   −4.5
                                                              0     20       40       60      80       100                                                         0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                                   Percentile of previous earnings                                                                     Percentile of previous earnings




                                                                                                         59
Figure 29: 103-gridpoint discretization: conditional third moment of earnings growth
                                                                     W−2 synthetic data                                                                              Binned synthetic W−2 process
                                                    1                                                                                                       1


                                                    0                                                                                                       0




                 Skewness of log earnings change




                                                                                                                        Skewness of log earnings change
                                                   −1                                                                                                     −1


                                                   −2                                                                                                     −2


                                                                    25−29
                                                   −3               30−34                                                                                 −3
                                                                    35−39
                                                                    40−44
                                                   −4               45−49                                                                                 −4
                                                                    50−54
                                                                    55−59
                                                   −5                                                                                                     −5
                                                        0        20       40       60      80      100                                                          0     20       40       60      80     100
                                                                Percentile of previous earnings                                                                      Percentile of previous earnings




         Figure 30: Conditional third moment for 35-40 year-old age group
                                                                          18 gridpoints                                                                                      103 gridpoints
                                                    0.5                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                      W−2 synthetic data
                                                        0             Binned synthetic W−2 process                                                          0
                Skewness of log earnings change




                                                                                                          Skewness of log earnings change




                                                   −0.5                                                                                                   −0.5

                                                    −1                                                                                                     −1

                                                   −1.5                                                                                                   −1.5

                                                    −2                                                                                                     −2

                                                   −2.5                                                                                                   −2.5

                                                    −3                                                                                                     −3

                                                   −3.5                                                                                                   −3.5

                                                    −4                                                                                                     −4

                                                   −4.5                                                                                                   −4.5
                                                            0     20       40       60      80      100                                                          0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                                 Percentile of previous earnings                                                                     Percentile of previous earnings




           Figure 31: PSID: conditional third moment of earnings growth
                                                                          PSID data                                                                                      Binned PSID process
                                                    2                                                                                                       2
                                                                                            20−24
                                                    1                                       25−29                                                           1
                                                                                            30−34
                 Skewness of log earnings change




                                                                                                                        Skewness of log earnings change




                                                    0                                       35−39                                                           0
                                                                                            40−44
                                                   −1                                       45−49                                                         −1
                                                                                            50−54
                                                   −2                                                                                                     −2

                                                   −3                                                                                                     −3

                                                   −4                                                                                                     −4

                                                   −5                                                                                                     −5

                                                   −6                                                                                                     −6

                                                   −7                                                                                                     −7
                                                        0        20       40       60      80      100                                                          0     20       40       60      80     100
                                                                Percentile of previous earnings                                                                      Percentile of previous earnings




                                                                                                      60
Figure 32: 18-gridpoint discretization: conditional fourth moment of earnings growth
                                                                W−2 synthetic data                                                             Binned synthetic W−2 process
                                                  50                                                                                  50
                                                               25−29
                                                  45           30−34                                                                  45
                                                               35−39
                                                  40           40−44                                                                  40




                Kurtosis of log earnings change




                                                                                                    Kurtosis of log earnings change
                                                               45−49
                                                  35           50−54                                                                  35
                                                               55−59
                                                  30                                                                                  30

                                                  25                                                                                  25

                                                  20                                                                                  20

                                                  15                                                                                  15

                                                  10                                                                                  10

                                                  5                                                                                   5

                                                  0                                                                                   0
                                                       0    20       40       60      80     100                                           0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                           Percentile of previous earnings                                                     Percentile of previous earnings




Figure 33: 103-gridpoint discretization: conditional fourth moment of earnings growth
                                                                W−2 synthetic data                                                             Binned synthetic W−2 process
                                                  55                                                                                  55
                                                               25−29
                                                  50           30−34                                                                  50

                                                  45           35−39                                                                  45
                                                               40−44
                Kurtosis of log earnings change




                                                                                                    Kurtosis of log earnings change




                                                  40           45−49                                                                  40
                                                               50−54
                                                  35           55−59                                                                  35

                                                  30                                                                                  30

                                                  25                                                                                  25

                                                  20                                                                                  20

                                                  15                                                                                  15

                                                  10                                                                                  10

                                                  5                                                                                   5

                                                  0                                                                                   0
                                                       0    20       40       60      80     100                                           0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                           Percentile of previous earnings                                                     Percentile of previous earnings




         Figure 34: Conditional fourth moment for 35-40 year-old age group
                                                                   18 gridpoints                                                                       103 gridpoints
                                                  40                                                                                  45
                                                                W−2 synthetic data
                                                  35            Binned synthetic W−2 process                                          40
                Kurtosis of log earnings change




                                                                                                    Kurtosis of log earnings change




                                                                                                                                      35
                                                  30
                                                                                                                                      30
                                                  25
                                                                                                                                      25
                                                  20
                                                                                                                                      20
                                                  15
                                                                                                                                      15
                                                  10
                                                                                                                                      10

                                                  5                                                                                   5

                                                  0                                                                                   0
                                                       0    20       40       60      80     100                                           0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                           Percentile of previous earnings                                                     Percentile of previous earnings




                                                                                               61
                Figure 35: PSID: conditional fourth moment of earnings growth
                                                                           PSID data                                                                     Binned PSID process
                                                        45                                                                                  45
                                                                     20−24
                                                        40           25−29                                                                  40
                                                                     30−34
                                                                     35−39




                      Kurtosis of log earnings change




                                                                                                          Kurtosis of log earnings change
                                                        35                                                                                  35
                                                                     40−44
                                                        30           45−49                                                                  30
                                                                     50−54
                                                        25           55−59                                                                  25

                                                        20                                                                                  20

                                                        15                                                                                  15

                                                        10                                                                                  10

                                                        5                                                                                   5

                                                        0                                                                                   0
                                                             0    20       40       60      80     100                                           0    20       40       60      80     100
                                                                 Percentile of previous earnings                                                     Percentile of previous earnings




   Therefore, we conclude that our procedure generates a reasonably good approximation
up to the fourth moment of the actual earnings process, particularly for discretizations with
a large number of gridpoints, when applied to a sufficiently large dataset. This represents a
significant improvement with respect to the use of a Gaussian AR(1) process, and is one of
the key contributions of this empirical method.
   When we refer to “W2 process”, unless specifically mentioned, we imply the 103-gridpoint
discretization. Using the 18-gridpoint discretization instead has no significant impact on the
results (not reported).




                                                                                                     62
