NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SKEWED WEALTH DISTRIBUTIONS:
THEORY AND EMPIRICS
Jess Benhabib
Alberto Bisin
Working Paper 21924
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21924

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016, Revised May 2017

Thanks to Mariacristina De Nardi, Steven Durlauf, Raquel Fernandez, Luigi Guiso, Dirk Krueger,
Mi Luo, Ben Moll, Thomas Piketty, Alexis Toda, Shenghao Zhu, and Gabriel Zucman. We thank
the Washington Center for Equitable Growth for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jess Benhabib and Alberto Bisin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Skewed Wealth Distributions: Theory and Empirics
Jess Benhabib and Alberto Bisin
NBER Working Paper No. 21924
January 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. B16,E13,E21,E24,E25
ABSTRACT
Invariably across a cross-section of countries and time periods, wealth distributions are skewed to
the right displaying thick upper tails, that is, large and slowly declining top wealth shares. In this
survey we categorize the theoretical studies on the distribution of wealth in terms of the
underlying economic mechanisms generating skewness and thick tails. Further, we show how
these mechanisms can be micro-founded by the consumption-saving decisions of rational agents
in specific economic and demographic environments. Finally we map the large empirical work on
the wealth distribution to its theoretical underpinnings.

Jess Benhabib
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jess.benhabib@nyu.edu
Alberto Bisin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

F. S. Fitzgerald: The rich are di¤erent from you and me.
E. Hemingway: Yes, they have more money.1

1

Introduction

Income and wealth distributions are skewed to the right, displaying thick upper tails,
that is, large and slowly declining top wealth shares. Indeed, these statistical properties
essentially determine wealth inequality and characterize wealth distributions across a
large cross-section of countries and time periods, an observation which has lead Vilfredo
Pareto, in the Cours d’Economie Politique (1897), to suggest what Samuelson (1965)
enunciated as the “Pareto’s Law:"
In all places and all times, the distribution of income remains the same. Neither institutional change nor egalitarian taxation can alter this fundamental
constant of social sciences.2
The distribution, which now takes his name, is characterized by the cumulative distribution function
xm
for x 2 [xm ; 1) and xm ; > 0:
(1)
F (x) = 1
x
The “law”has in turn led to much theorizing about the possible economic and sociological
factors generating skewed thick-tailed wealth and earnings distributions. Pareto himself
initiated a lively literature about the relation between the distributions of earnings and
wealth, i) whether the skewness of the wealth distribution could be the result of a
skewed distribution of earnings, and ii) whether a skewed thick-tailed distribution of
earnings could be derived from …rst principles about skills and talent. A subsequent
literature exploited instead results in the mathematics of stochastic processes to derive
these properties of distributions of wealth from the mechanics of accumulation.
Recently, with the distribution of earnings and wealth becoming more unequal, there
has been a resurgence of interest in the various mechanisms that can generate the statistical properties of earnings and wealth distributions, resulting in new explorations,
new data, and a revival of interest in older theories and insights. The book by Thomas
Piketty (2014) has successfully taken some of this new data to the general public.3
1

This often cited dialogue is partially apocryphal, see http://www.quotecounterquote.com/2009/11/richare-di¤erent-famous-quote.html?m=1
2
The “law,”here enunciated for income, was seen by Pareto as applying more precisely to both labor
earnings and wealth.
3
For an extensive discussion and some criticism of Piketty (2014), see Blume and Durlauf (2015); see
also Acemoglu and Robinson (2015), Krusell and Smith (2014), and Ray (2014).

2

In this survey we concentrate only on wealth, discussing the distribution of earnings
only inasmuch as it contributes to the distribution of wealth. More speci…cally, we
aim at i) categorizing the theoretical studies on the distribution of wealth in terms of
the underlying economic mechanism generating skewness and thick tails; ii) showing
how these mechanisms can be micro-founded by the consumption-saving decisions of
rational agents in speci…c economic and demographic environments; and …nally we aim
at iii) mapping the large empirical work on the wealth distribution to its theoretical
underpinnings, with the ultimate objective of measuring the relative importance of the
various mechanisms in …tting the data.4
In the following we …rst de…ne what it is meant by skewed thick-tailed distributions
and refer to some of the available empirical evidence to this e¤ect regarding the distribution of wealth. We then provide an overview and analysis of the literature on the wealth
distribution, starting from various fundamental historical contributions. In subsequent
sections we explore various models of wealth accumulation which induce stationary distributions of wealth that are skewed and thick-tailed. Finally, we report on how various
insights and mechanisms from theoretical models are combined to describe the empirical
distributions of wealth.

1.1

Skewed and thick-tailed wealth distributions

A distribution is skewed (to the right) when it displays an asymmetrically long upper
tail and hence large top wealth shares. The thickness of the tail refers instead to its
rate of decay: thick (a.k.a. fat) tails decay as power laws, that is, more slowly than e.g.,
exponentially.
Formally, thick tails are de…ned as follows. Let a measurable function R de…ned on
(0; 1) be regularly varying with tail index 2 (0; 1) if
R (tx)
=t
x!1 R (x)
lim

; 8t > 0:5

Then, a di¤erentiable cumulative distribution function (cdf) F (x) has a power-law tail
with index if its counter-cdf 1 F (x) is regularly varying with index > 0. We say
that
A distribution is thick-tailed if its cumulative F (x) has a power-law tail with
some index 2 (0; 1).
A standard example is the Pareto distribution in (1). A distribution with a powerlaw tail has integer moments equal to the highest integer below .6 We also say that
4

For an excellent survey of the mechanisms generating power laws in Economics and Finance, see
Gabaix (2009).
5
For t > 1; it is slowly varying if = 0 and rapidly varying if
= 1; see Resnick (1987), p.13-16.
6
The Cauchy distribution, for instance, has a tail index of 1 and has no mean or higher moments.

3

a distribution is thin-tailed if it has all its moments, that is, = 1: e.g., the normal,
lognormal, exponential distributions are thin-tailed. Obviously, the smaller is ; the
"thicker" is the tail.
As we noted, consistent with the “Pareto law,”distributions of wealth are generally
skewed and thick-tailed in the data, over countries and time. Skewness in the U.S. since
the 60’s is documented e.g., by Wol¤ (1987, 2004): the top 1% of the richest households
in the U.S. hold over 33% of wealth; see also Kuhn and Ríos-Rull (2016).7 Thick tails for
the distributions of wealth are also well documented. Indeed, the top end of the wealth
distribution in the U.S. obeys a power law (more speci…cally, a Pareto law): Using the
richest sample, the Forbes 400, for the period 1988-2003, Klass et al. (2007) estimate
a tail index equal to 1:49. Vermeulen (2015) adjusts estimates of the tail index for
non-response rates for the very rich by combining the Forbes 400 list with the Survey
of Consumer Finances and other data sets. He obtains estimates of the tail index in
the range of 1:48 1:55 for the U.S. Thick tails are also documented, for example by
Clementi and Gallegati (2004) for Italy from 1977 to 2002, by Dagsvik and Vatne (1999)
for Norway in 1998, and by Vermeulen (2015) for several European countries; see his
Table 8.

2

Historical overview

In this section we brie‡y identify several foundational studies regarding the distribution
of wealth. Indeed these studies introduce the questions and also the methods which a
large subsequent literature picks up and develops.

2.1

Skewed earnings

The main question at the outset, since Pareto himself, is how to obtain a skewed thicktailed distribution of wealth. Pareto assumed that a skewed distribution of labor earnings
would map into a skewed distribution of wealth, focusing then on the determinants of
skewed distributions of earnings. Pareto and a rich literature in his steps in turn explored
whether some heterogeneity in the distribution of talents could produce a skewed labor
earnings distribution.8 Along similar lines Edgeworth (1917) proposed the method of
translation, which consists in identifying distributions of talents coupled with mappings
7

Kuhn and Ríos-Rull (2016) also report detailed statistics on the recent distribution on income (which
include labor earnings and returns to wealth) by fractiles and Gini coe¢ cients for the U.S., updated
in 2013. Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011) present an extensive historical survey of the evolution of
top income across countries. A related literature investigates whether consumption is less unequal than
income or wealth. Recent studies however show that consumption inequality closely tracks earnings
inequality. See Aguiar and Bils (2011) and Attanasio, Hurst, and Pistaferri (2012).
8
See Pareto (1897), notes to No. 962, p. 416.

4

from talents to earnings that, through a simple change of variable, yield appropriately
skewed distributions of earnings.
More formally, the method of translation can be simply introduced. Suppose labor
earnings y are constant over time and depend on an individual characteristic s according
to a monotonic map g: y = g(s): Suppose s is distributed according to the law fs in
the population. Therefore, from the standard change of variables for distributions, the
distribution of labor earnings is:
fy (y) = fs g 1 (y)

ds
:
dy

For instance, if the map g is exponential, y = egs , and if fs is an exponential distribution,
p
1
fs (s) = pe ps , the distribution of y is fy (y) = pe p g ln y g1 y1 = gp y ( g +1) , a power law
distribution.
2.1.1

Models of skewed earnings

Several models of the determination of earnings have been proposed in the literature,
which produce a skewed distribution induced by basic heterogeneities of productivity
and talent. They link, through the method of translation, the thickness of the tail of the
distribution of earnings to various di¤erent properties of the labor market.
Talent. The simplest application is due to the mathematician F.P. Cantelli (1921, 1929)
and then re…ned by D’Addario (1943). Suppose talent, denoted by s, is exponentially
distributed: fs (s) = pe ps . Suppose also earnings y increase exponentially in talent:
p
y(s) = egs ; g 0. As we have shown above, by a change of variables, fy (y) = gp y ( g +1) ,
a power law distribution with exponent = gp .9
Inspired by Edgeworth’s (1896, 1898, 1899) critical comment of Pareto’s work, that
the lower earnings brackets does not follow a Pareto distribution, Frechet’s (1939) model
produces a hump-shaped distribution of earnings, with a left tail more akin to a lognormal than a power law. Indeed, suppose that the distribution of talent follows a
Laplace distribution, fs (s) = 12 pe pjsj ; s = ( 1; +1): Maintaining earnings which
ds
increase exponentially in talent, s = g 1 ln y and dy
= g 1 y1 ; we obtain, by translation,
1p1
fy (y) =
e
2gy

pj lngy j

=

(

( gp +1)
1p
if
y
2g
p
1p g 1
y
if
2g

y
y

1
1

:

9
In fact Cantelli (1921, 1929) also provides a rationale for a negative exponential distribution of
talent. Drawing on arguments by Boltzman and Gibbs, he shows that, if total talent is …xed, the
most likely distribution of talent across a large number of individuals drawing earnings according to a
multinomial probability from equally likely earnings bins is approximated by an exponential.

5

The distribution of earnings fy (y) is then a power law with exponent = gp above the
median (normalized to 1) and it is increasing below the median as long as > 1.
Schooling. Suppose acquiring human capital involves i) an opportunity cost of time
1
evaluated at discount rate 1+r
, and ii) a non-monetary marginal cost c, a measure of
ability. Let h denote human capital, identi…ed with years of schooling, and let y(h) denote
labor earnings for an agent with human capital h. Then, the competitive equilibrium
condition in the labor market is
y(h)e

rh

= y(0):

If the marginal cost of acquiring human capital through schooling, c, is exponentially
distributed, fc (c) = pe pc , so are years of schooling, h, in equilibrium. Then the same
transformation algebra used for talent in the previous example implies then that y has
a distribution even more skewed than a power law with exponent = pr . This is essentially Mincer’s (1958) schooling model;10 see also Roy (1950) for an extension to
multi-dimensional ability.11
Span of control. Let an entrepreneur with talent s be characterized by the opportunity
to hire n agents at wage x to produce with production function f (n; s) = sn . This
entrepreneur’s earnings y(s) will satisfy
y(s) = max
n 0

x
sn

if
n=0
:
xn else
1

It follows that, for any n > 0, y(s) = A(x)s 1 , where y (s) is a convex function which
ampli…es di¤erences in talent s. If s is uniformly distributed with support [1; b], transforming variables produces a truncated power law distribution of earnings:
fy (y) =

B
b

1

y

;

i
h
1
over support C; b 1 C , where B and C are constants depending on the parameters
x; .12
10

In Mincer (1958)’s analysis, however, ability, and hence human capital, are normally distributed for
0. As a consequence, y has a log-normal distribution in the tail, since ln y = ln y + rs:
11
More speci…cally, Roy (1950) postulates that human capital depends on an index of ability composed
of the sum of several multiplicative i.i.d. components (intelligence, perseverance, originality, health
etc). If these are normally distributed, or under assumptions for the Central limit theorem to apply,
earnings are approximately lognormal. However as Roy notes, if components of talent are correlated,
the distribution of earnings is more skewed than log-normal (see Roy’s reference to Haldane, 1942).
12
If s is instead exponentially distributed, the transformation generates a Weibull distribution of
earnings (with decreasing density).

h

6

Assortative matching. Suppose the expected output of …rms, E(Y ), is determined
by an "O-Ring" production function, as in Kremer (1993):
E[Y ] = k a (h1 h2 : : : hm )mB;
where k denotes capital, hi is the human capital of the worker the …rm assigns to task
i, m is the total number of tasks, and B is a …rm productivity parameter. We look for a
competitive equilibrium of the labor market in which earnings do not depend on tasks.
At such an equilibrium, y (h) represents workers’earnings as a function of their human
capital. Firms then choose h1 ; h2 :::hm , and k to maximize
max E (Y )

y (h1 )

y (h2 )

:::y (hm )

rk:

Because of the complementarity between the human capital of workers in di¤erent
tasks which characterize the O’Ring production, that is, because @ 2 E[y]=@hi @hj > 0,
in equilibrium workers of the same human capital will be matched assortatively. Letting
hi = h, for i = 1; : : : ; m, the …rst order conditions for pro…t maximization imply then
= 0, a di¤erential equation whose solution is
mBhm 1 (ahm Bm=r)a=(1 a) dy(h)
dh
y(h) = (1

a)(hm B)1=(1

a)

(am=r)a=(1

a)

:

The equilibrium earnings function y(h) is homogeneous of degree m=(1 a) > 1 in h:
small di¤erences in skills h translate into large di¤erences in earnings y: Indeed y(h) is a
convex function, so that labor earnings y are skewed to the right even if h is distributed
symmetrically.13 Consider again for instance the case in which h is uniformly distributed:
fh (h) = 1b ; 0 h b. Then, by transformation,
a 1
1
fy (y) = Cy ( m 1) ;
b
i
h
m
a truncated power law over support 0; b 1 a D , where C and D are constant depending
on parameters a; B; m; r.

Hierarchical production (Lydall (1959)). Suppose production is structured in hierarchical levels, 1; : : : ; I, where lower indexes correspond to lower positions in the hierarchy
to which a higher number of people, ni > ni+1 are assigned. Suppose also that the
technology requires ni = ni+1 , for some > 1. Finally, suppose earnings at level i + 1,
yi+1 are proportional to earnings in the contiguous lower level i (this could be the case,
13

Since the production function exhibits decreasing returns to scale, …rms will have positive pro…ts.
But even if redistributed to the agents in general equilibrium, these pro…ts do not constitute labor
earnings but rather capital income.

7

e.g., if higher level workers manage lower level ones): yi+1 = q yi ; with q
It follows then that
ln
yi+1
ni+1
=
ln
:
ln
ni
ln + ln q
yi

1; q

1.

In the discrete distribution we have constructed, ni is the number of agents with earnings
ln
yi . It is clear that a discrete power law distribution, ni = B(yi ) ln +ln q , for some constant
B and ln ln+ln q 1. 14
2.1.2

Thickness of the distribution of earnings

The models of skewed earnings surveyed in Section 2.1.1 link the exponent to various
structural parameters characterizing the labor market that produces earnings. We review in this section the implications of these models regarding the thickness of earnings
distributions.
In the Talent model, = gp and hence the earnings distribution is thicker when the
earnings map is steeper in talent (g is high), or when the density of talent decreases
relatively slowly (p is small). In the schooling model, human capital replaces talent in
p
the determination of the thickness of earnings distribution and
. The earnings
r
distribution is then thicker when the earnings map is steeper in human capital, that
is, when the rate of return r is high and agents need to be compensated more for the
opportunity costs of accumulating the human capital. It is also thicker when the density
of human capital decreases relatively slowly (p is small).
In the Span of control model, instead, earnings distributions are thicker the lower
are the decreasing returns in production (the lower is ). A related result holds in
the Assortative Matching model. In this case = 1ma and earnings distributions are
thicker the lower are the decreasing returns in production (the higher is a); and the more
specialized is human capital (the higher are the number of tasks m).
Earnings are distributed like power laws with exponent in these models. In general, however, a power law (for example a Pareto distribution) is well de…ned over an
unbounded support only for
0. Otherwise the distribution does not have a …nite integral unless its support is truncated, that is, de…ned on a bounded support. This is the
case for the distributions of earnings we obtained in the Span of Control and Assortative
Matching production models.15 In all these cases in fact the density of the distribution is
a power function with exponent < 1 over …nite support. The implied thickness is larger
than the thickness of any power law with exponent > 0.16
14

Note that if q = 1 , we get Zipf0 s Law.
We thanks Francois Geerolf for this observation.
16
More precisely in this case we say a truncated power law F T (y) over [a; b], b > a, is thicker than a
power law F (y) as there exists an "0 > > 0 such that F T (b ") > F (b ") and where F T (b) = F (1),
normalized to 1 without loss of generality.
15

8

A related more recent literature has developed which obtains thick-tailed earnings
endogenously. Along the lines of the Span of Control model, Gabaix and Landier (2008)
exploit assortative matching between …rms and their executives to produce a Pareto
distribution of the earnings of executives. More speci…cally, in Gabaix and Landier (2008)
the more talented executives are matched with larger …rms, which results in executive
earnings y increasing in …rm size S: y (S) = S ; S
Smin > 0;
0: Suppose …rm
size is Pareto distributed with exponent > 1, f (S) = QS . Then, by transformation,
earnings are also Pareto, with exponent = 1 :
fy (y) = f (S(y))

dS
Q
= y ((
dy

1

)+1) :

This model induces thicker earnings the thicker is the distribution of …rms size (the
smaller is ) and the steeper are earnings as a function of size (the higher is ). Interestingly, the distribution of earnings is power law even if earnings are concave in size S,
that is, if < 1. Finally, in the Hierarchical Production model, = ln ln+ln q 1
0
since
q 1 and thickness increases with the depth of the hierarchical structure, ,
and the steepness of the earning map with respect to the hierarchical level, q.
Geerolf (2016) obtains instead power law earnings in a model of one-dimensional
knowledge or skill hierarchies (rather than task specialization) with workers and layers of management endogenously sorted, incorporating span of control and assortative
matching within the …rm.

2.2

Stochastic returns to wealth

The literature focusing on the factors determining skewed thick-tailed earnings distribution tended to disregard the properties of wealth accumulation. Motivated by the
empirical fact that wealth generally tends to be much more skewed than earnings, an
important question for the subsequent literature has been whether a stochastic process
describing the accumulation of wealth could amplify the skewness of the earnings distribution. Alternatively, could skewed wealth distributions become skewed due to factors
unrelated to skewed earnings distributions? Several accumulation processes have been
proposed to study these questions.
Indeed Champernowne (1953) introduces a wealth accumulation process which contracts on average, but, due to stochastic returns on wealth, nonetheless induces a stationary distribution of wealth with a thick tail. More speci…cally Champernowne (1953)
divides wealth into bins,17 with a bottom bin from which it is only possible to move up,
acting as a re‡ecting barrier. While the overall average drift is assumed to be negative,
there are positive probabilities for moving up to the higher bins. Champernowne (1953)
17

In fact Champernowne (1953) applied the process to earnings rather than wealth, but the logic of
the result is invariant.

9

shows that this stochastic process generates a Pareto distribution of wealth. Formally,
the wealth bins, indexed by i = 0; 1; 2; 3; :::, are de…ned by their lower boundaries:
w (i) = w (0) eai ; i = 1; 2; 3:::

(2)

and w(0) > 0 is the lowest bin. With the exception of the lowest bin, the probability for
moving up (resp. down) a bin is p1 (resp. p 1 ); while the probability of staying in place
is p0 ; with p 1 + p0 + p1 = 1. The number of people at bin j = 0; 1; 2:: at time t; nit , is
given by
n0t+1 = p 1 n1t + (p0 + p 1 ) nit ;
nit+1 = p1 nit 1 + p 1 ni+1
+ p0 nit ; i 1;
t
P1 i
P
i
where the adding up constraint is 1
i=0 nt+1 = n: The stationarity condition,
i=0 nt =
that the number of people moving away from a bin must be o¤set by those incoming at
each t; takes then a simple form,
p 1 ni+1

(p

1

+ p1 )ni + p1 ni

1

= 0; i

1:

Champernowne shows, as it can be veri…ed by direct substitution, that this condition
implies that a stationary wealth distribution must satisfy ni = q
ately chosen. Letting
(2),

p1
p 1

n

i

=e

= q
= =

p1
p 1

i

, for q appropri-

, and after a transformation of variables using equation

p1
p 1

i

= qe

a

ln

w(i)
w(0)

1
(w (i))
a

1

q w (0) a
;
a w (i) a +1

P
i
18
which de…nes a Pareto distribution, with exponent = a and 1
Chami=0 n = n.
pernowne (1953) also shows that a stationary wealth distribution exists if and only if
p1 < p 1 (that is, wealth is contracting on average).
Champernowne’s approach, foreshadowing the subsequent mathematical results of
Kesten (1973), is at the core of a large literature exploiting the mathematics of wealth
accumulation processes with a stochastic rate of return of the form:
wt+1 =

for rt+1 wt > w
for rt+1 wt w;

rt+1 wt
wt

18

Champernowne also considered a two sided Pareto distribution with two-sided tails, one relating
to low incomes and one to high incomes. To obtain this, he eliminated the re‡ecting barrier, imposing
instead a form of “non-dissipation:" a negative drift for bins above a threshold bin and a positive one
for lower bins.

10

where rt
0 and i.i.d., and w > 0. We discuss several examples in the next section.
Importantly, Champernowne’s result that stationarity requires wealth to be contracting
on average holds robustly, as these processes induce a stationary distribution for wt if 0 <
E(rt ) < 1. Furthermore, for the stationary distribution to be Pareto it is required that
prob (rt > 1) > 0, an assumption also implicit in the accumulation process postulated by
Champernowne.

2.3

Explosive wealth accumulation

One central issue in this literature is the stationarity of the wealth distribution. Indeed
skewed wealth distributions can be easily obtained for explosive wealth accumulation
processes over time, but these processes do not necessarily converge to a stationary
wealth distribution.
As the simplest example, consider the wealth accumulation equation:
wt+1 = rt+1 wt
(the economy has no labor earning, yt = 0, for simplicity and without loss of generality).
The wealth process is non-stationary, trivially, when rate of return is deterministic,
rt+1 = r, and r > 1. But this is also the case if rt+1 is Normal i.i.d. and E(rt ) > 1.
The wealth process satis…es then what is generally referred to as Gibrat’s Law: 19 at each
…nite time t; it induces a log-normal distribution around it mean at t; with a mean and
variance increasing and exploding in t ,
ln wt = ln w0 +

t 1
X

ln rj :

j=0

The variance of wealth explodes and no stationary distribution of wealth exists.20
This logic clearly illustrates that an expanding wealth accumulation process can
coexist with stationary wealth distribution only in conjunction with some other mechanism to tame the tendency of these processes to become non-stationary. Consistently,
in Wold and Whittle (1957) it is a birth and death process which tames the possible
non-stationarity and induces a Pareto distribution for wealth.21
19

From Gibrat (1931).
Economic forces might however produce a stationary distribution of wealth that tames the exploding
variance resulting from proportional growth. Kalecki (1945) proposed to this e¤ect a mean rate of return
appropriately decreasing in wealth, e.g., ln rt =
ln wt +zt . The resulting negative correlation between
rt and wt could induce a constant variance in the distribution
of wealth. It is straightworward to show
P
(ln rt )2
that this is in fact the case if zt is i.i.d. and = P
2 . Benhabib (2014a) obtains the same result
2 (ln wti )
by means of progressive taxation of capital income. This line of argument has not been much followed
recently because a decreasing net rate of return in wealth appears counterfactual.
21
An early version of a related birth and death model giving rise to a skewed distribution was also
proposed by Rutherford (1955).
20

11

Consider an economy with a constant explosive rate of return on wealth, r > 1, and
no earnings, y = 0. In each period individuals die with probability , in which case their
wealth is divided at inheritance between n > 1 heirs in an Overlapping Generations
framework. The accumulation equation for this economy is therefore
wt+1 =

rwt with prob. 1
1
w with prob.
n t

and population grows at the rate (n 1). By working out the master equation for
the density of the stationary wealth distribution associated to this stochastic process
(after normalizing by population growth), fw (w), and guessing fw (w) = w 1 , Wold
and Whittle (1957) verify that a solution exists for satisfying r = n(1 n ). The
tail depends then directly on the ratio of the rate of return to the mortality rate,
r
; see Wold and Whittle (1957), Table 1, p. 584. To guarantee that the stationary
wealth distribution characterized by density fw (w) is indeed a Pareto law, Wold and
Whittle (1957) need to formally introduce a lower bound for wealth w 0. Such lower
bound e¤ectively acts as a re‡ecting barrier: below w the wealth accumulation process
is arbitrarily speci…ed so that those agents whose inheritance falls below w are replaced
by those crossing w from below, keeping the population above w growing at the rate
(n 1).
The birth and death mechanism introduced by Wold and Whittle (1957) is at the
core of a large recent literature on wealth distribution which we discuss in subsequent
sections. In particular, to guarantee stationarity all these models need to introduce,
besides birth and death, a mean-reverting force (e.g., some form of re‡ecting barrier) to
ensure that the children’s initial wealth is not proportional to the …nal wealth of their
parents for all the agents in the economy. Furthermore, the sign of the dependence of the
Pareto tail on r and also turns out to be a robust implication of this class of models;
see the discussion in Section 2.1.3.

2.4

Microfoundations

The theoretical models of skewed earnings in this early literature, as well as models of
stochastic accumulation, often tend to be very mechanical, engineering- or physics-like
in fact. This was duly noted and repeatedly criticized at various times in the literature.
Assessing his “method of translation,”Edgeworth (1917) defensively writes:
It is now to be added that our translation has the advantage of simplicity.
Not dealing with di¤erential equations, it is more accessible to practitioners
not conversant with the higher mathematics.
Most importantly, these models were criticized for lacking explicit micro-foundations
and more explicit determinants of earnings and wealth distributions. Mincer (1958)
writes:
12

From the economist’s point of view, perhaps the most unsatisfactory feature
of the stochastic models, which they share with most other models of personal income distribution, is that they shed no light on the economics of the
distribution process. Non-economic factors undoubtedly play an important
role in the distribution of incomes. Yet, unless one denies the relevance of
rational optimizing behavior to economic activity in general, it is di¢ cult
to see how the factor of individual choice can be disregarded in analyzing
personal income distribution, which can scarcely be independent of economic
activity.
Similarly, Becker and Tomes (1979) were also critical of models of inequality by
economists like Roy (1950) or Champernowne (1953) for having neglected the intergenerational transmission of inequality by assuming that stochastic processes largely
determine inequality through distributions of luck and abilities. They complain that:
"[...] mechanical" models of the intergenerational transmission of inequality that do not incorporate optimizing responses of parents to their own
or to their children’s circumstances greatly understate the contribution of
endowments and thereby understate the in‡uence of family background on
inequality.
The criticisms by Mincer and Becker and Tomes were especially in‡uential. Beginning
in the 1990s, they lead economists to work with micro-founded models of stochastic
processes of wealth dynamics and optimizing heterogenous agents.

3

Theoretical Mechanisms for the Skewed Distribution of Wealth

In this section we identify the distinct theoretical mechanisms responsible for thick-tailed
distributions of wealth. Various combinations of these mechanisms drive the modern
theoretical and especially empirical literature attempting to account for the shape of
wealth distribution. We follow the structure of the historical contributions laid out in
the previous section. We start with models that describe the wealth distribution as
induced by the distribution of labor earnings fyt g. We then introduce models of skewed
thick-tailed wealth distributions driven by individual wealth processes which contract
on average down to a re‡ecting barrier, but expand with positive probability due to
random rates of return frt g. Such models can be considered variations and extensions
of Champernowne (1953). We …nally study models in which skewed thick-tailed wealth
distributions are obtained by postulating expansive accumulation patterns on the part of
at least a subclass of agents in the economy. As noted, these models by themselves may
13

not induce a stationary wealth distribution and are therefore often accompanied by birth
and death processes which indeed re-establish stationarity. These are in e¤ect variations
on Wold and Whittle (1957). We then discuss models where preferences induce savings
rates that increase in wealth and can contribute to generating thick tails in wealth, with
expanding wealth checked again by birth and death processes (or by postulating …nite
lives).
These models are generally micro-founded, so that assumptions on preferences (including bequests), …nancial markets, and demographics guarantee that wealth accumulation is the outcome of savings behavior which constitutes the solution of an optimal dynamic consumption-savings problem. Formally, consider an economy in which i) wealth
at the end of time t; wt ; can only be invested in an asset with return process frt+1 g; and
ii) the earning process is fyt+1 g. Let ct+1 denote consumption at t + 1, so that savings
at t + 1 is yt+1 ct+1 . The wealth accumulation equation is then:
wt+1 = rt+1 wt + yt+1

3.1

(3)

ct+1 :

Linear savings

Suppose consumption (hence savings) is linear in wealth, ct+1 = wt +
; t+1 0. For these economies, equation (3) becomes:
wt+1 = (rt+1

) wt + yt+1

t+1

:

t+1 ;

and assume
(4)

In this section we show that, while the environments and underlying assumptions of
most micro-foundations of wealth accumulation models do not induce an exact linear
consumption function, this is a very useful benchmark to establish some of the basic
properties of wealth accumulation processes. Consider economies populated by agents
with identical Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) preferences over consumption
at any date t,
c1
u(ct ) = t ;
1
who discount utility at a rate < 1. We maintain the assumption that wealth at any
time can only be invested in an asset paying constant return r. We distinguish in turn
between in…nite horizon and overlapping generations economies.

14

3.1.1

In…nite horizon

Consider an in…nite horizon Bewley-Aiyagari economy.22 Under CRRA preferences, each
agent’s consumption-savings problem must satisfy a borrowing constraint and E(rt ) <
1. The borrowing constraint together with stochastic earnings generates a precautionary
motive for saving and accumulation and acts as a lower re‡ecting barrier for assets.
Consider …rst the case in which the rate of return is deterministic, rt = r. 23 The
consumption function c(wt ) is concave and the marginal propensity to consume declines
with wealth, as the precautionary motive for savings declines with higher wealth levels
far away from the borrowing constraint. While the model is non-linear, the consumption
function is asymptotically linear in wealth:
c(wt )
= :24
wt !1 wt
lim

The additive component of consumption, t+1 in (4), can be characterized at the solution
of the consumption-savings problem. It re‡ects the fraction of discounted sum of earnings
consumed, as well as precautionary savings. Indeed, the optimal choice of t+1 depends
on the the stochastic process for fyt g ; for example for an AR(1) process on its persistence,
and on the volatility of its innovations. In the very stylized case in which yt
0 is
deterministic, growing at some rate , and where r = 1, with CRRA or with Quadratic
utility, we have t+1 = yt+1 . When the income process fyt g is stochastic, optimal savings
include a precautionary component that can depend on wealth wt .25 This is the case
under CRRA utility for example that belongs to the decreasing absolute risk aversion
class, even though consumption and savings are asymptotically linear in wealth in this
case.26
22

From Bewley (1983) and Aiyagari (1994); see also Huggett (1993). These economies represent
some of the most popular approaches of introducing heterogeneity into the representative in…nitelylived consumer; see Aiyagari (1994) and the excellent survey and overview of the recent literature of
Quadrini and Rios-Rull (1997).
23
These economies easily extend to include production. In fact, under a neoclassical production
function, the marginal product of capital converges to r at the steady state and r < 1 holds because
capital also provides insurance against sequences of bad shocks.
24
See Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2015) for a formal proof.
25
In some speci…cations, consumption decisions ct are taken at the beginning of the period before
earnings yt are realized. Then in an optimizing framework current earnings realizations would not a¤ect
current consumption.
2

26

Some further intuition can be developed if we use to quadratic utility, (
b1 ct b2 (ct ) ; which
yields certainty equivalence, as well as analytical results with linear consumption and savings functions,
as in (4) above. Linear consumption policies obtained with quadratic preferences give rise to a wealth
accumulation process that is stationary (rather than a random walk) if r > 1; and under certainty
equivalence precautionary savings that depend on wealth levels are avoided.(See Zeldes, 1989, for differences in consumption policies under quadratic and CRRA preferences.) If we assume that earnings
are iid; and that consumption ct is chosen at the beginning of the period before the earnings yt are

15

More generally, as far as the right tail of wealth is concerned, the asymptotic linearity
of c(wt ) guarantees that equation (4) approximates wealth accumulation in the economy.
The condition r
< 1 is an implication of r < 1 under CRRA preferences. With
constant (r
) ; the right tail of the wealth distribution is therefore the same as that
of the stationary distribution of fyt
t g. Therefore, f t g determines the divergence
between the right tails of wealth and earnings. Speci…cally,for example if t = yt for all t,
the distribution of wealth does not have a thick tail (the tail index is 1).27 Alternatively,
as discussed further below in section 3.2, if t is a constant that just shifts the distribution
of fyt g to the left, the right tail of wealth will be no thicker than the right tail of earnings
yt .
The more general case in which returns are stochastic has essentially the similar
micro-foundations. In…nite horizon economies with CRRA preferences and borrowing
constraints still display a concave, asymptotically linear consumption function, as the
precautionary motive dies out for large wealth levels.28

3.1.2

Overlapping generations (OLG).

Let n denote a generation (living for a length of time T ). A given intra-generation
earnings pro…le, fyn gt ; can be mapped into lifetime earnings, yn . Also, a lifetime rate
of return factor rn can be constructed from the endogenous consumption and bequest
pattern.29 The initial wealth of each dynasty maps then into a bequest T periods later,
which becomes the initial condition for the next generation. The inter-generational
wealth accumulation equation is linear in this economy, that is equation (4) holds intergenerationally: wn+1 = (rn
) wn + yn+1
n+1 . The details of these arguments and
closed form solutions are derived in Benhabib, Bisin, and Zhu (2011).
Importantly, because of the OLG structure, no restriction is required on E(rn ); nor
borrowing constraints need be imposed.
observed, then t = aE (yt ) k where a and k are positive constants and k goes to zero as b1 goes to
zero: A disadvantage of quadratic utility however is that for large wealth and therefore consumption
above the "bliss point," marginal utility can become negative, creating complications. For an excellent
recent treatment of the Markovian income process see Light (2016).
27
When the earnings distribution is a …nite Markov chain however it is necessarily thin-tailed and
typically all its moments exist.
28
The wealth distribution in this class of economies has been studied, for example, by Benhabib,
Bisin and Zhu (2015), and Achdou, Han, Lasry, Lions, Moll (2016), in discrete and continuous time,
respectively and solved numerically by Nirei and Souma (2016).
29
The constructiuon is simpler under the assumption that the rate of return is constant in t, though
generally stochastic over generations n.

16

3.2

Skewed Earnings

A general characterization of the stationary distribution for fwt g induced by Eq. 4 will
be introduced in Section 3.3.2, Theorem 3, due to Grey (1994). In this section, however,
we study the simple special case where rt = r, a deterministic constant.
Theorem 1 Suppose 0 < r
< 1 and fyt g has a stationary distribution with a thick
tail with tail-index . Then the accumulation equation, (4), induces an ergodic stationary
distribution for wealth with right tail index not thicker than :
.
More precisely, the stationary distribution of wealth has a right tail-index equal to
the right tail-index of the stationary distribution of the stochastic process fyt
t g.
However if t 0 the tail index of wealth matching that of the stationary distribution of
30
fyt
In other words, under our
t g can be no thicker than the distribution of earnings.
assumptions for contracting economies with constant rates of return and linear consumption with t 0, the statistical properties of the right tail of the wealth distribution are
directly inherited from those of the distribution of earnings. As a consequence, the tail
of the wealth distribution cannot be thicker than the tail of the distribution of earnings.
The wealth distribution in economies with heterogenous agents and (exogenous) stochastic earnings has been studied, for example, by Diaz et al (2003), Castaneda, DiazJimenez, and Rios-Rull (2003).

3.3

Stochastic returns to wealth

An important contribution to the study of stochastic processes which has turned out to
induce many applications to the theoretical analysis of wealth distributions is a result
which obtains for the linear accumulation equation, (4), when the rate of return rt follows
a well-de…ned stochastic process.
Equation (4) de…nes a Kesten process if i) (rt ; yt ) are independent and i:i:d over time;
and if ii) satis…es:31
y > 0; 0 < E(rt )
for any t

< 1; and prob (rt

> 1) > 0;

0.

30

Let f (yt ) be the density of earnings yt with a thick tail. If t 0 and st = yt
t ; then h (st ) =
f (yt ) is a left shift of the density f (yt ) : So if f 0 (yt ) 0 in the tail;then h (st + t ) = h (yt ) f (yt ) ;
and the tail of yt
t is no thicker than that of yt : From the de…nition of power laws in section
=
q
for q; > 0;
0 and so ff(qy)
1.1, limy!1 ff(qy)
(y)
(y) < 1 (> 1) if q > 1 (< 1). Then indeed
0
0
limy!1 f (y) < 0 so for some x; f (y) 0 for y x.
31

Some other regularity conditions are required; see Benhabib, Bisin, Zhu (2011) for details.

17

These assumptions guarantee, respectively, that earnings act as a re‡ecting barrier
in the wealth process and that wealth is contracting on average, while expanding with
positive probability.
The stationary distribution for wt can then be characterized as follows.
Theorem 2 (Kesten) Suppose the accumulation equation, (4), de…nes a Kesten process
and fyt g has a thin right tail. Then the induced wealth process displays an ergodic stationary distribution with Pareto tail , where > 1 solves
E (rt

) ) = 1:32

A stochastic rate of return to wealth can generate a skewed and thick-tailed distribution of wealth even when neither the distribution of rt nor the distribution of earnings
are thick-tailed.33
An heuristic sketch for a proof of Kesten (1973) in a very simple case can be given
along the lines of Gabaix (1999, Appendix)). Consider the special case in which i)
yt+1
) is i:i:d:; and E (rt+1
)<
t+1 is constant, equal to y > 0; and ii) t = (rt+1
1: If y > 0; and w0 0, then wt y: Then the master equation for the dynamics can be
written as:
Z 1
P (wt =
y)
f ( )d
P (wt+1 ) =
0

where P (wt ) is the density of wt ; to be solved for. For large w we can ignore y which
becomes insigni…cant relative to w; and conjecture that we can approximate the sta1
tionary distribution with P (w) = Cw
;Ra power law over [y; 1) : Then for large
1
+1
1
1
f ( ) d , where solves
w at Rthe stationary distribution, Cw
= 0 C w
1
+1
1 = 0
f ( ) d . This is Kesten’sR result in this simpli…ed case: the tail index a
1
+1
solves E
= 1: Note that, since 0 f ( ) d = 1; for a solution with + 1 > 0
32

Allowing for negative earning shocks, so that Pr ((rt
) < 0) > 0, and without borrowing constraints, Kesten processes induce a two-sided Pareto distribution,
lim prob(w > w)w = C1 ;

w!1

lim prob(w <

w!1

w)w = C2

with C1 = C2 > 0 under regularity assumptions (see Roitershtein (2007), Theorem 1.6). This extension
addressing at least in part Edgeworth’s criticism of Pareto, was anticipated by Champernowne (1953)
(see footnote 18); see also Benhabib and Zhu (2008), as well as Alfarano, Milakovic, Irle, and Kauschke
(2012), Benhabib, Bisin, and Zhu (2016a); Toda (2012).
33
This result is generalized by Mirek (2011) to apply to asymptotically linear accumulation equations. This is important in this context because asymptotic linearity is the property generally obtained in micro-founded models, as we have shown in Section 3.1. Furthermore, for the study of
wealth distributions, recent results extend the characterization result for generalized Kesten processes
where (rt ; yt ) may be driven by a Markov process, hence rt can be correlated with yt ; and furthermore both rt and yt can be auto-correlated over time (see Roitershtein (2007)). In this case, solves
1=N
QN 1
limN !1 E
)
= 1.
n=0 (r n

18

we need Pr ( > 1) > 0: Thus for large w the stationary distribution is approximated
by a power-law with index a if there is a re‡ecting barrier y > 0; E ( ) < 1; and the
probability of growth is positive, that is Pr ( > 1) > 0:
The Kesten result has important implications for a characterization of the tail of
the induced distribution of wealth, depending on the stochastic properties of the rate
of return process rt . More speci…cally, it can be shown that the distribution of wealth
has a thicker tail (the which solves E ((rt
) ) = 1 is lower) the more variable is
rt , in terms of second order stochastic dominance; see Benhabib, Bisin, Zhu (2011),
Proposition 1.
Nirei and Souma (2007) used Kesten processes to study wealth accumulation and its
tail in a model with stochastic returns that is not microfounded. Wealth distribution of
economies with stochastic returns in microfounded models has been studied, for example,
in discrete time, by Quadrini (2000), Benhabib, Bisin, and Zhu (2011, 2015, 2016),
Fernholz (2016), and Wälde (2016). Krusell and Smith (1998), have studied a related
economy with stochastic heterogenous discount rates.34
3.3.1

Stochastic Returns in Continuous Time

The Kesten result in Theorem 2 can also be extended to continuous time under di¤erent
sets of assumptions. We survey them in the following.35
The stationary distribution of wealth is a power law when the wealth accumulation
process is de…ned by:
dw = r (X) wdt + (X) d!;
(5)
where X is an exogenous Markov jump process, E (r(X)) < 0; Pr (r (X) > 0) > 0,
(X) > 0; and d! is a Brownian motion.36 Here r (X) can be interpreted as the
stochastic net rate of return on wealth, and E (r(X)) < 0 assures that the process is
contractionary on average.
The stationary distribution of wealth is a power law also when the wealth accumulation process is a generalized "geometric" Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process:
dw = (
where ; r;

rw)dt + wd!;

> 0:37 In this case, while the drift (

(6)

rw) becomes negative for large w;

34

See also Angeletos and Calvet (2005, 2006), Angeletos (2007) and Panousi (2008).
We keep this section rather informal as the study of wealth distribution is mostly developed in
discrete time in the economics literature. But we carefully reference the relevant results in mathematics.
36
See Saporta and Yao (2005).
37
More precisely, the stationary distribution induced by Equation (6) is an inverse Gamma, f (w) =
2r 1
( 2r2 +1)
2
2
2
1
2
2r
w
e 2 w , where is the gamma function. Since e 2 w ! 1 as w !
2 + 1
2
35

1; the tail index of the stationary distribution of this process is 2r2 . More generally, see Borkovec and
Klüpperberg (1998), p. 68, and Fasen, Klüpperberg and Lindner (2006), p.113, for a characterization

19

the drift wd! is multiplicative in wealth and hence acts like a stochastic return on w:38
Finally, the stationary distribution of wealth is a power law also when the wealth
accumulation process is a standard OU process
dw = (

rw)dt + d ;

(8)

driven by a Levy jump process with positive increments d rather than a Brownian
motion.39
The wealth distribution of economies with stochastic returns has been studied in continuous time, for example by Benhabib and Zhu (2008), Achdou, Lasry, Lions, and Moll
(2014), Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2015), Aoki and Nirei (2015), Benhabib, Bisin
and Zhu (2016). In particular, Gabaix, Lasry, Lions and Moll (2015) study stochastic
processes of the type given by Equation (5). They apply Laplace transforms methods
to characterize the speed of convergence of the distribution of wealth to the stationary
distribution in response to changes in underlying parameters.
3.3.2

Stochastic returns and skewed earnings

We have seen in Theorem 1 that linear (or asymptotically linear) wealth accumulation
processes in economies with deterministic returns and skewed thick right-tailed distributions of earnings induce wealth distributions with right tails at most as thick as those of
earnings (Theorem 1). We have also seen that when returns are stochastic and earnings
are thin tailed, the stationary wealth distribution can have thick tails (Theorem 2). A
natural question is what happens in economies with both stochastic returns and thicktailed earnings. How thick is the tail of the wealth distribution in this case? The result,
from Grey (1994), is the following.
Theorem 3 Suppose (rt
) and (yt
t ) are both random variables, independent of
wt : Suppose the accumulation equation 4 de…nes a Kesten process and (yt
t ) has a
thick right-tailed with tail-index > 0: Then,
If E (rt
) < 1; and E ((rt
) ) < 1 for some > ; under some regularity
assumptions, the right-tail of the stationary distribution of wealth will be .
of heavy-tailed stationary distributions induced by
dw = (

rw)dt + w d!;

(7)

for
0:5. Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985) model interest rates as driven by a proces as (7) with
= 0:5. In this connection see also Conley et al (1997). For further applications of these results in
economics, see Luttmer (2012, 2016)).
38
The standard OU process, with drift d!; induces a Gaussian stationary distribution for w .
39
See Barndor¤- Nielsen and Shepard (2001) or Fasen, Klüpperberg and Lindner (2006)).

20

If instead E ((rt
) ) = 1 for
distribution of wealth will be

< ; then the right-tail index of the stationary
= .

Theorem 3 makes clear that the right-tail index of the wealth distribution induced
by Equation 4 is either ; which depends on the stochastic properties of returns, or
40
; the right-tail of earnings fyt
Note that if we assume t
0; the right
t g).
41
tail of fyt
g
is
no
thicker
than
that
of
fy
g
:
Then
it
is
never
the
case
that, for
t
t
a stochastic process describing the accumulation of wealth, the tail index of earnings
could amplify the right-tail index of the wealth distribution; it’s either the accumulation
process or the skewed earnings which determine the thickness of the right- tail of the
wealth distribution.
These asymptotic results on right tails however do not specify the wealth level at
which the right tail starts, and in principle the tails could be very far to the right,
raising the question of their empirical relevance when data is …nite. Section 4.1 however
indicates that indeed it is very hard to get actual earnings distributions to produce the
top wealth shares in the data, unless top earnings are augmented to induce thickness
in the distribution of earnings largely in excess of that which can be documented in
earnings data.

3.4

Explosive wealth accumulation

Even without a skewed distribution of earnings and a Kesten process for wt , a skewed
distribution of wealth might be obtained if a non-contracting process for (rt ; yt ) is postulated which does not satisfy the Kesten conditions. Equation (4) de…nes a explosive
process if i) (rt ; yt )
y > 0; 1 < E(rt )
for any t

0.

Theorem 4 Suppose the accumulation equation, (4), de…nes an explosive process. Then
the induced wealth process is non-stationary, independently of the distribution of yt .
This is the case, for instance, if i) the rate of return is deterministic, rt = r > 1;42 ;
and if ii) returns to wealth follow a stochastic process inducing an accumulation equation
following Gibrat’s Law.
While general results are nor available for non-linear accumulation equations, it is
straightforward that a non-stationary distribution of wealth is also induced when i)
40

See Ghosh et al. (2010) for extensions of Grey (1994) to random, Markov-dependent (persistent),
and correlated coe¢ cients (yt
) and (rt
) ; and see Hay et al. (2011) for the multivariate case.
41
See the discussion in Section 3.2 and footnote 3.2.
42
Even if only for a sub-class of the agents in the economy.

21

consumption is strictly concave (hence savings strictly convex) increasing in wealth,
that is ct+1 = (wt+1 )wt+1 ; (w) > 0; 0 (w) < 0 and/or ii) the rate of return on wealth
is increasing in wealth, that is rt+1 = rt+1 (wt+1 ) ; with rt+1 (w) increasing in w such that
limw!1 rt+1 (w
(w)) > 1.
3.4.1

Birth and death processes

As we noted discussing Wold and Whittle (1957) in Section 1.2, a number of birth and
death mechanisms can be super-imposed onto explosive economies to generate a skewed
stationary distribution of wealth.
The simplest micro-founded model which illustrates the power of birth and death
processes to tame the non-stationarity of wealth accumulation is Blanchard (1985).43
The economy in the model is characterized by a deterministic explosive rate of return
t and perpetual youth, that is, constant mortality rate p. Indeed, the only stochastic
variable generating wealth heterogeneity is the Poisson death rate. Agents receive constant earnings y, face a constant return on wealth r and a fair rate p from an annuity
on their accumulated wealth. The discount is but agents discount the future at rate
y
+ p; re‡ecting their mortality rate. 44 Consumption is linear in w + h, where h = r+p
is the present discounted value of earnings, and wealth wt satis…es
wt =

y
r+p

e(r

)t

1 :45

It is assumed that dying agents are replaced with newborns, so population size is constant
normalized at p 1 and the age density is exponential: n (t) = pe pt : Newborns start life
with exogenous initial wealth w.46 In this model, therefore, wealth is increasing in age
t and age is distributed exponentially. Applying Edgeworth translation method, the
distribution of wealth is:
fw (w) =

(r + p)
p
y (r
)

w
(r + p) + 1
y

(rp

+1)

which is a power law in the tail, that is, for large w, with exponent
43

;
=

p
r

> 0.47

Castaneda, Diaz-Jimenez, and Rios-Rull (2003) and Carroll, Slajek, and Tokeu (2014b) also make
use of microfounded versions of the perpetual youth model combined with skewed random earnings.
44
Several recent papers use features of the perpetual youth model to obtain thick tails; see for example
Benhabib and Bisin (2006), Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2016a), Piketty and Zucman (2015), and Jones
(2015), Toda (2014, 2015).
45
See Benhabib and Bisin (2006) and Benhabib and Zhu (2009), where the full optimization dynamics
is spelled out in a more general stochastic continuous time model.
46
See Benhabib and Bisin (2006) for the endogenous determination of w via a social security system
funded by taxation.
47
Note the stationary distribution of wealth will be well-de…ned with a positive Pareto exponent if
r > ; that is as long as the return r is smaller than the e¤ective discount rate: r < + p:

22

In this mode, the thickness of the tail of the distribution therefore increases with the
rate of return r and decreases with the death rate p, just as in Wold and Whittle (1957).
Death rates can check unbounded growth and induce a stationary tail in the distribution.
The re-insertion of (at least some) newborns at a wealth level w independent of their
parents’ wealth (a re‡ecting barrier) is crucial, however, as it is in Wold and Whittle
(1957). 48 The model implies that wealth will be correlated with age (or, in extensions
with bequests, with the average life-span of ancestors).49
In continuous time for an accumulation process following Gibrat’s Law, it is still the
case that a birth-death process can re-establish stationarity of the wealth distribution.
This is clearly demonstrated by Reed (2001). Consider exponentially distributed death
times, with re-insertion at initial wealth w0 .50 Assuming wealth evolves in continuous
time, with a constant positive drift (rate of return) r, and a geometric Brownian motion
as di¤usion, Reed (2001) obtains a log-normal distribution for wealth wT , where T
denotes the time of death. Assuming T is exponentially distributed, fT = pe pT ; and
integrating, he obtains:

fw (w) =

Z

1

pe

1
p
e
w 2 T

pT

0

with solution
fw (w) =

8
<
:

+

w
w0

+

w
w0

0

ln w

B
@

w0 + r
2 2T

2
2

2
T

1
C
A

dT

(9)

1

; for w < w0
1

; for w

w0

2

2

where ( ;
) solve the quadratic 2 z 2 + r
z p = 0. Note that the density of
2
wealth fw (w) is increasing in wealth for w < w0 , if > 1: As Reed (2001) notes, this is
48

The re-insertion of newborns at a wealth level corresponding to a …xed fraction of the wealth of
their parents at death however would simply dilute the growth rate on average, but would be insu¢ cient
to guarantee stationarity.
49
If we allow earnings y to grow exogenously at rate g the stationary distribution of wealth discounted
at the the rate g will still have the same Pareto tail exponent. r p . The discounted wealth of an agent
gt

1
r+p g

e(r )t 1 and the discounted distribution of wealth is given
( r p +1)
g) w
~
by fw (w) = p (r+p
(r
+
p
g)
+
1
; assuming that growing earnings discounted at the
y(r )
y
e¤ective return, r + p; do not explode, that is r + p > g Thus for a given growth rate of earnings g;
increasing r results in thicker wealth tails. For a related discussion of the e¤ects of r versus g on income
distribution see in particular Piketty and Zuchman (2015).
50
Reed (2003) generalizes the initial condition to allow the initial state w0 to be a log-normally
distributed random variable.
of age t is now w
~=e

w=y

23

a hump-shaped Double-Pareto distribution51 , which captures the stylized fact that the
distribution of wealth is increasing in the left tail.52;53
3.4.2

Non-homogeneous savings and/or returns

A model characterized by a savings rate 1
(w) which is increasing in wealth has been
studied by Atkinson (1971) in an OLG economy with constant rate of return on wealth,
…nitely lived agents, and warm glow preferences for bequests given by
wn
v(wT ) = A T +1
1

1

;

where wT +1 is the end of life wealth, that is, bequests.54 For these economies it is
straightforward to show that, if the curvature of consumption in the instantaneous utility
function, , is greater than the curvature in the bequest function, , propensity to
t)
, is decreasing in wealth, and therefore savings rates are
consume out of wealth, c(w
wt
55
increasing in wealth.
51
See also Benhabib and Zhu (2008), Toda (2014), and Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2016a) for microfoundations of wealth accumulation processes driven by geometric Brownian motion and contained by
constant death probabilities generating the Double-Pareto distributions.
52
Note that with insertion at w0 > 0; the stationary distribution results of Reed (2001) should hold
even if r < 0:
53
A particularly simple solution can be obtained with simplifying assumptions, following Mitzen2
macher (2004), pp. 241- 242. Suppose w0 = 1 and r = 2 ;
= 1: Substituting these in 9, setting
T = u2 ; and remembering to use dT
=
2u
in
the
change
of
variables,
integral tables yield:
du
( p
p
p ( 2p 1)
w
for w 1
2
fw (w) =
p p ( p2p 1)
for w 1
2w
54

A related class of models with potentially explosive wealth dynamics is characterized by heterogeneous savings rates appearing in the early work of Kaldor (1957, 1961), Pasinetti (1962) and Stiglitz
(1969). A recent example of this approach is Carroll, Slajek and Tokuo (2014b). Notably to generate
a stationary distribution, Carroll, Slajek and Tokuo (2014b) also introduce a constant probability of
death, with reinsertion at exogenous low levels of wealth, as in Blanchard’s model.
55
Atkinson’s approach using bequest functions more elastic than the utility of consumption is explored
in Benhabib, Bisin and Luo (2015) to study a model that nests stochastic earnings, stochastic returns
and savings rates increasing in wealth. To the same e¤ect, De Nardi (2004) and to Cagetti and De
Nardi (2008) explicitly introduce non-homogenous bequest motives:
v(wT +1 ) = A 1 +

wT + 1

1

;

where
measures how much bequests increase with wealth. See also Laitner (2001), for a model
with heterogeneity in the strength of the bequest motive; and Roussanov (2010) for status concerns in
accumulation incentives, distribution of asset holdings, and mobility.

24

4

Empirical evidence

In our theoretical survey, we identi…ed three basic mechanisms that can contribute to
generate wealth distributions that have thick tails: skewed earnings, stochastic returns
on wealth, and explosive wealth accumulation. Here we focus on the same mechanisms
to analyze the empirical literature on the wealth distribution. This is very useful to
understand how thick-tailed wealth distributions are or are not obtained in the data,
even though many of the classic models in the recent literature are hybrid models that
contain more than one of these mechanisms to generate thick tails in wealth.

4.1

Skewed earnings

A general view of the stylized facts regarding the distribution of earnings is helpful to
introduce the main issues regarding how much skewed earnings can contribute to explain
the thick-tail in the wealth distribution.
Earnings distributions are generally skewed and thick-tailed. In the U.S. this is well
documented by Piketty and Saez (2003) and especially by Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan,
and Song (2016) in their detailed study of the Social Security Administration panel data
covering 1978 to 2013; see also De Nardi, Fella, and Pardo (2016) for an overview. Across
countries, Atkinson (2002), Moriguchi-Saez (2005), Piketty (2001), and Saez-Veall (2003)
document skewed distributions of earnings with relatively large top shares consistently
over the last century, respectively, in the U.K., Japan, France, and Canada. Thick upper
tails are also documented, for example, by Nirei and Souma (2005) in Japan from 1960
to 1999, by Clementi-Gallegati (2004) for Italy from 1977 to 2002, and by Dagsvik-Vatne
(1999) for Norway in 1998.
Most importantly, however, earnings distributions display thinner upper tails than
the wealth distribution. The tail indices of earnings reported by Badel, Dayl, Huggett
and Nybom (2016) are about 2 for the US and Canada, and close to 3 for Sweden.
Corresponding tail indices for wealth are about 1:5 for the U.S.(Vermeulen (2015)) , 1:4
for Canada and 1:7 for Sweden (Cowell, 2011).56
The fact that the distribution of wealth has a thicker tail than the distribution of
earnings has important implications. In this case, in fact Theorem 1 suggests that the
distribution of earnings cannot by itself explain the thick tail of the wealth distribution,
and Theorem 3 strikingly implies that the distribution of earnings won’t even partially
contribute to explain the thickness of the tail of the wealth distribution; the burden for
56

Gini coe¢ cients, often used as a proxy measure of the thickness of the tail , are available for
earnings distributions for a number of countries; see the special volume of Review of Economic Dynamics,
Krueger, Perri, Pistaferri, Violante (2010). They can be compared with the Gini coe¢ cients for wealth
given by Davies, Sandstrom, Shorrocks and Wol¤ (2011). In all cases wealth Gini’s are higher than
earnings Gini’s. More speci…cally, for the 9 countries for which we have Gini coe¢ cients for both
earnings and wealth (Canada, UK, Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, Russia, Mexico and the U.S.) the
average ratio of the wealth Gini to the earnings Gini is 1.73.

25

explaining the thick tails of wealth distribution will have to rely on other factors, like
the stochastic returns on wealth and/or explosive wealth accumulation. Indeed, recent
empirical studies of the wealth distribution driven by earnings consistently …nd this to
be the case. Working with the standard Aiyagari-Bewley model with stochastic labor
earnings and borrowing constraints, Carroll, Slajek and Tokuo (2014b) note that “... the
wealth heterogeneity [...] model essentially just replicates heterogeneity in permanent
income (which accounts for most of the heterogeneity in total income)." Relatedly, De
Nardi et al (2016), adapt earnings data from Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song
(2015), which they introduce into a …nite-life OLG model. They note that earnings
processes derived from data, including the one that they use, generate a much better
…t of the wealth holdings of the bottom 60% of people, but generates too little wealth
concentration at the top of the wealth distribution (See De Nardi et al, (2016), p. 44).57
A careful account of those studies that do successfully match the distribution of
wealth with skewed earning also provides evidence which is consistent with the implications of Theorem 1 and Theorem 3 above. These studies in fact all estimate some speci…c
stochastic properties of the distribution of earnings to …t the distribution of wealth. More
speci…cally, these studies introduce an additional state to the stochastic process for earnings in order to match the chosen moments of the wealth distribution. The estimated
state, appropriately called awesome state in the literature, invariably induces thickness
in the distribution of earnings largely in excess of that which can be documented in earnings data. In other words, these results can be interpreted to suggest that, if earnings
were the main determinant of the thickness in the tail of the distribution of wealth, a
much thicker distribution of the tail of earnings relative to the tail of actual earnings data
would be required to …t the wealth data. For example, Castaneda et al. (2003) estimate
the properties of an awesome state in a rich overlapping-generation model with various
demographic and life-cycle features. It requires the top 0.039% earners have about 1; 000
times the average labor endowment of the bottom 61%, while this ratio, even for the
top :01%, is of the order of 200 in the World Wealth and Income Database (WWID) by
Facundo Alvaredo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel
Zucman (2016).58 Similarly, Diaz et al. (2003) estimate that the top 6% earn more than
40 times the labor earnings of the bottom 50%, while the top 5% of households in WWID
earn about 5 times the median. Finally, in Kindermann and Krueger (2014) earnings
are endogenously driven by a seven state Markov chain for labor productivity. In their
stationary distribution, 0:036% of the population is in the awesome productivity state
with average earnings of about 20 million dollars when calibrated to median earnings,
57

Furthermore, while the precautionary savings motive is the driving force of the Aiyagari-Bewley
model, Guvenen and Smith (2014) note that "... the amount of uninsurable lifetime income risk that
individuals perceive is substantially smaller than what is typically assumed in calibrated macroeconomic
models with incomplete markets."
58
We use WWID earnings data ,which is not top-coded, for 2014. The argument is not much changed
even when considering average income, excluding capital gains.

26

about 3 times the earnings reported in the WWID for the same share of the population.59
Perpetual youth demographics and random working life-spans that introduce age or
life-span heterogeneity across agents can complement skewed earnings to produce some
additional dispersion in wealth accumulation. For example even though their “awesome”
earnings state is less extreme than in the above cited literature, Kaymak and Poschke
(2015) calibrate expected working lives to 45 years, as in Castaneda et al (2003). This
however implies a substantial fraction of agents with an unbounded and excessive working
life-span at the stationary distribution: over 100 working-years for 11% of the working
population. Of these 11% a subset spend a lot of years in high earnings states to populate
the tail of the wealth distribution.60 The thick right tail of the wealth distributions will
then have dynasties with long average life-spans spent in high earnings states.

4.2

Stochastic returns to wealth

Data on stochastic returns are relatively hard to …nd. This is in part because of the conceptual di¢ culties involved in mapping rt with a measure of idiosyncratic rate of return
on wealth, or capital income risk. The available systematic evidence suggests however
that the idiosyncratic component of capital income risk is composed mainly of returns to
ownership of principal residence and unincorporated private business equity, and of returns on private equity.61 Also, capital income risk appears to be a signi…cant component
of individuals returns on wealth. Case and Shiller (1989) document a large standard deviation, of the order of 15%, of yearly capital gains or losses on owner-occupied housing.
Similarly, Flavin and Yamashita (2002) measure the standard deviation of the return on
housing, at the level of individual houses, from the 1968-92 waves of the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics (PSID), obtaining a similar number, 14%. Returns on private equity have an even higher idiosyncratic dispersion across household.62 Over the years
1953-1999, Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) …nd the average returns on private
equity, conditional on survival, of about 13% (Table 6). The distribution of returns
from private equity investment to households, obtained from the 1989 SCF, even conditional on survival, is very dispersed, especially compared to the dispersion on public
equity. Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) note that their "Figure 2 shows that
59

We thank the authors for a personal communication which clari…ed some issues in these calculations.
In fact De Nardi et al (2016), working with earnings data, also introduce stochastic but …nite lifespans, but with death certain by age 86. The age heterogeneity with such …nite lives however, as the
authors note, generates much too litle concentration of wealth at the top.
61
Principal residence and private business equity plus investment real estate account for, respectively,
28:2% and 27% of household wealth in the U.S. according to the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances ; see
Wol¤, 2006, Table 5, and also Bertaut and McCluer (2002), Table 2). Quadrini (2000) also extensively
documents the role of returns to entrepreneurial talent in wealth accumulation.
62
This is a consequence of the fact that private equity is highly concentrated: 75% of all private equity
is owned by households for which it constitutes at least 50% of their total net worth, as documented by
Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002).
60

27

the distribution of entrepreneurial returns is highly skewed with a fat right tail."
The most important contributions to the measurement of stochastic returns on wealth
consists however in the recent studies of administrative data in Norway and Sweden.
Fagereng, Guiso, Malacrino and Pistaferri (2016), in particular, using Norwegian administrative data, provide a systematic analysis of the stochastic properties of returns on
wealth. They …nd 3:7% average returns on overall wealth, with a standard deviation of
6:1%. They also document that such heterogeneity in returns is not simply the re‡ection
of di¤erences in portfolio allocations between risky and safe assets mirroring heterogeneity in risk aversion and actually identify the idiosyncratic component of the lifetime rate
of return on wealth across the population.63 This measure, conditioning away within
lifetime risk, is the most accurate measure to be mapped to rt , especially in OLG models
as e.g., Benhabib, Bisin, Luo (2016). This measure of returns to wealth also exhibits
substantial heterogeneity. For example, for 2013 they …nd that the average (median)
return varies signi…cantly across households, with a standard deviation of 2:8 percentage
points. Bach, Calvet, Sodini (2015), on Swedish administrative data, also …nd a substantial heterogeneity in returns to wealth. In particular they document large di¤erences
in returns across wealth classes: households in the top 1% of the wealth distribution,
e.g., earn 4:1% more than median wealth households. They attribute this heterogeneity
in large part to di¤erent portfolio strategies (riskier for wealthier individuals).64
Several recent studies allow for stochastic returns to wealth to successfully match
the observed thick tail of the wealth distribution, consistently with the implications of
Theorem 2. Importantly, the calibrated (and, in one case, even the estimated) stochastic
properties of returns are quite close to those documented in the data we just discussed.
More speci…cally, Quadrini (2000) calibrates his rich model of entrepreneurial activity
and returns to PSID and SCF data on private businesses, consistently with Moskowitz
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002). Cagetti and De Nardi (2006) build on the entrepreneurial
model of Quadrini (2000), and also calibrate their model to SCF data.65 Benhabib, Bisin
and Zhu (2011), using the methods of Kesten (1973), Saporta (2005) and Roitherstein
(2007), formally obtain a thick-tailed wealth distributions in OLG models with …nite
lives. They calibrate them explicitly rt to Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen’s (2002)
data.
Finally Benhabib, Bisin, Luo (2016) explicitly estimate the stochastic properties of
the Markov process for rt to match the distribution of wealth. Interestingly, the mean and
standard deviation of estimated returns, 2:76% and 2:54%, respectively, closely match
63
For a study of possible genetic factors that can induce di¤erences in di¤erences wealth accumulation
and portfolio choices, see Barth, Papageorge and Thom (2017).
64
For a recent study that combines asset rikiness with di¤erences in investor sophistication and endogenous participation in …nancial markets to explain the U.S. asset ownership dynamics and capital
income dispersion see Kacperczyk et al., (2015).
65
Their return to wealth for entrepreneurs is larger than in the data, with a median as high as 49%
(which however includes all entrepreneurial income and does not correct for the survival bias.)

28

those estimated by Fagereng, Guiso, Malacrino and Pistaferri (2015) for the idiosyncratic
component of the lifetime rate of return on wealth with Norwegian administrative data.

4.3

Explosive wealth accumulation

Various modelling features, can induce explosive wealth accumulation if not curtailed
by birth and death, or decreasing returns, or …scal policies, or other mechanisms that
tame explosive accumulation. They are used in the empirical literature to help match
the tail of the distribution of wealth. Cagetti and De Nardi (2008) notably center on
the role of voluntary (as opposed to accidental) bequests to populate the tail of the
wealth distribution with accumulated returns from entrepreneurial activities. Crucially,
as we argue in Section 3.4.2, the preferences for bequests that they adopt (see footnote
55) induce a saving rate that increases in wealth.66 Similarly, Atkinson’s approach to
non-homogeneous bequest is adopted by Benhabib, Bisin and Luo (2015) to structurally
identify the empirical relevance of a savings rate increasing in wealth in order to match
the distribution of wealth. They indeed estimate a curvature parameter (the inverse
of the elasticity of substitution with CRRA functional forms) in their bequest function
signi…cantly smaller than the curvature parameter of consumption in the instantaneous
utility function (1:01 and 2, respectively), implying savings rates which are substantially
increasing in wealth.
Another factor that can potentially induce explosive wealth accumulation, and which
plays an important role in the empirical literature on the wealth distribution is rates
of return that increase in wealth. A positive correlation between returns to wealth and
wealth is reasonably documented in the data, though a causal interpretation requires
caution. First of all, reverse causation is certainly at least in part present: individual
with higher returns, especially lifetime returns, e.g., due to personal ability, turn out to
be wealthier, other things equal. Furthermore, wealthier individuals will generally hold in
riskier portfolios, hence receiving higher returns as a remuneration for risk. Nonetheless,
even after consideration to these confounding factors, Fagereng, Guiso, Malacrino and
Pistaferri (2016) …nd returns signi…cantly increasing in wealth: the di¤erence between the
median returns for individuals in the 90th and the 10th wealth percentile is about 1:8% in
their data. Bach, Calvet, and Sodini (2015) …nd higher returns on large wealth portfolios
although, as we noted, little of this di¤erence holds in their data after conditioning
for risk. Related evidence is due to Piketty (2013), showing that returns to capital
endowments of U.S. universities increase with the size of endowments (Table 12.2). On
the other hand, averaged over the period 1980-2012, estimates of Saez and Zucman (2016,
online appendix, Tables B29, B30, and B31) show mildly increasing pre-tax returns in
wealth, but ‡at or mildly decreasing post-tax returns in wealth.
More recent studies have also highlighted the role of undiversi…ed portfolios, and
66

For savings rates increasing in wealth see also Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes (2004) and Carroll (2000).

29

especially portfolio compositions that can depend on wealth levels. Changes in prices of
asset classes that generating capital gains and losses can then di¤erentially a¤ect returns
across wealth classes and the distribution of wealth. Thus not only returns to wealth
are heterogenous when portfolio compositions di¤er, but they may vary systematically
across wealth levels. For example higher middle wealth classes may be invested heavily
in housing while the very top wealth groups may be more heavily invested in stocks and
equity. Stock or housing booms and busts may then a¤ect wealth shares and wealth
distribution especially at the top . Garbinti et al (2016), looking at French historical
data from 1870 to the present, show how the dynamic evolution of wealth distribution
in France re‡ects the changes in the prices of di¤erent asset classes. Similarly Gomez
(2016) and Kuhn et al (2017) study the e¤ects of capital gains and changes in asset
prices of the US distribution of wealth.
Non-homogeneous (increasing) returns to wealth have been exploited empirically by
Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2015) and Benhabib, Bisin, Luo (2016). In Kaplan, Moll
and Violante (2015) returns of wealth are increasing in wealth, and are endogenously
obtained in a model with …xed costs of portfolio adjustments for high-return illiquid
assets.67 Benhabib, Bisin, Luo (2016) directly estimate instead a speci…cation of the
rate of return to wealth process which is allowed to depend on wealth. They …nd a
relatively weak but signi…cant positive dependence, which induces a correlation between
returns and wealth, in equilibrium, of the same order of magnitude as the correlation
documented by Fagereng, Guiso, Malacrino and Pistaferri (2016).

4.4

On the relative importance of the various mechanisms for
thick-tailed wealth

Our focus on three basic mechanisms that can contribute to generating wealth distributions has a pedagogic motivation in that it clari…es the relationship between the
theoretical and empirical studies on the distribution of wealth, and identi…es the main
forces underlying simulations and calibrations. But distinguishing these mechanisms and
evaluating their relative importance in driving wealth accumulation and the thick-tails in
the distribution of wealth has also important normative implications. Modelling choices,
in particular whether the source of stochastic incomes is solely shocks to labor earnings,
or whether heterogeneity in rates of return also plays a role, can have signi…cant policy
consequences.
Empirically, Benhabib, Bisin and Luo (2015) structurally assess the relevance of the
various mechanisms that generate thick-tailed wealth distributions by estimating a model
67

See also Mengus and Pancrazi (2016) for a model with participation costs to state-contingent asset
markets; and Guvenen (2006), for a model where a majority of households do not participate in stock
markets due to an elasticity of intertemporal substitution that increases with wealth rather than …xed
costs of participation.

30

that nests them.68 The results give a good match to wealth distribution and mobility.
Benhabib, Bisin and Luo (2015) then estimate separate counterfactuals shutting down
one mechanism at a time. Their …ndings indicate that all the three mechanisms that
they focus on are important: stochastic earnings prevent poverty traps, or too many of
the poor from getting stuck close to the borrowing constraints; stochastic returns assures
downward mobility as well as a thick tail to match the wealth distribution; and a savings
rate increasing in wealth is essential to match the tail of the wealth distribution.

4.5

Stochastic returns and the e¤ects of tax policy

The identi…cation of the various factors which possibly explain the thick tail of the distribution of wealth is not just relevant in and of itself. It also has important implications
for the e¤ects of policy; in particular regarding whether estate or capital taxes have an
e¤ect on wealth inequality across generations?
To address this issue, Becker and Tomes (1979) constructed an OLG model with two
period lives. They introduced altruistic investments by parents in the earning ability of
their children, and the transmission of earnings ability through spillovers from parents
to children within families, as well as from average abilities in the economy. They also
introduced a random element of luck in earnings ability, but without any capital income
or rate of return risk. In this dynamic setup where choices of consumption and altruistic
investments in children are optimized, they concluded that progressive and redistributive
taxation may have unintended consequences for inequality: the e¤ect of estate taxes in
the transmission of inequality may be o¤set if parents respond by adjusting their net
bequests and investments in their children. They then concluded:
"Although increased redistribution within a progressive tax-subsidy system
initially narrows inequality, the new long-run equilibrium position may well
have greater inequality because parents reduce their investments in children.
Perhaps this con‡ict between initial and long-run e¤ects helps explain why
the large growth in redistribution during the last 50 years has had very modest e¤ects on inequality. "
Along similar lines, Castaneda, Diaz-Gimenez, and Rios-Rull (2003) and Cagetti
and De Nardi (2007) also found very small (or even perverse) e¤ects of eliminating
bequest taxes in their calibrations that have a skewed distribution of earnings but no
capital income risk. Laitner (2001) on the other hand introduced heterogeneity in the
strength of the bequest motive, or the in the degree of intergenerational altruism. Family
earnings are stochastic and drawn from a distribution. In a standard two-period OLG
model Laitner could then match the top tail of the US wealth distribution in the data.
68

As we noted, they adopt the OLG model in Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011), extended to allow for
a savings rate increasing in wealth, via non-homogeneous bequests as in Atkinson (1971).

31

However Laitner (2001)69 showed that matching the top tail of wealth distribution is
possible only if a large fraction (95%) of families are not altruistic and care only about
their own consumption, while the rest have an altruistic bequest motive; it is not possible
to match the top tail of wealth if everyone is equally altruistic. As Laitner points
out, a small group of altruistic families that are lucky enough to get rich through high
earnings perpetuate their dynasties’ fortunes with large estates, fattening the top tail
and generating substantial wealth inequality in the process. Introducing estate taxes can
then have a signi…cant impact and reduce wealth inequality, putting altruistic families
on a closer footing to the non-altruistic ones.
Alternatively, estate and capital taxes can have a signi…cant impact on wealth inequality and its transmission across generations in the presence of random and idiosyncratic
rates of return on wealth, without relying on heterogeneity in altruistic preferences. Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011) introduce stochastic idiosyncratic returns across generations.
Parents derive utility from after tax bequests, and therefore also adjust their bequests
in response to estate taxes. Nevertheless Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011) show that
when idiosyncratic rates of return across generations are a signi…cant source of wealth
inequality, reducing estate taxes, or amplifying the heterogeneity of after-tax bequests
by reducing estate taxes, or for that matter decreasing capital income taxes, can signi…cantly increase wealth inequality in the top tail of the distribution of wealth. This result
holds whether rates of return across generations are iid or persistent, and arise from the
multiplicative e¤ect of random returns on wealth, as opposed to the additive e¤ects of
saved earnings. The change in wealth inequality in response to changes in estate or capital income taxes then are not o¤set by the parental adjustments of bequests. Reducing
estate taxes can signi…cantly increase wealth inequality if returns are stochastic across
generations. Therefore to asses the full e¤ects of estate or capital taxation policies on
wealth distribution, it is important to explicitly model the idiosyncratic variability of
rates of return.70

5

Conclusions

Various mechanisms which can lead to wide swings in the distribution of wealth over
the long-run fall outside the scope of this survey. Some of these have been informally
highlighted by Piketty (2014). First of all, the distribution of wealth in principle depends
on …scal policy, while political economy considerations suggest that the determination
of …scal policy in turn depends on the distribution of wealth, speci…cally on wealth
69

See also Laitner (2002) for a brief overview of OLG models with altruistic bequests.
See also Guvenen, Kambourov Kuruscu Ocampo and Chen (2015) who study the di¤erential e¤ects
of wealth versus capital income taxation under return heterogeneity, and Hubmer, Krusell and Smith
(2016) and Nirei and Aoki (2016), Aoki and Nirei (forthcoming) on the e¤ect of recent changes in taxes
on wealth distribution..
70

32

inequality. This link is, strangely enough, poorly studied in the literature. A related
interesting mechanism, which did not receive much formal attention in the literature but
has been introduced by Pareto (who in turn borrows it from Mosca (1896), however)
goes under the heading of “circulations of the elites”.·It refers to the cyclical overturn of
political elites who lose political power because of social psychology considerations, e.g.,
the lack of socialization to attitudes like ambition and enterprise, in part due to selective
pressures weakening dominant elites. Alternatively wars and depressions can destroy
wealth, or social interest groups whose political power and fortunes rise can appropriate
economic advantages, and increase various forms of redistribution towards themselves.

33

References
Acemoglu, D., and J. A. Robinson (2015): "The Rise and Decline of General Laws of
Capitalism." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29, 3-28.
Achdou, Y., Han, J., J-M., Lions, P-L, and B. Moll (2014): "Heterogeneous Agent
Models in Continuous Time," http://www.princeton.edu/~moll/HACT.pdf
Aguiar, Mark, and Mark Bils. (2015) “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income
Inequality,”American Economic Review 105, 2725-2756.
Aiyagari, S.R. (1994): "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Savings," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109 (3), 659-684.
Alfarano, S., M. Milakovic, A. Irle, and J. Kauschke (2012): "A statistical equilibrium
model of competitive …rms,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(1),
136-149.
Alvaredo, F., Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., Saez, E. (2013): "The Top 1 Percent in
International and Historical Perspective," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27,
3-20.
Alvaredo, F., Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., Saez, E., Zucman, G., (since 2011): World
Wealth and Income Database, http://52.209.180.1/
Angeletos, G. (2007): "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Investment Risk and Aggregate Saving", Review of Economic Dynamics, 10, 1-30.
Angeletos, G. and L.E. Calvet (2005): "Incomplete-market dynamics in a neoclassical
production economy," Journal of Mathematical Economics, 41(4-5), 407-438.
Angeletos, G. and L.E. Calvet (2006): "Idiosyncratic Production Risk, Growth and the
Business Cycle", Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 1095-1115.
Aoki, Shuhei, and Makoto Nirei (forthcoming): "Zipf’s Law, Pareto’s Law, and the
Evolution of Top Incomes in the U.S.," American Economic Journal: Macro.
Arrow, K. (1987): "The Demand for Information and the Distribution of Income,"
Probability in the Engineering and Informational Sciences, 1, 3-13.
Atkinson, A.B. (1971): "Capital taxes, the redistribution of wealth and individual
savings," Review of Economic Studies, 38(2), 209-27.
Atkinson, A.B. (2002): "Top Incomes in the United Kingdom over the Twentieth Century," mimeo, Nu¢ eld College, Oxford.
34

Attanasio, O., E. Hurst, and L. Pistaferri (2015): “The Evolution of Income, Consumption, and Leisure Inequality in the US, 1980–2010,”Chap. 4 in Improving
the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures, edited by Christopher D. Carroll,
Thomas F. Crossley, and John Sabelhaus, University of Chicago Press.
Bach, L., Calvet, L., and P. Sodini (2015): “Rich Pickings? Risk, Return, and Skill in
the Portfolios of the Wealthy,”mimeo, Stockholm School of Economics.
Badel, A., Dayl, M., Huggett, M. and M. Nybom (2016): "Top Earners: Cross-Country
Facts", mimeo.
Barndor¤-Nielsen, O. E. and Shepard, N. (2001): "Non-Gaussian Ornstein–Uhlenbeck
based models and some of their uses in …nancial economics,”J. Roy. Statist. Soc.
Ser. B 63, 167-241.
Barth, D., Papageorge, N. W. and Thom, K. (2017): "Genetic Ability, Wealth, and
Financial Decision-Making," working paper,
https://www.dropbox.com/s/7lxgughkq2ar6lf/GENX_TALK.pdf?dl=0
Becker, G.S. and N. Tomes (1979): "An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of
Income and Intergenerational Mobility," Journal of Political Economy, 87, 6, 11531189.
Benhabib, J. and A. Bisin (2006): "The Distribution of Wealth and Redistributive
Policies," New York University.
https://sites.google.com/site/jessbenhabib/working-papers
Benhabib, J. and S. Zhu (2008): "Age, Luck and Inheritance," NBER Working Paper
No. 14128.
Benhabib, J., Bisin, A. and Zhu, S. (2011): “The Distribution of Wealth and Fiscal
Policy in Economies with Finitely-Lived Agents" Econometrica (79) 2011, 123-157.
Benhabib, J., Bisin, A. and Zhu, S. (2016a): “The Distribution of Wealth in the
Blanchard-Yaari Model,”, Macroeconomic Dynamics, 20, 466-481.
Benhabib, Jess, “Wealth Distribution Overview,”(2014a). NYU teaching slides.
http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/benhabib/wealth%20distribution%20theories%20overview3.pdf

Benhabib, J., Bisin, A. and Zhu, S. (2015): “The Wealth Distribution in Bewley Models
with Capital Income”, Journal of Economic Theory, Part A, 489-515.
Benhabib, J., Bisin, A. and Luo, M., (2015): "Wealth distribution and social mobility
in the US: A quantitative approach," NBER working paper w21721.
35

Bertaut, C. and M. Starr-McCluer (2002): "Household Portfolios in the United States",
in L. Guiso, M. Haliassos, and T. Jappelli, Editor, Household Portfolios, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Bewley, T. (1983): "A di¢ culty with the optimum quantity of money." Econometrica,
51:1485–1504,1983.
Blanchard, O. J. (1985): "Debt, De…cits, and Finite Horizons," Journal of Political
Economy, 93, 223-247.
Boserup, Simon H., Wojciech Kopczuk, and Claus T. Kreiner (2015): "Born with a
Silver Spoon: Danish Evidence on Intergenerational Wealth Formation from Cradle
to Adulthood,”University of Copenhagen and Columbia University, mimeo.
Blume, L. and Durlauf, S. (2015): "Capital in the Twentieth Century: A Critical
Review Essay", Journal of Political Economy, 123, 749-777.
Borkovec, M. and Kluppelberg, C. (1998): "Extremal Behavior of Di¤usions Models in
Finance". Extremes 1 (1), 47–80.
Brandt, A. (1986): "The Stochastic Equation Yn+1 = An Yn + Bn with Stationary
Coe¢ cients," Advances in Applied Probability, 18, 211–220.
Burris, V. (2000): "The Myth of Old Money Liberalism: The Politics of the "Forbes"
400 Richest Americans", Social Problems, 47, 360-378.
Cagetti, C. and M. De Nardi (2005): "Wealth Inequality: Data and Models," Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, W. P. 2005-10.
Cagetti, M. and M. De Nardi (2006): "Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth", Journal of Political Economy, 114, 835-870.
Cagetti, M. and C. De Nardi (2007): "Estate Taxation, Entrepreneurship, and Wealth,"
NBER Working Paper 13160.
Cagetti, C. and M. De Nardi (2008): "Wealth inequality: Data and models," Macroeconomic Dynamics, 12(Supplement 2), 285-313.
Case, K., and Shiller, R. (1989): "The E¢ ciency of the Market for Single-Family
Homes", American Economic Review, 79, 125-137.
Castaneda, A., J. Diaz-Gimenez, and J. V. Rios-Rull (2003): "Accounting for the U.S.
Earnings and Wealth Inequality," Journal of Political Economy, 111, 4, 818-57.
Carroll, C. D. (1997): “Bu¤er-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
Hypothesis,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1–56.
36

Carroll, C. D. and Slacalek, J., and K. Tokuoka, (2014): "The Distribution of Wealth
and the MPC: Implications of New European Data," American Economic Review:
Papers and Proceedings, Volume 104, No. 5, pp. 107–11.
Carroll, C. D. and Slacalek, J., and K. Tokuoka, (2014b): "Wealth Inequality and
the Marginal Propensity to Consume, " European Central Bank, Working Paper
Series, NO 1655.
Carroll, C. D. (2000): “Why Do the Rich Save So Much?,”in Joel B. Slemrod, ed., Does
Atlas Shrug?: The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, 465-484.
Champernowne, D.G. (1953): "A Model of Income Distribution," Economic Journal,
63, 318-51.
Chipman, J.S. (1976): "The Paretian Heritage," Revue Europeenne des Sciences Sociales et Cahiers Vilfredo Pareto, 14, 37, 65-171.
Cantelli, F.P. (1921): "Sulla deduzione delle leggi di frequenza da considerazioni di
probabilita," Metron, 1, 83-91.
Cantelli, F.P. (1929): "Sulla legge di distribuzione dei redditi," Giornale degli Economisti e Rivista di Statistica, 4, 69, 850-852.
Clementi, F. and M. Gallegati (2005): "Power Law Tails in the Italian Personal Income
Distribution," Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Theoretical Physics, 350, 427438.
Conley, T.G., Hansen, L.P, Luttmer, E.G.J., Scheinkman, J.A. (1997): "Short-Term
Interest Rates as Subordinated Di¤usions," Review of Financial Studies, 10, 525577.
Cox, J.C., Ingersoll, J.E., and Ross, S.A. (1985): “A Theory of the Term structure of
Interest Rates,”Econometrica 53, 385-408.
Cowell F.A., (2011): "Inequality Among the Wealthy," mimeo, Centre for Analysis of
Social Exclusion, LSE.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach (2010): "Estimating
the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation," Econometrica,
78, 883-931.
Dagsvik, J.K. and B.H. Vatne (1999): "Is the Distribution of Income Compatible with
a Stable Distribution?," D.P. No. 246, Research Department, Statistics Norway.

37

Davies, J.B., S. Sandström, A. Shorrocks, E. Wol¤ (2011): "The Level and Distribution of Global Household Wealth," Economic Journal, 121(551), 223-254.
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2010.02391.x/epdf
De Nardi, M. (2004): "Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links," Review of Economic Studies, 71, 743-768.
De Nardi, M., Fella, G. and G. P. Pardo (2016): "The Implications of Richer Earnings
Dynamics for Consumption, Wealth, and Welfare", NBER Working paper No,
21917.
Diaz, A, Josep Pijoan-Masb, J., and Rios-Rull, J-F, (2003): "Precautionary savings
and wealth distribution under habit formation preferences,"Journal of Monetary
Economics 50, 1257-1291.
Diaz-Gimenez, J., V. Quadrini, and J. V. Rios-Rull (1997): "Dimensions of Inequality:
Facts on the U.S. Distributions of Earnings, Income, and Wealth," Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 21(2), 3-21.
Díaz-Giménez, J., V. Quadrini, J. V. Ríos-Rull, and S. B. Rodríguez (2002): "Updated
Facts on the U.S. Distributions of Earnings, Income, and Wealth", Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 26(3), 2-35.
Dynan, K., Skinner, J. and Zeldes, S. P. (2004): "Do the Rich Save More?" Journal of
Political Economy, 112, 397-444.
Edgeworth, F. Y., (1896): "Review notice concerning Vilfredo Pareto’s "Courbe des
Revenus," Economic Journal, 6, 666.
Edgeworth, F. Y., (1899): "On the Representation of Statistics by Mathematical Formulae," Part I, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 61, 670-700.
Edgeworth, F. Y., (1899): "On the Representation of Statistics by Mathematical Formulae," Part IV, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 62 , 534-555.
Elwood, P., S.M. Miller, M. Bayard, T. Watson, C. Collins, and C. Hartman (1997):
"Born on Third Base: The Sources of Wealth of the 1996 Forbes 400," Uni…ed for
a Fair Economy. Boston.
Fagereng, Andreas, Mogstad, Magne and Marte Rønning (2015): "Why do wealthy
parents have wealthy children?" Statistics Norway Discussion Paper.
Fagereng, A., L. Guiso, D. Malacrino, and L. Pistaferri (2015): “Wealth Return Dynamics and Heterogeneity,”mimeo, Stanford University.

38

Fagereng, A., Guiso, L., Malacrino, D., and Pistaferri, L. (2016): “Heterogeneity in Returns to Wealth, and the Measurement of Wealth Inequality”American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 106, 651-655(5).
Fasen, V., Kluppelberg, C. & Lindner, A. (2006):. ¨ "Extremal Behavior of Stochastic
Volatility Models," in Stochastic Finance, M.D.R. Grossinho, A.N. Shiryaev, M.
Esquivel & P.E. Oliviera, eds, Springer, New York, pp. 107-155.
Feenberg, D. and J. Poterba (2000): "The Income and Tax Share of Very High Income
Household: 1960-1995," American Economic Review, 90, 264-70.
Feller, W. (1966): An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, 2, Wiley,
New York.
Fernholz, R.T. (2016): "A Model of Economic Mobility andthe Distribution of Wealth,"
Claremont McKenna College, mimeo.
Fiaschi, D. and M. Marsili (2009): "Distribution of Wealth and Incomplete Markets:
Theory and Empirical Evidence," University of Pisa Working paper 83.
Flavin, M. and T. Yamashita (2002): "Owner-Occupied Housing and the Composition
of the Household Portfolio", American Economic Review, 92, 345-362.
Fréchet, Maurice, (1939): "Sur les formules de repartition des revenus," Revue de
l’Institut International de Statistique, 7, 32-38.
Fréchet, Maurice (1958): "Letter to the Editor", Econometrica, 26(4), 590-591.
Gabaix, Xavier, (1999): “Zipf ’s Law for Cities: An Explanation,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, CXIV , 739 -767.
Gabaix, Xavier, (2009):. "Power Laws in Economics and Finance," Annual Review of
Economics, Annual Reviews, vol. 1(1), pages 255-294, 05.
Gabaix, X., Lasry, J-M., Lions, P-L, and B. Moll, (2016): "The Dynamics of Inequality,"
Econometrica 84, 2071-2111.
Gabaix, X. and A. Landier (2008): "Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?" The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1), 49-100.
Garbinti, B., Goupille-Lebret, J. and Piketty, T. (2016): "Accounting for Wealth Inequality Dynamics: Methods, Estimates and Simulations for France (1800-2014),"

https://editorialexpress.com/cgi-bin/conference/download.cgi?db_name=EWM2016&paper_id=50

Geerolf, F. (2016): "A Theory of Pareto Distributions," UCLA, mimeo.
39

Ghosh, A.P., D. Hay, V. Hirpara, R. Rastegar, A. Roitershtein, A. Schulteis, J. Suh
(2010): "Random linear recursions with dependent coe¢ cients," Statistics and
Probability Letters, 80, 1597-1605.
Gibrat, R. (1931): Les InÃ c galitÃ c s Ã c conomiques, Paris, Librairie du Recueil
Sirey.
Goldie, C. M. (1991): "Implicit Renewal Theory and Tails of Solutions of Random
Equations," Annals of Applied Probability, 1, 126–166.
Gomez, M. (2016): "Asset Prices and Wealth Inequality," working paper. Princeton.
http://www.princeton.edu/~mattg/…les/jmp.pdf

Grey, D.R. (1994): "Regular variation in the tail behavior of solutions of random difference equations," The Annals of Applied Probability, 4)(1), 169-83.
Guvenen, F. (2006): "Reconciling con‡icting evidence on the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution:A macroeconomic perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics, 53,
1451–1472.
Guvenen, F. and A. A. Smith (2014): “Inferring Labor Income Risk and Partial Insurance From Economic Choices,”Econometrica, 82, 2085–2129.
Guvenen, F. (2015): "Income Inequality and Income Risk: Old Myths vs. New Facts,"
Lecture Slides available at https://fguvenendotcom.iles.wordpress.com/2014/04/
handout_inequality_risk_webversion_may20151.pdf.
Guvenen, F., G. Kambourov, B. Kuruscu, S. Ocampo, and D. Chen (2015): "Use It or
Lose It: E¢ ciency Gains from Wealth Taxation,"
https://fguvenendotcom.…les.wordpress.com/2014/04/handout_ggkoc_slides_web.pdf
Guvenen, F., Karahan, F., Ozkan, S. and J. Song (2015): "What Do Data on Millions
of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Risk?," National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc. NBER Working Papers 20913
Haldane, J. B. S. (1942): "Moments of the Distributions of Powers and Products of
Normal Variates" Biometrika, 32, 226-242.
Hay, D., R. Rastegar, and A. Roitershtein (2011): Multivariate linear recursions with
Markov-dependent coe¢ cients, J. Multivariate Anal. 102, 521 527.
Heathcote, J. (2008): "Discussion Heterogeneous Life-Cycle Pro…les, Income Risk, and
Consumption Inequality, by G. Primiceri and T. van Rens," Federal Bank of Minneapolis, mimeo.
40

Huggett, M. (1993): "The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-household IncompleteInsurance Economies, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 953-69.
Huggett, M. (1996): "Wealth Distribution in Life-Cycle Economies," Journal of Monetary Economics, 38, 469-494.
Huggett, M., G. Ventura, and A. Yaron, (2011): "Sources of Lifetime Inequality,"
American Economic Review, 101 (7), 2923{54.
Hurst, E. and K.F. Kerwin (2003): "The Correlation of Wealth across Generations,"
Journal of Political Economy, 111, 1155-1183.
Jones, C. I. (2015): "Pareto and Piketty: The Macroeconomics of Top Income and
Wealth Inequality," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29, 29–46
Kaldor, N. (1957): "A Model of Economic Growth", Economic Journal, 67(268): 591624.
Kaldor, N. (1961): "Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth," in F. A. Lutz and
D. C. Hague, eds. The Theory of Capital, St. Martins Press, pp. 177-222.
Kalecki, M. (1945): "On the Gibrat Distribution," Econometrica 13: 161–170.
Kacperczyk, M., Nosal, J., and Stevens, L. (2015): "Investor sophistication and capital
income inequality," Narodowy Bank Polski, working paper 199.
Kaplan, G, Moll, B., and Gianluca Violante (2015): "Asset Illiquidity, MPC Heterogeneity and Fiscal Stimulus," in preparation.
Kaymak, Baris and Markus Poschke (2016): "The evolution of wealth inequality over
half a century: the role of taxes, transfers and technology," Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 77(1).
Keane, M. and Wolpin, K. (1997): "The Career Decisions of Young Men", Journal of
Political Economy, 105, 473Kesten, H. (1973): "Random Di¤erence Equations and Renewal Theory for Products
of Random Matrices," Acta Mathematica, 131, 207–248.
Klass, O.S., Biham, O., Levy, M., Malcai O., and S. Solomon (2007): "The Forbes 400,
the Pareto Power-law and E¢ cient Markets, The European Physical Journal B Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 55(2), 143-7.
Kuhn, M. and V.J. Rios-Rull (2016): "2013 Update on the U.S. Earnings, Income, and
Wealth Distributional Facts: A View from Macroeconomics," Quarterly Review,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April, 1-75.
41

Kuhn, M, Schularick, M., and Steins, Ulrike I. (2017): "Income and Wealth Inequality
in America,"
http://www.wiwi.uni-bonn.de/kuhn/paper/Wealthinequality_20March2017.pdf
Klevmarken, N.A., J.P. Lupton, and F.P. Sta¤ord (2003): "Wealth Dynamics in the
1980s and 1990s: Sweden and the United States", Journal of Human Resources,
XXXVIII, 322-353.
Krueger, D. and Kindermann, F., (2014: "High marginal tax rates on the top 1%?
Lessons from a life-Cycle model with idiosyncratic income risk," NBER WP 20601
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20601
Krueger, D., F. Perri, L. Pistaferri, G.L. Violante (eds.) (2010): Review of Economic
Dynamics, 13.
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (1998): "Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy," Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867-896.
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (2014): "Is Piketty’s "Second Law of Capitalism" Fundamental? http://aida.wss.yale.edu/smith/piketty1.pdf
Hubmer, J., P. Krusell, and A.A. Smith, Jr. (2016): “The Historical Evolution of
the Wealth Distribution: A Quantitative-Theoretic Investigation,”NBER Working
Paper, 23011.
Kuznets, S. (1955): ‘Economic Growth and Economic Inequality,’American Economic
Review, 45, 1-28.
Laitner, John (2001): "Inequality and Wealth Accumulation: Eliminating the Federal
Gift and Estate Tax," In William G. Gale, James R. Hines, Jr., and Joel Slemrod,
editors, Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation, Brookings Institution Press, 258–292.
Laitner, John (2002): "Wealth Inequality and Altruistic Bequests," American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, 92, 270-273.
Lampman, R.J. (1962): The Share of Top Wealth-Holders in National Wealth, 19221956, Princeton, NJ, NBER and Princeton University Press.
Levy, M. (2005): " Market E¢ ciency, The Pareto Wealth Distribution, and the Levy
Distribution of Stock Returns" in The Economy as an Evolving Complex System
eds. S. Durlauf and L. Blume, Oxford University Press, USA.
Levy, M. and S. Solomon (1996): "Power Laws are Logarithmic Boltzmann Laws,"
International Journal of Modern Physics, C,7, 65-72.
42

Light, B. (2016): "Precautionary Saving in a Markovian Earnings Environment," mimeo,

https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/sites/gsb/…les/working-papers/precautionary_saving_in_a_markov

Loève, M. (1977): Probability Theory, 4th ed., Springer, New York.
Luttmer, E.G.J. (2012): "Slow Convergence in Economies with Firm Heterogeneity,"
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis working paper 696.
Luttmer, E.G.J. (2016): "Further Notes on Micro Heterogeneity and Macro Slow Convergence," University of Minnesota,
http://users.econ.umn.edu/~luttmer/research/MicroHeterogeneityMacroSlowConvergence.pdf

Mandelbrot, Benoit (1969). "Stable Paretian Random Functions and the Multiplicative
Variation of lncome," Econometrica, 29, 517-543.
McKay, A. (2008): "Household Saving Behavior, Wealth Accumulation and Social Security Privatization," mimeo, Princeton University.
Mengus, E. and R. Pancrazi (2016): “Endogenous Partial Insurance and Inequality,”
mimeo, University of Warwick.
Meyn, S. and R.L. Tweedie (2009): Markov Chains and Stochastic Stability, 2nd edition,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Mirek, M. (2011): "Heavy tail phenomenon and convergence to stable laws for iterated
Lipschitz maps," Probability Theory and Related Fields, 151, 705-34.
Mitzenmacher, M. (2004): "A Brief History of Generative Models for Power Law and
Lognormal Distributions", Internet Mathematics, vol 1, No. 3, pp. 305-334, 2004,
pp.241-242)
Moriguchi, C. and E. Saez (2005): "The Evolution of Income Concentration in Japan,
1885-2002: Evidence from Income Tax Statistics," mimeo, University of California,
Berkeley.
Mosca, G. (1896): Elementi di scienza politica , Fratelli Bocca, Rome. Translated into
English by H. D. Kahn (1939), The Ruling Class, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Moskowitz, T. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2002): "The Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?", American Economic Review, 92,
745-778.
Nirei, M. and W. Souma (2007): "Two Factor Model of Income Distribution Dynamics,"
Review of Income and Wealth, 53(3), 440-459.
43

Nirei, M. and S. Aoki (2016): Pareto Distribution of Income in Neoclassical Growth
Models,”Review of Economic Dynamics, 20:25-42.
Panousi, V. (2008): "Capital Taxation with Entrepreneurial Risk," mimeo, MIT.
Pareto, V. (1897): Cours d’Economie Politique, II, F. Rouge, Lausanne.
Pareto, V. (1901): "Un’ Applicazione di teorie sociologiche", Rivista Italiana di Sociologia. 5. 402-456, translated as The Rise and Fall of Elites: An Application
of Theoretical Sociology , Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, New Jersey,
(1991).
Pareto, V. (1909): Manuel d’Economie Politique, V. Girard et E. Brière, Paris.
Piketty, T. (2003): "Income Inequality in France, 1901-1998," Journal of Political Economy. 111, 1004–1042.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003): "Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII, 1, 1-39.
Piketty , T. (2014): Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Harvard University Press.
Piketty, T. and Zucman, G. (2015): "Wealth and Inheritance in the Long Run," in
Handbook of Income Distribution, Atkinson, A. B. and Bourguignon, F., eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1303-1368.
Pasinetti, L. (1962): "The rate of pro…t and income distribution in relation to the rate
of economic growth," Review of Economic Studies, 29, 267-279.
Primiceri, G. and T. van Rens (2006): "Heterogeneous Life-Cycle Pro…les, Income Risk,
and Consumption Inequality," CEPR Discussion Paper 5881.
Quadrini, V. and J.V. Ríos-Rull, (1997): "Understanding the U.S. Distribution of
Wealth", Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review Vol. 21, No.
2, pp. 22–36.
Quadrini, V. (1999): "The importance of entrepreneurship for wealth concentration
and mobility," Review of Income and Wealth, 45, 1-19.
Quadrini, V. (2000): "Entrepreneurship, Savings and Social Mobility," Review of Economic Dynamics, 3, 1-40.
Ray, D. (2014): "Nit-Piketty: A Comment on Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty
First Century," http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/debraj/Papers/Piketty.pdf.

44

Reed, W. J. (2001): "The Pareto, Zipf and other power laws", Economics Letters 74
(2001) 15–19.
Reed, W. J. (2003): The Pareto law of income — an explanation and an extension.
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 319, 469-486.
Resnick, Sidney (1987): Extreme Values, Regular Variation, and Point Processes, NewYork:
Springer-Verlag.
Roitershtein, A. (2007): "One-Dimensional Linear Recursions with Markov-Dependent
Coe¢ cients," The Annals of Applied Probability, 17(2), 572-608.
Roussanov, N. (2010): "Diversi…cation and its Discontents: Idiosyncratic and Entrepreneurial Risk in the Quest for Social Status", Journal of Finance, LXV, 1755-1788.
Roy, A. D.(1950): "The Distribution of Earnings and of Individual Output", The Economic Journal, 60, 489-505.
Rutherford, R.S.G. (1955): "Income Distribution: A New Model," Econometrica, 23,
277-94.
Saez, E. and M. Veall (2003): "The Evolution of Top Incomes in Canada," NBER
Working Paper 9607.
Saez E. and Zucman, G., (2016): "Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913:
Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data" Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming. Online appendix at
http://gabriel-zucman.eu/…les/SaezZucman2016QJEAppendix.pdf
P.A. Samuelson (1965): ‘A Fallacy in the Interpretation of the Pareto’s Law of Alleged
Constancy of Income Distribution,’Rivista Internazionale di Scienze Economiche
e Commerciali, 12, 246-50.
Saporta, B. (2004): "Etude de la Solution Stationnaire de l’´Equation Yn+1 = an Yn +bn ;
a Coe¢ cients Aleatoires," (Thesis), at
http://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/04/74/12/PDF/tel-00007666.pdf
Saporta, B. (2005): "Tail of the stationary solution of the stochastic equation Yn+1 =
an Yn +bn with Markovian coe¢ cients," Stochastic Processes and Application 115(12),
1954-1978.
Saporta, B., and Yao, J.-F., (2005): "Tail of a linear di¤usion with Markov switching,
Ann. Appl. Probab. 15 , 992–1018.
Sargan, J.D. (1957): "The Distribution of Wealth", Econometrica, 25, pp. 568-590.
45

Stiglitz, J. (1969): "Distribution of income and wealth among individuals," Econometrica, 37(3), 382-397.
Stiglitz, J. (2015a): "Of income and wealth among individuals: Part 1. The wealth
residual," NBER Working paper 21189.
Stiglitz, J. (2015b): "Of income and wealth among individuals: Part 2. Equilibrium
wealth distributions," NBER Working paper 21190.
Stiglitz, J. (2015c): "Of income and wealth among individuals: Part 3. Life-cycle
savings vs. inherited savings," NBER Working paper 21191.
Sornette, D. (2000): Critical Phenomena in Natural Sciences, Berlin, Springer Verlag.
Souma,W. and Nirei, M. (2005): "Empirical study and model of personal income,"
https://arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0505173.pdf
Storesletten, K., C.I. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2004): "Consumption and Risk Sharing
Over the Life Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(3), 609-33.
Toda, A. (2012): “The double power law in income distribution: Explanations and
evidence,”Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 84(1), 364-381.
Toda, A. (2014): “Incomplete market dynamics and cross-sectional distributions," Journal of Economic Theory, 154, 310–348.
Toda, A., K.J. Walsh (2015): “The Double Power Law in Consumption and Implications
for Testing Euler Equations," Journal of Political Economy, 123(5), 1177-1200
Vermeulen, P. (2014): "How fat is the top tail of the wealth distribution?" European
Central Bank, Working Paper Series no.1692.
Wälde, K., (2016): "Pareto-Improving Redistribution of Wealth –The Case of the NLSY
1979 Cohort," Johannes-Gutenberg University, Mainz, mimeo.
Wold, H.O.A. and P. Whittle (1957): "A Model Explaining the Pareto Distribution of
Wealth," Econometrica, 25, 4, 591-5.
Wol¤, E. (1987): "Estimates of Household Wealth Inequality in the U.S., 1962-1983,"
The Review of Income and Wealth, 33, 231-56.
Wol¤, E. (2006): "Changes in Household Wealth in the 1980s and 1990s in the U.S.," in
Edward N. Wol¤, Editor, International Perspectives on Household Wealth, Elgar
Publishing Ltd.

46

Zeldes, S. P. (1989): "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from
Certainty Equivalence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 275-298.
Zhu, S. (2010): "Wealth Distribution under Idiosyncratic Investment Risk", mimeo,
NYU.

47

