                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            NOT WORKING AT WORK:
                LOAFING, UNEMPLOYMENT AND LABOR PRODUCTIVITY

                                            Michael Burda
                                          Katie R. Genadek
                                         Daniel S. Hamermesh

                                         Working Paper 21923
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21923


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2016




We thank Dan Black, Peter Egger, Albrecht Glitz, Mathias Hoffmann, Christian Merkl, Richard Murphy,
Silvia Sonderegger, Jeff Woods and participants in several seminars, as well as Matthew Notowidigdo
for providing the files on states’ unemployment insurance programs. Hamermesh thanks the Humboldt
Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Michael Burda, Katie R. Genadek, and Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Not Working at Work: Loafing, Unemployment and Labor Productivity
Michael Burda, Katie R. Genadek, and Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 21923
January 2016
JEL No. E24,J23

                                              ABSTRACT

We use the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) 2003-12 to estimate time spent by workers in non-work
while on the job. Non-work time is substantial and varies positively with the local unemployment
rate. While average time spent by workers in non-work conditional on any positive amount rises with
the unemployment rate, the fraction of workers reporting positive values varies pro-cyclically, declining
in recessions. These results are consistent with a model in which heterogeneous workers are paid efficiency
wages to refrain from loafing on the job. That model correctly predicts relationships of the incidence
and conditional amounts of non-work with wage rates and measures of unemployment benefits in
state data linked to the ATUS, and it is consistent with estimated occupational differences.


Michael Burda                                        Daniel S. Hamermesh
Faculty of Business and Economics                    Department of Economics
Humboldt University Berlin                           Royal Holloway University of London
Spandauer Str. 1                                     Egham, TW20 0EX
D-10178 Berlin                                       UNITED KINGDOM
Germany                                              and NBER
burda@wiwi.hu-berlin.de                              Daniel.Hamermesh@rhul.ac.uk

Katie R. Genadek
University of Minnesota
50 Willey Hall
225 19th Ave S
Minneapolis, MN 55455
kgenadek@umn.edu
                                                                                 First Version: February 2015
                                                                                  This Version: January 2016




Introduction

        The relationship between labor-market slack and worker effort is a hoary topic in

macroeconomics and labor economics. The notion of labor hoarding—retaining workers during times of

low product demand even though their labor input is reduced—goes back at least 50 years and has been

adduced as an explanation for pro-cyclical changes in labor productivity—productivity falling as

unemployment rises. (See Biddle, 2014, for a thought-historical discussion of this concept.) The notion

that unemployment incentivizes workers to work harder to avoid layoff—the idea of efficiency wages—

was described formally in the now-classic study by Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), and goes back to writings

of Kalecki (1943) and even to the reserve army of the unemployed described by Marx (1867) in Chapter

23 of Das Kapital. 1 It implies counter-cyclical changes—that labor productivity and effort rise as

unemployment rises. Both of these strands in economic thought describe the relationship between

unemployment in a labor market and worker effort (and presumably labor productivity). Yet their

implications are contradictory.

        A large empirical literature has inferred from lags in employment adjustment behind shocks to

output that labor hoarding is important (Hamermesh, 1993, Chapter 7). A much smaller literature has used

the theory of efficiency wages to examine how wages respond to workers’ opportunities (e.g., Cappelli

and Chauvin, 1991). No study to date has examined directly how effort at work responds to differences or




1
 A recent sociological study, Paulsen (2015), presents cases illustrating the role and reasons for people loafing on
the job. Lazear et al (2013) and Pencavel (2014) analyze changes in effort and productivity in single firms.


                                                         1
changes in unemployment. 2 The reason is simple: Until very recently no large-scale data set has been

available detailing what workers do on the job and providing such information as unemployment varies.

            This paper asks and answers the following questions: 1) On what do American workers spend

time on the job when they are not working? 2) Most important, how does non-work vary with local labor

market conditions, as measured by the unemployment rate? 3) Is there a model that can account

consistently for any regularities that we observe? 4) What are the implications of these findings for

aggregate labor productivity and macroeconomic behavior generally?

       I.       Data and Descriptive Statistics

            Since 2003, the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) has generated time diaries of large monthly

samples of individuals showing what they are doing and where they are located. (See Hamermesh et al,

2005, for a description of these data, and Aguiar et al (2013) for an examination of some cyclical aspects

of time use.) It thus allows the first study of how workers spend time on the job, its relationship to their

demographic and job characteristics, and its variation with differences and changes in unemployment.

Throughout this analysis we use various sub-samples from the ATUS, which over the period 2003-2012

collected 136,960 monthly diaries of former Current Population Survey (CPS) respondents’ activities on

one particular day between two to five months after their final rotation in the CPS. Because we are

concentrating on activities while the respondent was at work, the only diaries included are those for days

when a respondent reported some time at the workplace. Since half the diary days in the ATUS are on

weekends when relatively few respondents are working, this restriction cuts the sample greatly, leaving us

with 41,111 usable diaries. Moreover, since our focus is on employee productivity, for most of this study

we exclude the self-employed (most of the remaining excluded observations) and those diaries without

information on usual weekly hours of work, which reduces the sample to 35,548 usable observations.

Thus for a typical month in the sample period after 2003 we have around 250 observations on

employees. 3


2
    Hamermesh (1990) examines cross-sectional differences in the allocation of time on the job.
3
    The ATUS collected more diaries in its first year, generating about 450 usable diaries each month in 2003.


                                                            2
         Obtaining responses about what the respondent was doing at each moment of the diary day, the

ATUS then codes them into over 400 distinct activities. Respondents also note where they were while

performing each activity, with one of the possible locations being “at the workplace.” We focus on

primary activities performed at that location, defining total time at work as all time spent at the

workplace. We then divide time at the workplace into time spent working and time spent not working. 4

The latter is divided into time spent eating, at leisure and exercising, cleaning, and in other non-work

activities.5 In the ATUS, eating at work can be a primary activity, a secondary activity to working or a

part of the job. Non-work time at work which is spent eating corresponds to a response of eating as a

primary activity at the workplace. Non-work time at work also includes activities that might be viewed as

investment in future productivity but that are not currently productive, such as cleaning and perhaps

exercising, as well as others such as gossiping, web-surfing and chatting that are less likely to be

productive. Non-work time does not include any time spent away from the workplace during the

workday.

         Table 1 presents sample means and their standard errors of the proportions of time spent at the

workplace in these four activities and in actual work, along with the time spent at work and other

variables that are central to our analysis. All the statistics are calculated using the ATUS sampling

weights, thus accounting for disproportionate sampling across days of the week, for standard CPS

weighting and for differential non-response to the ATUS by former CPS participants. The first thing to

note is that the typical day at work lasts about eight hours and twenty minutes, a statistic that yields a




4
 Time spent working includes time spent in “Work Related Activities” or ATUS codes 50000-50299. Work-related
activities include socializing and eating as a part of the job.
5
 In the original data, non-work time on the job is divided into the following broad primary activities: Personal care;
household production; care-giving; educational activities; shopping; services; eating, leisure, exercising and sport,
and volunteering and religious activities. Several of these are observed so infrequently as to prevent them from
being analyzed separately, so that we combine them into the fifth (other) category of non-work time on the job.
Household production is not considered an act at work.


                                                          3
five-day workweek of 41.74 hours, which is consistent with the mean usual weekly hours of 41.38 hours

reported retrospectively by employees in the sample. 6

         Sample respondents report spending nearly seven percent of time at the workplace not working,

amounting to thirty-four minutes per day. Roughly half of this time is spent eating; the other half is spent

in leisure, exercise, cleaning and other non-work activities. These latter three activities are so rare that

henceforth we concentrate on the twofold division between eating and non-work non-eating time at work.

While thirty-four minutes per day at the workplace not working seems low, most eating reported during

the work day as a primary activity probably occurs away from the workplace and thus is not specifically

assignable to the job in these data. To the extent that eating away from the workplace during work hours

varies cyclically, it will be reflected in cyclical variations in the length of the day at the workplace.

         As Figure 1 shows, there are a substantial number of zeros in the responses, 33.7 percent of the

sample, and much of our subsequent analysis focuses on this fact. The conditional mean amount of

positive non-work time is slightly over 50 minutes per day. Beyond that, the distribution is skewed to the

right, with a tiny fraction of respondents even reporting not working the entire time on the job. 30.8

percent of the respondents reported eating at the workplace but no other non-work time, 14.6 percent

reported other non-work but no eating on the job, and 20.9 percent reported both eating and other non-

work time on the job.

         Throughout this study, the central forcing variable is the local unemployment rate, measured as

the jobless rate in the state where the worker resides. 7 The average unemployment rate in the sample is

6.6 percent, but it varies over a wide range—from barely two to over fourteen percent. Partly because of

the Great Recession, there is substantial variation in unemployment, which allows us to examine how

non-work responds to changing local labor-market conditions.

6
 This near-equality differs from the result in the literature that recall weekly hours exceed diary hours (Juster and
Stafford, 1991; Frazis and Stewart, 2004). The difference may arise because we restrict the workday to the time
respondents spend at the workplace in any activity.
7
 Experiments with the one-month unemployment rate consistently yielded weaker fits, so we limit the reported
results to those based on the three-month average. Replacing the most recent three-month average unemployment
rate with a lagged three-month average yielded similarly weaker fits (but no qualitative change in the estimates), and
similarly for nonlinear transformations of the unemployment rate.

                                                          4
    II.       Non-work and its Relationship with Unemployment over Time and Space

          Before presenting evidence on the cyclical behavior of non-work time at work, it is important to

remember that economic theory is ambiguous about the sign of the relationship between non-work and

business cycle conditions. This is because workers and their employers have different interests in non-

work. If initiated by the worker, non-work might be interpreted as “loafing,” “shirking” or “goofing off

on the job.” A raft of theories predicts a negative relationship between local labor market conditions and

shirking. The most prominent of these are Calvo (1981), Akerlof (1982), Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984) and

Bowles (1985). In this vein, high unemployment signals a lower value of utility in the state of

unemployment, either because the incidence or duration (or both) of joblessness is high. To avoid landing

in the state, workers exert higher effort when employed, in order to curry favor with their employers, to

increase their productivity, or to reduce the probability of detection when they do shirk. Because effort is

unobservable and/or monitoring is costly, firms accept this outcome passively, with few or no layoffs of

shirkers occurring in equilibrium.

          Alternatively, firms may find non-work by workers in certain states of the world to be desirable.

Firms face variable and imperfectly forecastable demand for their products, while producing with workers

who represent substantial investments in human capital, search effort and other considerable resources. In

an economic downturn which is perceived as temporary, it is easy to show that a layoff, even if

temporary, is an inferior choice to maintaining employment, possibly even at standard hours. 8 This

behavior is often referred to as labor hoarding. In this case, firms assign workers to “unproductive” tasks

such as cleaning, maintenance, painting, etc. or even tolerate more worker-initiated non-work.

          A, Central Results

          In Table 2 we present evidence on the cyclical behavior of non-work in the United States based

on the ATUS. This cyclical behavior is measured by the response of non-work time at the workplace to

8
 Burda and Hunt (2011) showed that while firms in Germany retained workers during the Great Recession, hours
worked declined by less than would be expected given the decline in output, so that hourly productivity fell in a
recession for the first time since 1970. In the U.S., Gordon (1981) documented a decline in labor productivity in
every postwar recession up to that point in time; Galí and van Rens (2014) find that the correlation between the
business cycle and productivity since 1990 has become negative.


                                                       5
variations in local labor-market conditions. We assume that workers take those conditions as given, and

we note that they vary across both time and space. 9 In the data most of the variation in unemployment is

across time: Temporal movements account for two-thirds of the variance. Only twelve percent of the

variance in unemployment rates is idiosyncratic at the state and month level.

         The initial least-squares results shown in Column (1) simply relate the proportion of non-work

time at work to the state unemployment rate.10 There is a highly significant positive association of

unemployment with non-work time on the job. Over the entire range of unemployment observed in the

data, the estimate suggests that the proportion of non-work time will vary by 0.013 (on a mean of 0.069).

         The estimates in Column (1) fail to account for the possible co-variation of time spent in non-

work with the amount of work performed and with workers’ demographic characteristics. The equation

underlying the estimates in Column (2) includes quadratic terms in usual weekly hours and time at work

on the diary day; indicators of race and ethnicity; a vector of indicators of educational attainment; a

quadratic in potential experience (age – education – 6), indicators of gender and marital status and their

interaction, and an indicator of metropolitan residence.11

         A longer usual workweek significantly increases the fraction of work time not working up to 43

usual weekly hours, with decreases thereafter. Conditional on usual hours, however, spending more time

at work in a day decreases the proportion of time spent in non-work activities, but only up to 5.9 hours of

work time per day. Beyond that, and thus for 85 percent of the sample, additional time on the job

increases the share of time spent not working. Whether because of boredom, fatigue or something else,



9
 We cannot rule out that workers might self-select via migration, effectively choosing regions in which
unemployment is lower and thus affecting the conditions under which they work. The same argument applies to
employers and capital mobility. This possibility would bias the estimated impact of unemployment toward zero.
10
   All the results in this section remain qualitatively identical if we use minutes of the various types of non-work time
rather than their proportions of the workday as the dependent variables. Similarly, using more flexible
representations of usual weekly hours and time spent at work does not alter the results, nor does deleting the
quadratic in time at work from the estimates in Columns (2) and (3) change the central conclusions.
11
  In the Table we only report those estimates that are economically interesting. One should also note that,
unsurprisingly, the estimates vary negligibly if we use a quadratic in age instead of potential experience. The
estimates using the latter do, however, describe variations in time not working slightly better than do those including
age.


                                                           6
the marginal effect of additional work time on non-work activities is increasing for most employees as the

workday lengthens. 12

         The estimates on the indicators of gender and marital status, and their interaction, are small and

individually and jointly insignificant here and in all subsequent estimates, so we do not report them in

later tables.   African-Americans, Hispanics and Asian-Americans, however, report spending higher

fractions of their time at work not working than do workers with otherwise identical demographic

characteristics and with workdays and workweeks of the same length. Not only are these effects highly

significant statistically, they are also large, implying a proportion of non-work time 15 to 20 percent

above the average. Additional schooling attainment monotonically decreases the reported proportion of

work time spent not working. Here too the differences are substantial, with the proportion among

employees with graduate degrees being about 30 percent below that of high-school dropouts.

        While the estimated impact of unemployment does change with the addition of these covariates,

their unsurprisingly very weak correlation with state unemployment rates guarantees that their inclusion

does not qualitatively alter the estimated effect of unemployment on non-work time. 13 The inference may

understate the magnitude of this effect: As unemployment rises, even holding demographic characteristics

constant, workers who retain their jobs may be those who report less non-work at work, creating a

compositional effect that negatively biases the estimated impact of unemployment on non-work time.

        In Column (3) we add vectors of fixed effects for occupation, industry, state and month to the

estimating equation in Column (2). Each of the four vectors of indicators is jointly statistically significant:

There are substantial differences across occupations, industries and states in the (conditional) proportion




12
 This finding is consistent with older evidence from the scientific management literature charting workers’
productivity over the work day (Florence, 1958).
13
  The covariates included in Column (2) describe 0.92 percent of the variation in state unemployment rates over
time.


                                                      7
of time at work spent not working. Even with these additions, however, over half of the estimated positive

effect of unemployment on time not worked remains.14

        These estimates have aggregated all non-work time at work; yet one might expect different

responses to changing unemployment of the partly biological activity, eating at work, and the broader

category, other non-work time on the job. We thus re-estimate the basic model, first using the proportion

of time at work spent eating as the dependent variable, then using the proportion of time at work spent in

other non-work time. In each case, we first include the vectors of work time and demographic measures

that were added to the estimates shown in Column (2), then add the same four vectors of fixed effects

included in the estimates shown in Column (3).

        The results, presented in Columns (4) - (7) of Table 2, are striking. The overwhelming majority of

the effect of changing unemployment on non-work time at work operates through its impact on other non-

work time—i.e., on leisure on the job. Eating at the workplace is affected by variations in unemployment

much less. 15 Moreover, except for Hispanics and Asian-Americans, the effects of differences in workers’

demographic characteristics on non-work time also operate mainly through other non-work time, not

through eating at work.

        As Table 1 and Figure 1 showed, there are many zeros in these data. That fact might suggest

estimating these models using tobit, but that is problematic for two reasons: 1) There is no reason to

assume that the impacts of unemployment (or of any of the other regressors included in Table 2) on the

probability of non-work and its conditional mean work in the same direction. That difficulty suggests

using a more free-form technique, either the all-in-one approach suggested by Cragg (1971), or separate

treatment of the probability of non-work and its mean conditional on its occurrence; 2) The zeros may

14
 Almost the entire drop in the estimate arises from the inclusion of state fixed effects. Re-estimating the model
excluding state effects, the estimated impact of unemployment is essentially unchanged from that in Column (2).
15
  One might be concerned that employees change the amount of non-work multi-tasking that they do as
unemployment changes. The ATUS does not provide information on secondary activities in most months; but for
2006 and 2007, as part of the Eating and Health Module, it collected information on secondary eating, including at
work. Of the employees in our sample in those years, 41 percent report some secondary eating and/or drinking at
work. Among those who do, the average amount of time spent in these secondary activities is almost exactly two
hours per day. Although this activity is important, re-estimates of the models in Table 2 show that variations in
secondary eating are independent of differences in unemployment rates across states and over these two years.

                                                        8
result partly from the limitation of the diaries to a single day (Stewart, 2013), who argues that estimating a

probit on the incidence of non-work and a regression on the amount of non-work among those non-zero

observations circumvents this difficulty. Since that approach handles both problems, we follow it here.

         Table 3 presents the probit derivatives of the variables’ impacts on the probability of non-work on

the job, and regression coefficients describing their effects on the amount of non-work for the two-thirds

of the sample respondents who report positive non-work. The independent variables are the same as those

included in the regressions in columns (2) and (3) of Table 2. The differences between these results and

those in Columns (2) and (3) from the unconditional regressions are remarkable. While higher

unemployment is positively associated with the proportion of time at work reported non-working, it

significantly reduces the probability that a worker spends any time not working. This reduction is more

than offset by the significant increase in the proportion of time not working as the unemployment rate

rises by those who state that they spent some time not working.

         Unlike in the unconditional regressions, the negative impact on the probability of not-working

and the positive impact on the conditional mean are robust to the inclusion of all the vectors of fixed

effects. Moreover, the effects are economically important: Over the range of unemployment in the

sample, the probability of not working falls by 0.061 on a mean of 0.337, while the fraction of time not

working rises by 0.020 on a conditional mean of 0.100. Our results also show that the demographic

differences observed in Table 2 stem mostly from demographic differences in the probability of reporting

non-work time as opposed to the amount of time spent by those reporting non-work. That is especially the

case for differences in educational attainment; but even the racial/ethnic effects, while significant on both

the probability and the conditional mean, are much stronger on the former. 16


16
  Do these effects arise from a greater willingness of minorities and the less educated to report non-work time on the
job? We cannot be sure, of course, but the evidence suggests the opposite. African-American workers report 0.6
fewer different activities per day than otherwise identical workers, on a mean of 19 activities; Hispanics report 0.7
fewer activities per day, while Asian-Americans report 0.9 fewer activities. Those with graduate degrees (college
degrees) report 0.9 (0.8) more activities per day than high-school dropouts. In short, the likelihood of reporting an
activity is opposite the impact of these demographics on the propensity to report on-the-job loafing. These
fascinating racial/ethnic differences are not the focus of this study, and we leave exploration of their causes for
future work.


                                                          9
        The results displayed in Table 2 showed that the positive effect of higher unemployment on time

spent not working was mainly on other non-work time rather than on time spent eating at work. Table 4

presents estimates of effects on the probabilities of eating at work and engaging in other non-work, and on

their conditional means. In all cases, we present only the specifications expanded to include all the vectors

of fixed effects. The negative impacts of unemployment on the probabilities of eating at work and

engaging in other non-work are essentially identical. The difference in the responsiveness of eating and

other non-work activities to higher unemployment that were shown in Table 2 result from the greater

responsiveness of the latter among those workers who report some non-work time: The impact on the

intensity of other non-work time is three times as large as that on time spent eating at work.

        B. Robustness Checks—Alternative Samples and Specifications
        Our central finding is that higher unemployment is associated with a greater fraction of time at

work spent not working, with most of the effect coming from greater time at work in leisure, cleaning up,

etc. Since higher unemployment, other things equal, is also associated with less time at work (in this

sample each extra percentage point of unemployment reduces the workday by 2.4 minutes per day), this

finding suggests that employers are allowing workers to spend a greater fraction of the workday not

working. The net effect is underlain by an important and surprising pair of subsidiary effects, namely that

higher unemployment reduces the likelihood of non-work, while increasing the conditional amount of

non-work sufficiently to generate the net positive relationship between unemployment and non-work on

the job. The question, however, is how sensitive these findings are to alternative specifications of the

estimating equations and underlying samples. In this subsection we present a number of re-examinations

focusing on this question.

        While we have held constant for fairly large vectors of occupation (22) and industry (51)

indicators, one might argue that these are insufficiently fine to account for differences in the structure of

labor demand. The ATUS provides more detail on these measures, 513 occupation and 259 industry

categories. At the expense of some cells being very sparsely populated or empty, we re-estimate the

equations in columns (3) of Table 2 and columns (2) and (4) of Table 3 including these expanded vectors


                                                     10
of indicators. For this experiment and the others, Table 5 reports the parameter estimates of the effects of

unemployment on the unconditional mean proportion of time spent not working at work, its incidence and

its intensity. This expansion of the vector of controls generates a slight increase in the impact of higher

unemployment on the conditional mean, but only tiny changes in its impact on the incidence and intensity

of non-work.

        With less cyclicality in demand and less exposure to the risk of job loss, we might expect that

public-sector employees’ non-work will be less cyclically sensitive. To examine this possibility, in the

second experiment we delete the roughly 1/6 of the respondents who are public employees. As the results

listed in the second row of Table 6 demonstrate, the expected change is exactly what we observe. Private-

sector employees’ non-work is more sensitive to variations in unemployment, but solely because its

intensity is more variable; its incidence actually varies slightly less with unemployment than does that of

the entire work force.

        The Great Recession was a unique experience in post-war American history; and regrettably

much of the variation in unemployment during our sample period arose because of this shock. To what

extent are our results driven by responses to this unusual event? In the third experiment we delete

observations from December 2007 through June 2009, the peak to trough of the NBER dating of this

cycle. Remarkably enough, these deletions hardly alter the estimated impacts of unemployment on the

three outcomes. Indeed, the effect on the unconditional mean is slightly higher than that estimated over

the entire 120 months, because the impact on the intensity of non-work is greater when observations from

the Great Recession are excluded.

        While we included gender in the basic specification, we did not allow for different responses to

unemployment by gender. In the fourth experiment we estimate the three basic equations separately by

gender, with the estimated impacts of unemployment shown in the fourth and fifth rows of Table 5. The

average increase by men in time spent loafing as unemployment rises exceeds women’s, because men’s




                                                    11
probability of loafing is less (negatively) responsive than women’s, while their conditional mean loafing

is more positively responsive to higher unemployment. 17

        The cyclical responsiveness of loafing may differ by payment method, even holding constant for

differences in demographics and occupational and industry attachment between hourly and salaried

workers. The former are more likely to report some loafing than are salaried workers. As the results in the

sixth and seventh rows of Table 5 show, however, differences in the cyclical responsiveness of non-work

on the job by payment method are small. The net impact is slightly greater among hourly workers, mainly

because their conditional mean amount of non-work is more responsive to variations in unemployment.

As with the central results, for both groups the incidence responds significantly negatively to increases in

unemployment, while the conditional mean responds significantly positively.

        In the penultimate experiment we limit the sample to full-time workers, to examine the possibility

that the incentives for loafing and the demand for part-time workers differ from those for workers more

closely attached to the labor market. The results, shown in the eighth row of Table 5, do not differ greatly

from the central results. While the net effect is smaller than in Table 2, both the incidence and intensity

effects are statistically significant, of opposite sign, and differ very slightly from those shown in Table 3.

Finally, deleting those workers who report loafing the entire day means truncating the sample on the

dependent variable, thus biasing any results. Although thus not desirable, in the last row of Table 5 we

nonetheless examine how the results change if we exclude this one percent of the sample. The net impact

of unemployment among the remaining group is nearly zero; but the incidence of loafing responds to

higher unemployment even more negatively than in the entire sample, while the intensity of loafing

responds significantly positively, as before, but less strongly than in the entire sample.

        Overall this array of alternative specifications with samples truncated temporally or by workers’

characteristics suggests that the central conclusions from the results in Tables 2 and 3 are quite robust.

There is a small net positive effect of higher unemployment in the amount of non-work in the workplace,

17
  The presence of young (age 13 or less) children significantly reduces men’s unconditional mean loafing while not
affecting women’s. This result seems consistent with income effects on married men’s efforts in households with
young children where the male is the major earner.


                                                       12
a net effect that is composed of a significant negative impact on the incidence of non-work and a more

important significant positive impact on the amount of non-work by the roughly two-thirds of workers

who report any at all.

        IV. A Suggestive Model of Non-Work (Loafing)

        Our results imply contradictory and offsetting motives for non-work on the job over the business

cycle or at different states of the labor market. Workers engage in non-work less frequently in bad times

(when the rate of unemployment is higher), but given that they do so, they tend to do more of it. The

following efficiency wage model with heterogeneous preferences can reconcile these apparently

contradictory findings.

        A. Preliminaries
        We consider an environment in which workers’ effort cannot be monitored perfectly, but their

aggregate productivity is an observable outcome of the state of the business cycle or the local labor

market as well as of the fraction of their time spent in non-work activities. Workers are heterogeneous

and, in the spirit of Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), face a binary decision to spend a fraction of working time

in non-work or exert full effort. Individual workers are risk-neutral and receive utility from consumption

goods purchased with their wages, as well as from leisure on the job (non-work). Each worker is endowed

with one unit of time and, if employed, receives a wage w plus the monetary equivalent of time spent in

leisure on the job (non-work or “loafing”), denoted as li. Workers are indexed by i∈[0,1] in increasing

order of li, so i > j implies li > lj for all i and j. Without loss of generality, the index could represent the

percentile of the worker in the distribution of preferred loafing times; in our example, the index is the

“name” of the individual worker in question and equals the preferred loafing time (as a fraction of total

available labor effort). If undetected, worker i is assumed to prefer enjoying this fixed amount of non-

work li and exerting work effort ei=1- li to exerting full effort ei = 1. The valuation of non-work li is

drawn when the job begins and lasts for its duration and has time-invariant expected value Eli.

        In each period, worker i chooses between loafing with income equivalent w+li, and not loafing at

all and receiving w. With exogenous probability θ, management monitors workers; if they are found

                                                      13
loafing, they are fired. Employment relationships also end exogenously with probability δ. Unemployed

workers receive income equivalent in value to b and are indistinguishable from other workers on the basis

of employment or non-work history. They find jobs at rate f, which, given the stock of employment, a

separation rate, and an exogenous labor force, is determined endogenously by a steady-state condition to

be described below.

        B. To Loaf or Not to Loaf: That is the Question

        For an arbitrary worker i ∈ (0,1) earning wage wi, it is straightforward to compute steady-state

valuations of the three possible labor-force states/strategies: Employment without any non-work (ViN),

employment with non-work (ViS), and unemployment (VU):

                 wi   δ        1− δ N ,
        Vi =        +     VU +
          N
                                    Vi                                                             (1)
                1+ r 1+ r      1+ r

               wi +  i θ + δ U 1 − θ − δ S
        Vi =           +      V +
          S
                                         Vi ,                                                      (2)
                1+ r     1+ r     1+ r

                b    f        1− f U
        VU =       +     VE +      V ,                                                             (3)
               1+ r 1+ r      1+ r

where

                         {
        V E = E  max Vi , Vi 
                 i ∈{0, i }
                                S N
                                   }
                                                                                                   (4)


represents the expected value of employment from the perspective of an unemployed person who does not

know her future value of lj, but knows that she will choose the strategy that maximizes expected utility

going forward.

        Given this set of behavioral assumptions, each worker i is characterized by a “no-loafing wage.”

If paid above this wage, the worker’s valuation of not loafing at all dominates that of loafing:

        Vi ≥ Vi .
           N       S
                                                                                                   (5)

As in Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), this “no-loafing condition” (NLC), defines the cutoff or minimal

threshold wagewi at which worker i is indifferent between loafing and not loafing, i.e., Vi = Vi . In
                                                                                            N    S



Appendix A, the “NLC wage” for worker i is shown to be:

                                                     14
                   r +δ + f            r +δ
        wi = b +              E i +          ( i − E i )                                                                             (6)
                       θ                θ
The NLC wage depends positively on income in unemployment b, the interest rate r, exogenous job

turnover δ, the outflow rate from unemployment f, and the worker’s expected valuation of loafing E i as

well as the deviation of her current value from the mean  i − E i . It depends negatively on θ, the

probability of detection.

        C. Aggregate Loafing and the Steady-State Flow Equilibrium

        The NLC wage represents a threshold wage above which a worker i will not loaf at all. Inverting

(6) yields the identity of the “marginal loafer” for whom wi = w, i.e., who is indifferent between loafing

her preferred amount and not loafing at all:

             θ (w − b ) − fE i
        =                                                                                                                              (7)
                   r +δ

          At any common wage w, all workers for whom wi > w (or, equivalently,  i >  ) will spend

time  i in non-work on the job. Let g ( i ) be the density of workers on the support of preferred loafing

time [0,1] and G be the associated c.d.f. The following measures are implied by (7), all contingent on w:

                                                           1
1) Fraction of workers loafing, γ (w) : γ =              ∫ 
                                                               g ( i )d i = 1 − G () ;

                                              1
2)   Aggregate loafing, (w) : ( w) =        ∫
                                              
                                                   i g (  i ) d i

3) Aggregate effort, e(w): e( w) = 1 − ( w) ;

                                                                              1                            1

4)   Conditional mean loafing, φ (w) : φ = E [ i  i > 0] =                 ∫
                                                                                   i g ( i ) d i
                                                                                                      =
                                                                                                          ∫  g (
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                               i       i   ) d i
                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                  1 − G ( )                       γ

        In the steady state, the outflow rate f, expressed as a fraction of the unemployed, endogenously

equates gross outflows and inflows into unemployment. Outflows are the product of f and ( L − L) ,

whereL is the exogenous labor force and L is employment. The mass of workers who flow into



                                                                 15
unemployment equals that of workers who lose their jobs through exogenous separation (δL) plus those

who are monitored and were loafing ( θγL = θ ( 1 − G ()) L ). The flow rate out of unemployment f is:

                  (δ + θγ ) L
            f =               = (δ + θγ )(u −1 − 1) . 18                                               (8)
                    L−L

           By inspection, an increase in unemployment has two opposing effects on the outflow rate. In the

first instance, it decreases f directly via the steady-state unemployment flow condition (8). Yet lower f

will increase the expected duration of unemployment and the cost of loafing. This second-order effect

reduces the fraction of loafers (γ) and lowers the inflow into unemployment due to those who are caught,

and renders the overall effect on f of a rise in unemployment, strictly speaking, ambiguous. Without

further restricting the model, we will assume that the first-order effect dominates:

Assumption: In general equilibrium, the outflow rate f is decreasing in the unemployment rate:

∂f/∂u<0. In Appendix A, we show that a sufficient condition for this assumption is that the elasticity of

the extensive margin of loafing with respect to the outflow rate is less than unity; i.e., ( f / γ )∂γ / ∂f < 1 .

           D. Predictions

             With these results and imposing ∂f/∂u<0, we can establish the following propositions (proofs of

which can be found in Appendix A), which will help interpret our findings and point to further empirical

implications for loafing:

Proposition 1: Loafing and unemployment. Holding the wage constant, the fraction of workers who

loaf depends negatively on the unemployment rate.

Proposition 1 is a partial-equilibrium relationship which holds all other factors constant, including the

wage. A rise in unemployment lowers the outflow rate, and thereby raises the no-shirking wage and

reduces the fraction of workers for whom shirking is the more attractive option.




18
     We assume that separations occur exogenously before monitoring.


                                                           16
Proposition 2: Loafing, wages and unemployment income. Holding the outflow rate f constant, the

fraction of workers who loaf depends negatively on the wage and positively on income in

                  ∂γ         ∂γ
unemployment:        < 0 and    > 0.
                  ∂w         ∂b

Proposition 2 holds that, ceteris paribus, an increase in the wage will deter some workers who were

previously enjoying non-work from doing so. Similarly, an increase in unemployment income will

increase the mass of workers who enjoy positive non-work.

Proposition 3: Conditional mean loafing and unemployment. Holding the wage constant, the

conditional mean of non-work on the job by those with positive non-work is increasing in the

                       ∂φ
unemployment rate:        >0.
                       ∂u

Proposition 4: Conditional mean loafing, wages and unemployment income. Holding the outflow rate

constant, the conditional mean of non-work on the job by those with positive non-work is increasing

                                                              ∂φ         ∂φ
in the wage and decreasing in income in unemployment:            > 0 and    < 0.
                                                              ∂w         ∂b

        Propositions 3 and 4 have important implications about conditional effects for those observed

with positive non-work. Proposition 3 implies that under the conditions assumed, an increase in

unemployment will raise the average amount of non-work by those observed with any positive non-work.

Intuitively, those who still loaf will have stronger preferences for it and this shows in the mean of those

who still choose non-work. In contrast, and possibly counterintuitively, an increase in the wage and/or a

decrease in unemployment benefits also increases the average non-work observed for those with positive

non-work.

        E. An Extension

        Our theoretical model, which ignores labor hoarding, can explain both the negative influence of

unemployment on γ, the fraction of workers who report any loafing at all, and the positive influence on φ,

the mean value of their loafing conditional on nonzero values. Yet our empirical findings show that the

response to unemployment at the intensive margin (the volume of non-work of each loafer) dominates

                                                    17
that at the extensive margin (incidence), implying a positive overall dependence of unconditional mean

loafing,

γφ, on the unemployment rate. In the model presented above this is impossible, since for each individual i

the amount of preferred shirking, if positive, is fixed at li. 19

            A variable intensive margin can be readily incorporated into our model while continuing to

eschew any explicit reference to the firm’s decision (although such effects could also be operative and we

discuss them below). Assume that loafing also imposes a fixed cost ε(u)>0 on the worker, independent of

identity, with ε(u)<Eli. This cost reduces the utility of loafing and reduces preferred loafing time. It could

be associated with peer effects – the stigma of being observed goofing off, for example. Although the sign

of the dependence on unemployment could be positive or negative, it is more likely that this cost declines

in the unemployment rate, ε´(u)<0, implying a smaller stigma in recessions when unemployment is high,

even as the potential cost of a layoff increases.

            In addition to heterogeneity in the effect of loafing on utility, the preferred level of loafing can

thus vary independently of the loafers’ identities; local labor-market slack is assumed to impart a peer

effect to the preferred level of loafing, perhaps resulting from the shame of being seen by colleagues,

friends and others goofing off on the job. This cost links the preferred amount of loafing negatively to the

state of the business cycle. In busy times when the labor market is tight and others are working hard,

being seen loafing by friends on the job is more likely to be embarrassing. In contrast, in slack times, this

cost will be smaller since others are working less. 20




19
     The effect of unemployment on aggregate effort at wage w is ∂e( w) = ∂ (1 − 1  g ( ) d ) = g () ∂  ∂f ,
                                                                  ∂u      ∂u    ∫ i i i                  ∂f ∂u

which is strictly positive since ∂  / ∂f and ∂f / ∂u are both negative.

20
  The importance of peer effects at work was noted eighty years ago by Mathewson (1931) and recently
demonstrated by Mas and Moretti (2009). It would be straightforward to model this in a more direct fashion,
allowing li to depend positively on φ - salient loafing by colleagues provides a fillip to one’s own loafing. An
equivalent outcome would arise if firms hoard labor over the business cycle (Fay and Medoff 1984) and accept slack
in bad times, which is taken up uniformly by workers choosing to loaf, regardless of the amount.

                                                            18
         The additional effect of unemployment works as follows: higher unemployment lowers f, which

raises the loafing threshold at any wage and thereby reduces non-work, but at the same time it also

reduces the social cost (“peer effect”), which raises the amount of non-work by the amount ε´, conditional

                                                                         1
                                                                             (    )
on doing any at all. Aggregate effort at wage w is now e( w) = 1 − ∫  i − ε (u ) g (i )di . In the Appendix A we
                                                                         


prove:

Proposition 5: In the presence of a pro-cyclical fixed cost of non-work, the net overall effect of

unemployment on overall non-work is ambiguous.

         The following toy model highlights this ambiguity. Preferred loafing is uniformly distributed:

g ( i ) = 1, G ( i ) =  i . Positive loafing is associated with a fixed cost ε0-ε1u, with ε0 and ε1 both positive


and small, so that ε 0 − ε1u < E i = ½ . We also impose 1 > θ (w − b ) − ½ f + (r + δ + f )(ε 0 − ε1u ) > 0 to
                                                                               r +δ

ensure meaningful outcomes. It follows that:

         wi = b +
                    r +δ + f
                               (½ − ε 0 + ε1u ) + (r + δ ) ( i − ½ )
                        θ                            θ

              θ (w − b ) − ½ f + (r + δ + f )(ε 0 − ε1u )
         =
                                r +δ

                   θ (w − b ) − ½ f + (r + δ + f )(ε 0 − ε1u )
         γ = 1−
                                     r +δ

                     θ (w − b ) − ½ f + (r + δ + f )(ε 0 − ε1u ) 
         φ = ½ 1 +                                               .
                                       r +δ                      

         Total non-work is given by:

                                      θ (w − b ) − ½ f + (r + δ + f )(ε 0 − ε1u )  2 
         ( w) = ½[1 − (ε 0 − ε1u )]1 −                                            ,
                                                       r + δ                      

and is represented as the trapezoid ABCD in Figure 2. Total available labor is 1 and total effort is

e( w) = 1 − ( w) ; while ∂e / ∂w = −∂ / ∂w > 0 unambiguously, ∂ / ∂u cannot be signed. Holding the

wage constant, higher unemployment leads to a lower outflow rate f, which means fewer workers are

loafing; but among those who are, the average amount of non-work is higher, since by assumption

                                                                 19
                 df 
                 (ε − ε u − ½ ) − ε1 (r + δ + f )
∂f         d   du  0 1
              =                                     > 0 . Figure 2 illustrates the impact of an increase in
                                                         21
   < 0 and
∂u         du               r +δ

unemployment which matches that found empirically in Section III, i.e., with the intensive margin

dominating the extensive margin.

        F. An Alternative Interpretation of the Empirical Results

        Our model takes a supply-side view of non-work driven by workers’ motives. Our data do not

allow us to test this model against demand-driven explanations of non-work based on labor-hoarding

motives, i.e., that firms contribute actively to countercyclical non-work. In this sub-section, we briefly

sketch such a model and leave it to future research based on richer datasets with extensive employer

information to distinguish between labor hoarding and shirking motives.

        Suppose workers have different productivities based on their endowments of firm-specific human

capital, and suppose that the state of demand for firms is perfectly (negatively) correlated with the

unemployment rate. In downturns, when demand is low, firms lay off some workers, but due to the costs

of investing in firm-specific capital they prefer to part with workers with lower levels of prior human

capital first. (In terms of our model, this could be subsumed by allowing the control and layoff probability

θ to depend explicitly on li.) Workers understand this and know that if they are caught shirking they will

be laid off. Because layoffs will be concentrated but not limited to workers with low firm-specific human

capital, these workers have an incentive to reduce non-work and lower their layoff probability, while

those with more firm-specific capital will tend take advantage of it. Overall, we would observe a

reduction of non-work in recessions, but an increase of those for whom it is a low-risk activity, given

firm-specific investments.

        V. Further Implications
        The model in Section IV provides several testable implications that we can examine using the

ATUS data. The results in Section III also have implications for the ongoing debate over the cyclicality of

21
  Recall that ε (u ) = ε 0 − ε 1u < E ( i ) = ½ was imposed. It should be emphasized that even this expanded model is
only partial equilibrium. In Appendix B, we endogenize the wage by embedding the model in a general equilibrium
framework.

                                                         20
labor productivity (see, e.g., Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2011; Galí and van Rens, 2014). We deal with

these two issues in turn in this Section.

           A.   Unemployment Insurance and Goofing Off

            The validity of Propositions 2 and 4 in Section IV can be assessed by expanding the

specifications presented in Tables 2 and 3 to include proxies for the wage rate and unemployment income.

Rather than adding the wage rate itself, which would generate errors due to division bias, we add the

usual weekly earnings that are reported in the ATUS. Since a quadratic in weekly hours is already

included, weekly earnings in this context become a measure of the worker’s hourly wage rate.

           The relevant measure of unemployment insurance (UI) income for each worker depends on

complicated formulas typically linking her most recent year’s pattern of earnings and employment to

state-specific regulations that are revised annually. The ATUS lacks worker-specific earnings histories;

faute de mieux we therefore experiment with two measures of the UI income that might represent the

average benefit available to an unemployed worker. The first, the annual state-specific maximum weekly

benefit amount (maxWBA), is set legislatively. Given the relatively low benefit ceilings that characterize

most states’ programs, roughly half of UI recipients receive maximum benefits, so that this measure could

be a good proxy for the incentives described in the model of Section IV. An alternative measure is the

average weekly benefit amount (averageWBA) paid in each state each year.22 We experiment with this

too, although it is not as clean a measure as maxWBA, since it depends partly on state-specific variation in

unemployment.

           We re-estimate the models in Column (3) of Table 2 and Columns (2) and (4) of Table 3, adding

each worker’s usual weekly earnings and sequentially the maxWBA and averageWBA in the state in the

particular year. For both maxWBA and averageWBA we present estimates of the determinants of the

unconditional mean of the percentage of non-work time, the incidence of non-work (the extensive

margin) and its conditional mean (the intensive margin). We measure UI benefits and weekly earnings in



22
     These data represent an extension of the sample used by Kroft and Notowidigdo (2011).


                                                          21
thousands of dollars for ease of presenting the parameter estimates, noting that their raw means are $384,

$281 and $858 respectively. While the results are very similar for both measures of UI benefits, the

explanatory power is slightly higher when we include maxWBA.

     Section IV generated no predictions about the determinants of the unconditional mean of non-work

time; and we see in Columns (1) and (4) of Table 6 that the inclusion of neither maxWBA nor

averageWBA has a significant impact on this outcome. Even with all the demographic controls, however,

conditional on hours of work those with higher weekly earnings (implicitly a higher wage rate) spend a

smaller fraction of their time at the workplace in non-work. 23 Proposition 2 suggested that the incidence

of non-work will fall with increases in the wage rate and rise with increases in income when unemployed.

The estimates in Columns (2) and (5) of Table 6 represent strong evidence in support of this hypothesis.

Controlling for education and other characteristics, workers with higher wage rates are less likely to

engage in any goofing off on the diary day in the ATUS. Workers in states and at times where the

maximum (average) UI benefit is higher conditional on their earnings and hours are more likely to spend

part of their day at work in non-work. This represents a strong confirmation of the model in Section IV

and, more generally, of the role of incentives to shirk in determining workers’ and firms’ behavior.

     Proposition 2 implied that the incidence of non-work is increasing in unemployment income and

decreasing in the wage rate. Proposition 4, in contrast, implies that the intensity of non-work is decreasing

in unemployment income and increasing in wages. The former implication is supported by the results in

Columns (3) and (6) of Table 6: Other things equal, including the large vectors of demographic, industry

and occupational characteristics, the conditional fraction of non-work is lower among workers with higher

hourly wages. The only part of Propositions 1-4 that is not supported by the data is the relationship




23
  The inclusion of weekly earnings and the UI variables does not qualitatively alter any of the inferences about the
effects of the demographic and other variables on the amount and incidence of non-work time that were based on the
estimates in Tables 2 and 3.


                                                        22
between unemployment income and conditional non-work time: As Table 6 shows, UI benefits exhibit no

correlation with conditional non-work time, only with its incidence.24

         B. Heterogeneity of Loafing

         The estimates in Section III suggest substantial heterogeneity in loafing along demographic,

geographic, occupational and industrial dimensions. We explicitly excluded the self-employed from our

empirical analysis, both because we wished to concentrate on how the employment relationship expresses

differences and changes in loafing, and because we wished later to focus on causes of changing employee

productivity. Yet the existence of self-employed individuals – who by definition are not subject to

efficiency-wage considerations – suggests an additional test of the theory: They should behave

qualitatively and quantitatively differently from employees. To test this, we estimate the same equations

for the self-employed respondents who reported time at the workplace, of whom there are 3347 with

complete information on work-days in the ATUS 2003-12.

        The estimates of the same expanded models that appeared in Column (3) of Table (2) and

Columns (2) and (4) Table 3 yield parameter estimates on the unemployment rate of 0.0027 (s.e.=0.0015),

-0.0043 (s.e.=0.0061) and 0.00432 (s.e.=0.0022). Most interesting is the fact that the impact at the

intensive margin is much larger than that shown in Column (4) of Table 3. This difference should be

expected, although the model in Section IV is not relevant here, as when unemployment is high and

demand is slack, self-employed individuals might spend less time working at work, instead waiting for

work or for customers. Together with a slightly smaller impact at the extensive margin, this finding

results in much more cyclicality of non-work time at work among the self-employed than among

employees.

        In the equations presented in Tables 2 and 3 the parameter estimates of the vector of occupational

indicators were highly significant statistically. Figures 3a, 3b and 3c present these estimates for the net

impact, the extensive margin and the intensive margin respectively, with management as the excluded

24
  Unreported results show that adding earnings to the specification hardly reduces the estimated positive impacts of
minority status on the unconditional mean of loafing, nor does it alter very much the impacts on its incidence and
intensity. The results suggest that an explanation related to incentives, rather than discrimination may better account
for minority-majority differences in the amount of non-work.

                                                          23
occupation. Remembering that the equations already hold constant a large vector of demographic

characteristics, these parameter estimates suggest an interesting pattern of heterogeneity across

occupations. First, except for protective services, workers in all other occupations loaf more on the job

than do managers, other things equal. Second, and most striking, the occupational differences in the net

amount of loafing arise almost entirely from differences at the extensive margin. The pattern at this

margin is consistent with what seem easily predictable occupational differences in the ease of monitoring

potential shirkers. It is plausible that the monitoring technology is the weakest, and the tolerance of slack

to be the highest, in farming, fishing and forestry, in production and extraction and in construction.

        C. Cyclical Movements in Labor Productivity Since 2003

        The nature of cyclical changes in labor productivity has been a focus of macroeconomic

controversy for over half a century (e.g., Okun, 1962). Labor-hoarding motives suggest that output per

paid worker-hour will fall in recessions, while the reduction in shirking incentives coupled with

diminishing marginal productivity suggests it will rise when workers are laid off. Our model implies the

outcome will be ambiguous, depending on the relative sizes of the impacts at the extensive margin

(counter-cyclical productivity per hour at work through greater incentives against shirking) and the

intensive margin (pro-cyclical productivity per hour at work through increased loafing by retained

workers).

        In the model presented in Section IV, there are four distinct effects of an exogenous increase in

labor productivity, characterized in Appendix B. First, the obvious direct effect is greater productivity per

worker with the same number of workers. Second, competitive firms will expand production and hire

more labor in response, which tends to reduce productivity at the margin. The third and fourth effects

arise in a general equilibrium context. As employment rises unambiguously, wages rise unambiguously,

enhancing effort and boosting productivity. Fourth, unemployment falls, increasing labor turnover and




                                                     24
reducing the cost of shirking, with the increase in loafing putting a damper on productivity. The net result

of these effects is ambiguous. 25

        Our estimates demonstrate that the impact at the intensive margin dominates that at the extensive

margin, so that we would expect pro-cyclical labor productivity if we measure it as output per hour on

the job. To examine how our finding might alter measures of productivity change over the cycle, we

extend the measures of labor productivity generated by Burda et al (2013) to account for cyclical

variation in non-work at work. Most crucially, in our adjustment we measure labor productivity as output

per hour at work and working—i.e., per hour of actual effort, and thus the closest empirical analog to

measuring average productivity in a neoclassical production function. We concentrate on labor

productivity in 2006:IV, when the U.S. unemployment rate in our data reached its cyclical low, and

2010:I, when it reached its high. 26

        The first row of Table 7 presents the BLS index of labor productivity in the business sector (using

a base of 2003:I = 100) for these two quarters and its peak-trough percentage change. The second row

lists a calculation based on a number of changes by Cociuba et al (2012) using detailed modifications of

the BLS series that account carefully for hours actually at work among civilian workers. The third row

shows calculations that adjust the measures in the second row to account for time at work as reported by

ATUS respondents in their diaries, which we view as more reliable than one-week retrospective reports of

time on the job, based on Burda et al (2013). All of these measures confirm that labor productivity rose

during the Great Recession.

        Amending these calculations to account for non-work time at work, the purpose of this exercise,

will increase the estimated counter-cyclicality of labor productivity, measured as output per hour of effort

(since we showed that the net impact of higher unemployment is to raise non-work time at work), but the


25
  In Appendix B we show that the partial derivative of average productivity with respect to a homothetic outward
shift in the production function is ambiguous for the reasons cited in the text.
26
  Aggregate unemployment reached its cyclical minimum of 4.4 percent in a number of months between October
2006 and May 2007. Its cyclical maximum was reached in October 2009. We use the minimum and maximum in
the ATUS sample for convenience, although the use of these dates hardly alters the inferences qualitatively.


                                                      25
question is: By how much? Taking the change in unemployment over this cycle, and using the estimates

in Column (1) of Table 2 as indicating the maximum possible cyclicality of non-work time at work, the

fourth row of Table 7 shows the adjusted indexes of labor productivity. 27 As the final column shows,

accounting for the counter-cyclicality of non-work time at work sharply increases the estimated counter-

cyclicality of labor productivity. Indeed, it nearly doubles its variation during the Great Recession

compared to the Cociuba et al (2012) measure, and increases it by 25 percent compared to the BLS

measure. Even with much less counter-cyclicality of non-work (based on the estimates in Column (3) of

Table 2), accounting for this phenomenon (in the sixth row of Table 7) still shows substantial effects on

the estimated change in labor productivity over the cycle. The main conclusion is that the standard

neoclassical prediction holds up even more strongly when worker effort is measured correctly.

        D. The Changing Cyclical Behavior of Labor Productivity

        We can decompose the rise in productivity with higher unemployment into the increase caused by

the rise in non-work time at the intensive margin and the drop generated at the extensive margin. As the

fifth and bottom rows of Table 7 show, movements at the intensive margin generate effects on

productivity (per hour of actual effort) that double the counter-cyclicality of productivity as compared to

the less comprehensive measures in Rows 1-3. The decomposition demonstrates that the cyclicality of

productivity will depend crucially on the relative importance of movements along the extensive and

intensive margins.

        The increase in labor productivity in the wake of the Great Recession stands in contradiction to an

earlier, conventional wisdom that labor productivity and total factor productivity in general are pro-

cyclical (e.g., Cooley and Prescott, 1995, Gordon, 2003, Ch. 8). Our estimates hint that this reversal in the

correlation could be due to changing strengths of behavior at the intensive and extensive margins – in the

pre-1990 period, the intensive margin may have dominated the extensive margin. Our model points to




27
 These are calculated so that they equal the measure in Row 3 at the average unemployment rate during this period.
Changing the basis does not change the estimated cyclical change in this adjusted index.

                                                       26
parameters such as worker turnover (δ or f) as well as the monitoring intensity (θ) or income while

unemployed as causal in this regard and indicates several directions for future work.

        VI. Concluding Remarks

        We have focused on measuring changes in effort exerted by workers as the labor market loosens

or tightens. This would appear to be a simple measurement issue, one that would have been reflected in

official aggregate data for many years. It has not been. With the now thirteen-year-old large-scale study of

time use, the American Time Use Survey, we can begin to examine this issue in a way that was heretofore

impossible, since that survey provides information on time use on the job. In particular, these new data

allow us to measure the cyclical variability of time not working while at the workplace.

        There is some evidence that non-work time at work is counter-cyclical, consistent with the

dominance of labor hoarding over the role of workers’ incentives to reduce shirking at times when its cost

rises due to reduced external opportunities. Within this net result, however, lie highly significant but

opposite-signed impacts of higher unemployment. The role of shirking is reflected strongly in the pro-

cyclical variation in the incidence of non-work time; but among those who shirk at all, the intensity of

their non-work is strongly counter-cyclical. These empirical results can be rationalized by a model of

interactions between employers and workers in which higher unemployment reduces the incentive for

heterogeneous workers to shirk, so that those who choose to continue shirking as unemployment rises are

those whose preferences for shirking are strongest.

        The model also generates predictions about how additional external opportunities, in the form of

prospective unemployment benefits, affect the incidence and intensity of non-work on the job. In general

they suggest that higher unemployment benefits lead unsurprisingly to more non-work on the job, but

they also lead those who do shirk to do less of it. These predictions are mostly supported when we match

the time-use data to various parameterizations of states’ unemployment insurance systems. Other models

might be constructed that explain all of the phenomena we have documented and still others, and that

would be a worthwhile additional development.




                                                      27
        We use the estimates to develop a new measure of labor productivity, relating it to changing

unemployment and showing that, at least during the period encompassing the Great Recession, labor

productivity was even more counter-cyclical than suggested by previous estimates. No doubt there are

many other applications of this new approach to measuring effort on the job that might be carried out. For

example, we have shown striking demographic differences in the share of work time devoted to non-

work. These might be used to re-estimate hourly wage differentials among different races/ethnicities;

they might be employed to adjust measures of the returns to education; or they could be used to re-

examine the returns to on-the-job training. We leave this large set of potential extensions and

applications, along with the derivation of additional predictions from our model, to others.




                                                    28
                                            REFERENCES

Mark Aguiar, Erik Hurst and Loukas Karabarbounis, “Time Use during the Great Recession,” American
      Economic Review, 103 (Aug. 2013): 1664-96.

George Akerlof, “Labor Contracts as a Partial Gift Exchange,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97 (Nov.
       1982): 543-69.

Truman Bewley, Why Wage Don’t Fall During a Recession. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
      1999.

Jeff Biddle, “The Cyclical Behavior of Labor Productivity and the Emergence of the Labor Hoarding
        Concept,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28 (Spring 2014): 197-212.

Samuel Bowles, “The Production Process in a Competitive Economy: Walrasian, Neo-Hobbesian, and
       Marxian Models,” American Economic Review, 75 (March 1985): 16-36.

Michael Burda and Jennifer Hunt, “What Explains the German Labor Market Miracle in the Great
       Recession?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring 2011): 273-319.

Michael Burda, Daniel Hamermesh and Jay Stewart, “Cyclical Variation in Labor Hours and Productivity
       Using the ATUS,” American Economic Association: Papers & Proceedings, 103 (May 2013): 99-
       104.

Kenneth Burdett and Dale Mortensen, “Wage Differentials, Employer Size and Unemployment”
       International Economic Review, 39 (May 1998) 257-73.

Peter Cappelli and Keith Chauvin, “An Interplant Test of the Efficiency Wage Hypothesis,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 106 (Aug. 1991): 769-87.

Guillermo Calvo, “Quasi-Walrasian Theories of Unemployment,” American Economic Review, 69 (May
        1979): 102-107.

Simona Cociuba, Edward Prescott and Alexander Ueberfeldt, “U.S. Hours and Productivity Behavior
       Using CPS Hours Worked Data, 1947:III- 2011:IV,” Unpublished paper, University of Western
       Ontario, 2012.

Thomas Cooley and Edward Prescott, “Economic Growth and Business Cycles,” in Thomas Cooley, ed.,
      Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995.

John Cragg, “Some Statistical Models for Limited Dependent Variables with Application to the Demand
       for Durable Goods,” Econometrica, 39 (Sept. 1971): 829-44.

Jon Fay and James Medoff, “Labor and Output over the Business Cycle: Some Direct Evidence,”
       American Economic Review, 75 (Sept. 1985): 638-55.

P. Sargant Florence, “Past and Present Incentive Study,” Chapter 1 in J.P. Davidson, ed., Productivity and
        Economic Incentives. London: Routledge, 1958.

Harley Frazis and Jay Stewart, “What Can Time-Use Data Tell Us About Hours of Work?” Monthly
       Labor Review, 127 (Dec. 2004): 3-9.

Jordi Galí and Thijs van Rens, “The Vanishing Procyclicality of Labor Productivity,” CEPR Discussion
        Paper 9853, 2014.


                                                   29
Robert Gordon, “The "End-of-Expansion" Phenomenon in Short-Run Productivity Behavior,” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity (1979:2): 447-61.

------------------, Productivity Growth, Inflation and Unemployment. New York: Cambridge University
          Press, 2003.

Marcus Hagedorn and Iourii Manovskii, “Productivity and the Labor Market: Comovement over the
       Business Cycle,” International Economic Review, 52 (Aug. 2011): 603-19.

Daniel Hamermesh, Labor Demand. Princeton University Press, 1993.

----------------------, “Shirking or Productive Schmoozing: Wages and the Allocation of Time at Work,”
          Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43 (Feb. 1990): 121S-133S.

Daniel Hamermesh, Harley Frazis and Jay Stewart, “Data Watch: The American Time Use Survey,”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19 (Winter 2005): 221-32.

F. Thomas Juster and Frank Stafford, “The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings, Behavioral Models,
       and Problems of Measurement,” Journal of Economic Literature, 29 (June 1991): 471-522.

Michal Kalecki, “Political Aspects of Full Employment,” The Political Quarterly, 14 (1943): 322-30.

Kory Kroft and Matthew Notowidigdo, “Should Unemployment Insurance Vary with the Unemployment
       Rate: Theory and Evidence,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
       17173, June 2011.

Edward Lazear, Kathryn Shaw and Christopher Stanton, “Making Do With Less: Working Harder in
      Recessions,” NBER Working Paper No. 19238, 2013.

Alan Manning, Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets.               Princeton, NJ:
      Princeton University Press, 2003.

Karl Marx, Das Kapital (Band 1) 1867. Berlin: Dietz Verlag, 1982.

Alexandre Mas and Enrico Moretti, “Peers at Work,” American Economic Review, 99 (Jan. 2009): 112-
       45.

Stanley Mathewson, The Restriction of Output Among Unorganized Workers. New York: Viking, 1931.

Arthur Okun, “Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance,” Proceedings of the Business and
       Economics Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association (1962): 98-104.

Roland Paulsen, Empty Labor: Idleness and Workplace Resistance. New York: Cambridge University
       Press, 2015.

John Pencavel, “The Productivity of Working Hours,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 8129, 2014.

Carl Shapiro and Joseph Stiglitz, “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device,” American
        Economic Review, 74 (June 1984): 433-44.

Robert Solow, “Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness,” Journal of Macroeconomics, 1 (1979): 79-
       82.

Jay Stewart, “Tobit or not Tobit,” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 38 (2013): 263-90.



                                                  30
APPENDIX A
A1. Derivation of the NLC wagewi
          For every value of  i , the NLC-wagewi implies indifference between the strategies of loafing

and non-loafing. For any value ofli we have the following four equations in four unknowns: the NLC
wagewi, the expected value of employment when unemployed EVE (not knowing li), the value of
unemployment VU, and the value of employment VE conditional on knowing li and imposing

Vi = Vi = Vi :
  N    S    E



(r + δ + θ )Vi E = wi +  i − ε (u ) + (δ + θ )V U
(r + δ )Vi E = wi + δV U
(r + f )V U = b +   fEV E .
                E i − ε (u ) ,
EV E = V U +
                     θ
or in matrix form:

r + δ + θ      − 1 − (δ + θ )         0   Vi E    i 
                                                   
 r +δ
               −1     −δ              0   wi   0 
                                                      =                                (A1)
    0          0     r+ f            − f  V U   b 
                                                        
    0          0      −θ              θ   EV E   E i 
Note that the system is block recursive. We can solve for VU and EViE easily and, given those, solve
forwi and ViE. The lower block can be solved first:

          b    f       
 V U   r + rθ E i 
    E
        =                                                                            (A2)
 EV   b + r + f E i 
         r    rθ       
Using (xx) the upper block of (x) is

                                            f        b 
                                 + (δ + θ )    E i + 
r + δ + θ      − 1 Vi E   i             rθ       r 
 r +δ               =
               − 1  wi              f       b      
                                     δ  E i + 
                                      rθ       r      

The solution for the NLC wage is then

wi = b +
            r +δ + f
                         E i − +
                                    (r + δ ) (       − E i )
                θ                     θ
                                                  i


and the NSC threshold at given wage w is
        θ (w − b ) − fE i
 i =                      .
             (r + δ )
                                                                 31
A2. Conditions for ∂f/∂u<0 and ∂l /∂ u >0 to hold in steady state equilibrium.
Proof. For ∂f/∂u: Differentiate equation (8), which defines f, with respect to u:
            f = (δ + θγ )(u −1 − 1) ,
to obtain
df    dγ df −1
   =θ       (u − 1) − (δ + θγ )u − 2
du    df du
or, solving

df   − (δ + θγ )u −2
   =
du 1 − θ (u −1 − 1) dγ
                    df
                                                                dγ
so for df/du<0 it is necessary and sufficient that θ (u − 1)
                                                       −1
                                                                   < 1 , which with u=(δ+θγ)/(δ+θγ+f)
                                                                df
               δ + θγ + f      dγ          f     dγ  f     δ + θγ      δ          δ
becomes θ (               − 1)    < 1 or          <           = 1+    . Since    > 0 , it sufficient
                 δ + θγ        df           γ     df  γ     θf         θγ         θγ
      df          dγ  f     
         < 0 that            < 1 .
                  df  γ
for
      du                      

                            ∂  − E i ∂f                                           df
Corollary: ∂l /∂ u >0:        =          , which is unambiguously positive because    <0.
                            ∂u r + δ ∂u                                             du


A3. Proofs of Propositions 1-4.
Proposition 1: Loafing and unemployment. Holding the wage constant, the fraction of workers who
                                                             dγ
loaf depends negatively on the unemployment rate:               < 0.
                                                             du
                                                                       dγ            d
Proof: Differentiate γ = 1 − G () with respect to u to obtain            = − g ( )    < 0 , because the density
                                                                       du            du
                                           d
g>0 and the Corollary establishes that        is positive. 
                                           du
Proposition 2: Loafing, wages, and unemployment income. Holding the rate of outflow constant, the
fraction of workers who loaf depends negatively on the wage and positively on income in
                     ∂γ         ∂γ
unemployment:           < 0 and    > 0.
                     ∂w         ∂b


                                                        32
                                                                                                                                  θ (w − b ) − fE i
Proof: Differentiate          γ = 1 − G () with respect to w to, using  =                                                                            yielding
                                                                                                                                        r +δ
dγ    θg ()                 dγ θg ()
   =−        < 0; similarly,   =       > 0. 
dw    r +δ                   db r + δ
Proposition 3: Conditional mean loafing and unemployment. Holding the wage constant, the
conditional mean of non-work on the job for those with positive non-work is increasing in the
                          ∂φ
unemployment rate:           >0.
                          ∂u
                                                        1                             1

Proof. Differentiate φ ≡ E  i  i [        > 0] =
                                                   ∫  g ( )d
                                                       
                                                             i    i      i
                                                                                 =
                                                                                   ∫  g ( )d
                                                                                      
                                                                                              i           i           i
                                                                                                                          with respect to u using Leibniz’s
                                                            1 − G ( )                                γ
                                   1
      dφ    g () d  ∫  i g ( i )d i dγ         d                            dγ
Rule:    =−           −                       . Since    > 0 (by the Corollary) and    < 0 (by
      du      γ du             γ 2
                                           du         du                            du
Proposition 1), the first term is negative and the second term is positive. Use Proposition 1,

dγ           d
   = − g ()    to rewrite this as:
du           du
                          1
                                                                            1
                                                                                                                  
 dφ
    =−
       g (  ) d 
                    +
                         ∫  g ( )d
                          
                               i        i   i
                                                 g ( )
                                                        d 
                                                          = −+
                                                                         ∫  g ( )d
                                                                             
                                                                                  i               i           i
                                                                                                                   g () d  , which can be written as
 du      γ du                      γ2                   du                               γ                        γ du
                                                                                                                

(φ − ) gγ() ddu   which is unambiguously positive, because the threshold value is by definition the lower


bound of  i for all those who loaf, so this always holds. 28 

Proposition 4: Conditional mean loafing, wages and unemployment income. Holding the outflow rate
constant, the conditional mean of non-work on the job for those with positive non-work is
                                                                                                                              ∂φ         ∂φ
increasing in the wage and decreasing in income in unemployment:                                                                 > 0 and    < 0.
                                                                                                                              ∂w         ∂b
                                                                                              1

Proof. As with the proof of Proposition 3, differentiate φ ≡
                                                                                          ∫  g ( )d
                                                                                          
                                                                                                      i           i       i
                                                                                                                               with respect to w and b:
                                                                                                          γ



                                                 1  g ( )d − γ  γ −1 =   G ( ) 1 − 1 G ( )d − (1 − G ()) γ −1
                                                  ∫ i                                       ∫ i i
28
     Use integration by parts to get                       i   i
                                                                                i     i 
                                                                                                                          
 = 1 −  − ∫ G ( i )d i γ −1 =  ∫ [1 − G ( i )]d i γ −1 which is unambiguously positive, since 1 − G ( i ) > 0
              1                          1

                                                         
for the entire interval  i ∈ [0,1]

                                                                      33
     d 1
dφ dw ∫ i
          g ( i )d i
                           1

   =                    −
                          ∫
                              i g ( i )d i dγ
                                                 = φ − 
                                                         γ −1θg ()
                                                                    >0(        )
dw         γ                      γ2          dw           r +δ
     d 1
dφ db ∫ i
          g ( i )d i
                           1

   =                    −
                          ∫
                              i g ( i )d i dγ
                                                 = φ − 
                                                         γ −1θg ()
                                                                     (
                                                                    <0     )
db         γ                      γ2          db           r +δ
                                                                dγ         dγ
The signs of these derivatives follow from                         < 0 and    > 0, as shown in Proposition 2, and from the
                                                                dw         db
fact that φ >  , established in the proof of Proposition 3.


A4. Fixed costs of non-work and Proposition 5.

Parallel to the original model, we assume that the conditions obtain that yield a negative correlation in
general equilibrium between the unemployment rate u and the inflow rate f. Using arguments analogous
to those above, it is straightforward to show that: 29


wi =
         (r + δ ) (       − E i ) +
                                        r +δ + f
                                                   (E i − ε (u ) ) + b
           θ           i
                                           θ

       θ (w − b ) − fE i + (r + δ + f )ε (u )
=
                       r +δ

Using these results, we can prove

Proposition 5: In the presence of a pro-cyclical fixed cost of loafing, the net overall effect of
unemployment on overall loafing is ambiguous.
                                                                               1
                                                                                   [   ]       1
                                                                                                                 [
Proof: Overall total loafing is given by ( w) = ∫  i − ε (u ) g ( i )d i = ∫  i g ( i )d i − ε (u ) 1 − G () ; by
                                                                                              
                                                                                                                          ]
                                                                                                   1
integrating the first term by parts, we can write ( w) = 1 − G () − ∫ G ( i )d i − ε (u ) 1 − G () .
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     [         ]
Differentiate this with respect to u:
∂( w)
 ∂u
                ∂
                                          [
       = −g () − ε ´(u ) 1 − G () + ε (u ) g ()
                ∂u
                                                    ∂
                                                    ∂u
                                                      ]                                                      (A3)

                                    ∂f
                                −      (E i − ε (u ) ) + (r + δ + f )ε ´                                                ∂
Note first that ∂  =               ∂u                                    , so E i > ε (u ) is no longer sufficient for    >0; a
                ∂u                               r +δ                                                                    ∂u
value of ε´ which is sufficiently close to zero will generate this inequality. Yet even then, the sum of three



29
     A more detailed appendix describing this extension is available from the authors upon request.

                                                                          34
terms in (A3) has an ambiguous sign; the first term is negative, the second is positive and the third is
positive.



APPENDIX B. Closing the Model: Efficiency Wages versus Competitive Labor Markets

        The model was set up in partial-equilibrium terms, focusing on the worker’s decision to supply
effort, taking the wage and unemployment as given. Closing the model requires specifying the wage
determination process. One possibility is that firms set or post wages as in the efficiency wage or search
literature. 30 In a class of model developed in Section IV, firms would choose a wage offer and a level of
employment to maximize profits subject to dependence of effort on pay. Let the representative firm’s
production function be given by Y = ΘF(e(w)L), where F is a concave, continuous function of labor input
                            1
e(w)L, with e( w) = 1 −    ∫
                                 i g ( i )d i F´>0 and F´´<0 and Θ>0 is an exogenous productivity shift term.

            ∂e θg ()     31
Note that     =       > 0. For simplicity, the price of output is set to one. First-order conditions for profit
            ∂w r + δ
maximization are: eΘF´= w, and Θe´F´(e(w)L) = 1. Combining the two yields the familiar “Solow
condition” (Solow, 1979), we´/e = 1:

                                            (r + δ )1 − ∫  i g ( i )d i 
                                                             1


                  w=
                        (r + δ )e( w) =                                       ,
                            θg ()                        θg ()

where  = θ (w − b ) − fE i . From the firm’s perspective, the wage set is independent of the marginal
                r +δ
product of labor, equating it rather to the ratio of average effort and marginal effort in response to the
wage. The model is closed by the optimality condition for employment L after substituting for e and 


                  Θ 1 − ∫  i g ( i )d i  F  1 − ∫  i g ( i ) d i  L  = w ,
                          1                               1

                                                                       

and the flow equilibrium condition for f (8), which yields, after substituting for  , a system of three
equations in w, L and f.

30
  The notion that firms post or set wages has a diverse literature: Bewley (1999) presents evidence that firms set
wages and are reluctant to reduce them; Burdett and Mortensen (1998) model wage-posting and turnover as sources
of labor market frictions which gives rise to an equilibrium distribution of wages. Manning (2003) provides a
summary of these arguments as deriving from both monopsony power and search frictions.
31
 To ensure uniqueness of the efficiency wage, we would need to require e(w)=0 for some w>0 and for e(w) to be
concave: e´´<0. In the present model, the first condition is always met; the second is met if the density of preferred
loafing times is declining at the optimum and  is decreasing in the wage in general equilibrium.

                                                                 35
        Alternatively, a competitive wage equates the marginal product of labor, given effort, with the
monetary disutility of work at some level of employment. The representative firm’s profit is as before, but
firms choose employment only. For simplicity, we specify an iso-elastic production function Y = ΘL1-1/η
with η>0. Profit maximization implies a single first-order condition eΘF´(eL) = w. At the same time, the
competitive wage also equals the marginal disutility of work, w=L1/ε. η and ε are thus the elasticities of
labor supply and demand, respectively. The equilibrium level of employment L solves:
                 1 − 1  g ( ) d  η − 1 ΘL−1 / η = L1 / ε ,
                   ∫ i i i  η

yielding one equation in L , after substituting for out γ, f,  and using w=e(L1/ε)ΘF´(L).




                                                        36
  Table 1. Descriptive Statistics, ATUS Employees' Workdays, 2003-12, N=35,548,
    Means and their Standard Errors (and Ranges for Several Variables)

                                             Unconditional Mean/          Conditional Mean
                                                 Incidence

Daily hours at work                                  8.35
                                                    (0.014)
                                                   [0.02, 24]
Proportion of time at work Not Working:
                                                    0.0688
                                                   (0.00062)

                                                     0.663                         0.1003
Of which:                                                                         (0.00084)
 Eating                                             0.0372
                                                   (0.00028)

                                                     0.518                         0.0682
                                                                                  (0.00041)
 Non-work not eating                                0.0316
                                                   (0.00057)

                                                    0.0355                         0.0869
  Of which:                                                                       (0.00145)
   Leisure and exercise                             0.0221
                                                   (0.00038)


    Cleaning                                        0.0046
                                                   (0.00031)


    Other                                           0.0050
                                                   (0.00028)


Usual weekly work hours                              41.38
                                                    (0.063)
                                                    [1, 160]


State unemployment rate                              6.65
  (three-month average)                             (0.012)
                                                   [2.1,14.4]


                                             37
Table 2. Basic Estimates of the Fraction of Time at Work Not Working, ATUS 2003-12, N=35,548
  (Parameter Estimates and Their Standard Errors)*

Ind. Var.                                 Non-Work                Eating at Work            _ Other_

State unemployment rate     0.00104     0.00084     0.00056     0.00024     0.00001     0.00060     0.00056
(3-month average)           (0.00037)   (0.00036)   (0.00041)   (0.00022)   (0.00022)   (0.00030)   (0.00035)

Usual weekly hours                       0.0029      0.0027      0.0007        x         0.0022       x
                                        (0.0004)    (0.0004)    (0.0002)                (0.0003)


(Usual weekly hours)2/100               -0.0034     -0.0031     -0.0010        x        -0.0024       x
                                        (0.0004)    (0.0004)    (0.0002)                (0.0003)

Hours at work                           -0.0368     -0.0377      0.0046        x        -0.0414       x
                                        (0.0028)    (0.0028)    (0.0013)                (0.0026)


(Hours at work)2/100                     0.0032      0.0032     -0.0002        x        -0.0034       x
                                        (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.00009)               (0.0003)

African-American                         0.0114      0.0104      0.0033        x         0.0082       x
                                        (0.0022)    (0.0024)    (0.0010)                (0.0020)

Hispanic                                 0.0139      0.0112      0.0101        x         0.0037       x
                                        (0.0022)    (0.0025)    (0.0010)                (0.0020)

Asian-American                           0.0115      0.0084      0.0101        x         0.0014       x
                                        (0.0033)    (0.0036)    (0.0019)                (0.0028)

Schooling=12                            -0.0049     -0.0041     -0.0001        x        -0.0049       x
                                        (0.0029)    (0.0029)    (0.0012)                (0.0027)

Schooling=13-15                         -0.0094     -0.0064     -0.0016        x        -0.0077       x
                                        (0.0033)    (0.0034)    (0.0015)                (0.0030)

Schooling = 16                          -0.0180     -0.0131     -0.0036        x        -0.0144       x
                                        (0.0031)    (0.0033)    (0.0012)                (0.0028)

Schooling >16                           -0.0199     -0.0167     -0.0033        x        -0.0166       x
                                        (0.0031)    (0.0035)    (0.0013)                (0.0029)




                                               38
 Table 2, cont.

 Married                                         -0.0017       -0.0025     0.0018          x        -0.0034        x
                                                 (0.0021)      (0.0021)   (0.0011)                  (0.0018)

 Male                                            0.0019        -0.0018     0.0004          x        0.0016         x
                                                 (0.0025)      (0.0026)   (0.0013)                  (0.0022)

 Married x Male                                  0.0015        0.0031      0.0001          x        0.0014         x
                                                 (0.0031)      (0.0031)   (0.0016)                  (0.0027)

 Occupation fixed effects (22)                                    x                        x                       x
 Industry fixed effects (51)                                      x                        x                       x
 State fixed effects (51)                                         x                        x                       x
 Month fixed effects                                              x                        x                       x

 Adjusted R2                        0.0004        0.074         0.084       0.029       0.044        0.112      0.115

*x denotes the variable or vector is also included. Each equation also includes a quadratic in potential experience,
and an indicator of metropolitan status. Standard errors in parentheses here and in Tables 3-6.




                                                          39
Table 3. Probit Derivatives and Conditional Regression Estimates of the Fraction of Time at Work
  Not Working, ATUS 2003-12*

Ind. Var.                              Probit Derivatives                        Conditional Regressions

State unemployment rate              -0.00347      -0.00507                          0.00159         0.00162
(3-month average)                    (0.00150)     (0.00172)                        (0.00042)        (0.00048)

African-American                      0.0795            x                            0.0047              x
                                     (0.0089)                                        (0.0024)

Hispanic                              0.0742            x                            0.0106              x
                                     (0.0088)                                        (0.0025)

Asian-American                        0.0775                                         0.0051
                                     (0.0183)                                        (0.0038)

Schooling=12                         -0.0279            x                            0.0009              x
                                     (0.0124)                                        (0.0032)

Schooling=13-15                      -0.0645            x                            0.0003              x
                                     (0.0131)                                        (0.0035)

Schooling = 16                       -0.1112            x                            -0.0048             x
                                     (0.0143)                                        (0.0034)

Schooling >16                        -0.1174            x                            -0.0050             x
                                     (0.0144)                                        (0.0034)

Occupation fixed effects (22)                           x                                                x
Industry fixed effects (51)                             x                                                x
State fixed effects (51)                                x                                                x
Month fixed effects                                     x                                                x

Pseudo- or Adjusted R2                0.095          0.127                            0.365            0.370

N=                                    35,548         35,548                          23,578           23,578

*x denotes the variable or vector is also included. Each equation also includes quadratics in usual weekly hours,
 time at the workplace, and potential experience; indicators of gender, marital status and their interaction, and
 metropolitan residence.




                                                        40
 Table 4. Probit Derivatives and Conditional Regression Estimates of the Fraction of Time Eating at Work
  and Other Non-Work, ATUS 2003-12*

                                       Eating at Work                                Other Non-Work

 Ind. Var.                          Probit    Conditional                           Probit        Conditional
                                  Derivatives Regressions                         Derivatives     Regressions

 State unemployment rate            -0.00579        0.00081                         -0.00529        0.00231
 (3-month average)                  (0.00197)       (0.00032)                       (0.00180)       (0.00072)

 African-American                    0.0483          0.0014                          0.1015         -0.0021
                                     (0.0120)       (0.0014)                        (0.0111)        (0.0038)

 Hispanic                            0.0952          0.0040                          0.0022          0.0118
                                     (0.0120)       (0.0019)                        (0.0112)        (0.0043)

 Asian-American                      0.0862          0.0034                          0.0255          0.0017
                                     (0.0216)       (0.0024)                        (0.0205)        (0.0074)

 Schooling=12                        -0.0186         0.0031                         -0.0057         -0.0036
                                     (0.0140)       (0.0016)                        (0.0124)        (0.0044)

 Schooling=13-15                     -0.0304         0.0029                         -0.0353         -0.0028
                                     (0.0152)       (0.0025)                        (0.0130)        (0.0050)

 Schooling = 16                      -0.0397         0.0026                         -0.0917         -0.0087
                                     (0.0165)       (0.0021)                        (0.0140)        (0.0056)

 Schooling >16                       -0.0383         0.0011                         -0.1252         -0.0058
                                     (0.0176)       (0.0023)                        (0.0144)        (0.0062)

 Occupation fixed effects (22)          X               x                               x               x
 Industry fixed effects (51)            X               x                               x               x
 State fixed effects (51)               x               x                               x               x
 Month fixed effects                    x               x                               x               x
 Pseudo- or Adjusted R2               0.153           0.143                           0.058           0.498

 N=                                  35,548          18,401                          35,548          12,612

*x denotes the variable or vector is also included. Each equation also includes quadratics in usual weekly hours.
Time at the workplace, and potential experience; indicators of gender, marital status and their interaction, and
metropolitan residence.




                                                       41
Table 5. Robustness Checks on Basic Equations Describing Non-Work Time: Estimated Impacts of
Unemployment*
                                               Dependent Variable:
                                            Unconditional        Incidence      Intensity      N = Total
                                               Mean                                            (Intensity)
Experiment:

More occupation (513) and                     0.00067          -0.00506        0.00160           35,548
 industry (259) indicators                    (0.00042)        (0.00202)       (0.00048)         23,578

Private-sector only                           0.00070          -0.00466        0.00177           29,292
                                              (0.00046)        (0.00191)       (0.00054)         19,402

Exclude Dec. 2007 - June 2009                 0.00062          -0.00460        0.00201           30,204
                                              (0.00046)        (0.00186)       (0.00054)         20,019
Men and women separately:
 Men                                          0.00085          -0.00437        0.00207           17,777
                                              (0.00057)         0.00270)       (0.00067)         11,808

  Women                                       0.00026          -0.00701        0.00134           17,771
                                              (0.00058)        (0.00284)       (0.00067)         11,770
Workers separately by payment
method:
 Hourly                                       0.00066          -0.00463        0.00173           20,541
                                              (0.00053)        (0.00214)       (0.00059)         14,644

  Salaried                                    0.00050          -0.00490        0.00162           14,991
                                              (0.00064)        (0.00275)       (0.00082)          8,932

Full-time (35+ weekly hours)                  0.00032          -0.00511        0.00131           29,864
                                              (0.00040)        (0.00179)       (0.00047)         20,408

No 100-percent non-workers                    0.00016           -0.0056        0.00089           35,059
                                              (0.00028)        (0.00177(      (0.000360          23,089

*Each equation also includes all the controls included in Column (3) of Table 2, here and in Table 6.




                                                          42
Table 6. Estimates of the Effects of Earnings and Unemployment Benefits on the Incidence and
Intensity of Non-work, ATUS 2003-12

                               Maximum Benefit                           Average Weekly Benefit

                         Unconditional                              Unconditional
                             Mean      Incidence        Intensity    Mean      Incidence    Intensity

State unemployment rate     0.00049    -0.00640     0.00173         0.00058     -0.00635    0.00178
(3-month average)          (0.00045)   (0.00187)        (0.00052)   (0.00048)   (0.00197)   (0.00056)

Weekly earnings ($000)      -0.0035     -0.0266         -0.0020      -0.0035     -0.0261     -0.0019
                            (0.0011)    (0.0054)        (0.0014)     (0.0011)    (0.0054)    (0.0014)


UI benefits ($000)          0.0180      0.2823          -0.0111      0.0048      0.3641      -0.0260
                            (0.0231)    (0.1034)        (0.0259)     (0.0405)    (0.1861)    (0.0465)

Pseudo- or Adjusted R2       0.085       0.129           0.370        0.085       0.129       0.370

N=                          35,548      35,548           23,578      35,548      35,548      23,578




                                                   43
 Table 7. Changes in Productivity, 2006:IV – 2010:I (2003:I = 100)

                                                         Peak        Trough    Percentage
Row       Productivity Measure                          Quarter      Quarter   Change
                                                        2006:IV       2010:I   Peak to Trough

1      Business Productivity                            108.05       116.81          8.11
2      Cociuba et al Adjustment                         106.27       111.79          5.20
3      Burda et al Adjustment of (2)                    105.20       111.79          6.26
4a     (3) Adjusted for Maximum Non-work                103.57       114.44         10.49
          Of Which: Intensive Margin                     103.27      117.66         13.93
4b     (3) Adjusted for Minimum Non-work                104.30       113.22          8.55
          Of Which: Intensive Margin                     103.10      113.50         10.08

       Unemployment Rate                                  4.21        10.23




                                         44
     20
     15
  Density
   105
     0




            0     .2        .4           .6         .8      1
                           prop_notwrk_atwrk
                                  51


Figure 1. Distribution of the Fraction of Non-work Time, ATUS 2003-2012




                                               45
46
                                                                                                                                                         -0.005
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                          0.005
                                                                                                                                                          0.015
                                                                                                                                                          0.025
                                                                                                                                                          0.035




                                                                                                                                                           0.01
                                                                                                                                                           0.02
                                                                                                                                                           0.03
                                                                                                                                                           0.04
                                                                                                                   business and financial operations
                                                                                                                                                                             coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                 (management=0)



                                                                                                                computer and mathematical science
                                                                                                                       architecture and engineering
                                                                                                                     life, physical and social science
                                                                                                                       community and social service




     Is the Excluded Category).
                                                                                                                                                legal
                                                                                                                      education, training and library
                                                                                                       arts, design, entertainment, sports and media
                                                                                                               healthcare practitioner and technical
                                                                                                                                 healthcare support
                                                                                                                                  protective service
                                                                                                               food preparation and serving related
                                                                                                                  building and grounds cleaning and…




47
                                                                                                                           personal care and service
                                                                                                                                   sales and related
                                                                                                                   office and administrative support
                                                                                                                        farming, fishing and forestry
                                                                                                                        construction and extraction
                                                                                                                installation, maintenance and repair
                                                                                                                                          production
                                                                                                                transportation and material moving
                                                                                                                                                    occupation




     Figure 3a. Coefficients on Occupational Indicators, Column (3), Table 2 (Net Effect; Management
                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.35




                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.3




                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                       business and financial operations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (management=0)


                                                                                                    computer and mathematical science
                                                                                                           architecture and engineering
                                                                                                          life, physical and social science
                                                                                                           community and social service
                                                                                                                                     legal
                                                                                                          education, training and library
                                                                                                  arts, design, entertainment, sports and…
                                                                                                   healthcare practitioner and technical




     Management Is the Excluded Category).
                                                                                                                      healthcare support
                                                                                                                       protective service
                                                                                                    food preparation and serving related




48
                                                                                                      building and grounds cleaning and…
                                                                                                               personal care and service
                                                                                                                        sales and related
                                                                                                       office and administrative support
                                                                                                             construction and extraction
                                                                                                    installation, maintenance and repair
                                                                                                                               production
                                                                                                     transportation and material moving
                                                                                                                                         occupation




     Figure 3b. Coefficients on Occupational Indicators, Column (2), Table 3 (Extensive Margin;
                                                                                                                                                        -0.025
                                                                                                                                                        -0.015
                                                                                                                                                        -0.005


                                                                                                                                                         -0.02
                                                                                                                                                         -0.01
                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                         0.005
                                                                                                                                                         0.015
                                                                                                                                                         0.025


                                                                                                                                                          0.01
                                                                                                                                                          0.02
                                                                                                                                                          0.03

                                                                                                                business and financial operations
                                                                                                                                                                         coefficient
                                                                                                                                                             (management=0)




                                                                                                             computer and mathematical science
                                                                                                                    architecture and engineering
                                                                                                                  life, physical and social science
                                                                                                                    community and social service
                                                                                                                                             legal
                                                                                                                   education, training and library
                                                                                                    arts, design, entertainment, sports and media
                                                                                                            healthcare practitioner and technical




     Management Is the Excluded Category).
                                                                                                                              healthcare support
                                                                                                                               protective service
                                                                                                            food preparation and serving related
                                                                                                  building and grounds cleaning and maintenance




49
                                                                                                                        personal care and service
                                                                                                                                sales and related
                                                                                                                office and administrative support
                                                                                                                     farming, fishing and forestry
                                                                                                                     construction and extraction
                                                                                                             installation, maintenance and repair
                                                                                                                                       production
                                                                                                             transportation and material moving
                                                                                                                                                occupation




     Figure 3c. Coefficients on Occupational Indicators, Column (4), Table 3 (Intensive Margin;
