NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATION, CORRUPTION, AND GROWTH
Philippe Aghion
Ufuk Akcigit
Julia Cagé
William R. Kerr
Working Paper 21928
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21928

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016

Comments are welcome and can be sent to paghion@fas.harvard.edu, uakcigit@uchicago.edu, julia.cage@sciencespo.fr,
and wkerr@hbs.edu. Author affiliations are Harvard University, University of Chicago, Sciences Po
Paris, and Harvard Business School. We thank Raj Chetty, Jim Davis, the editors and two anonymous
referees, and many seminar participants for very helpful comments and suggestions. This research
is supported by Harvard Business School, Innovation Policy and the Economy forum, Kauffman Foundation,
and University of Pennsylvania. Kerr is a research associate of the Bank of Finland and thanks the
Bank for hosting him during a portion of this research. Sina Ates, Alexis Brownell, Karthik Nagarajan,
and Jin Woo Chang provided excellent research assistance on this project. The research in this paper
was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the US Census Bureau
at the Boston Census Research Data Center (BRDC). Support for this research from NSF grant ITR-0427889
[BRDC] is gratefully acknowledged. Research results and conclusions expressed are the authors' and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau, the NSF, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential data are revealed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Philippe Aghion, Ufuk Akcigit, Julia Cagé, and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxation, Corruption, and Growth
Philippe Aghion, Ufuk Akcigit, Julia Cagé, and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 21928
January 2016
JEL No. H11,H21,H25,H41,H71,H72,M13,O11,O12,O40,R11,R12
ABSTRACT
We build an endogenous growth model to analyze the relationships between taxation, corruption, and
economic growth. Entrepreneurs lie at the center of the model and face disincentive effects from taxation
but acquire positive benefits from public infrastructure. Political corruption governs the efficiency
with which tax revenues are translated into infrastructure. The model predicts an inverted-U relationship
between taxation and growth, with corruption reducing the optimal taxation level. We find evidence
consistent with these predictions and the entrepreneurial channel using data from the Longitudinal
Business Database of the US Census Bureau. The marginal effect of taxation for growth for a state
at the 10th or 25th percentile of corruption is significantly positive; on the other hand, the marginal
effects of taxation for growth for a state at the 90th percentile of corruption are much lower across
the board. We make progress towards causality through Granger-style tests and by considering periphery
counties where effective tax policy is largely driven by bordering states. Finally, we calibrate our model
and find that the calibrated taxation rate of 37% is fairly close to the model's estimated welfare maximizing
taxation rate of 42%. Reducing corruption provides the largest potential impact for welfare gain through
its impact on the uses of tax revenues.

Philippe Aghion
The College de France
3 Rue D'Ulm
75005 Paris
FRANCE
and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu
Ufuk Akcigit
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Saieh Hall, Office 403
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu

Julia Cagé
Sciences Po
28 Rue des Saints-Pères
75007 Paris
France
julia.cage@sciencespo.fr
William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu

1

Introduction

Is taxation good or bad for growth? A dominant view is that taxation is detrimental to
growth. Taxation reduces the reward to entrepreneurial innovation and therefore discourages
investments that are important for growth. This perspective emphasizes minimizing the tax
burden on successful innovators to encourage more people to try to become successful innovators. An alternative view argues that taxation should not be analyzed independently from the
surrounding economic and institutional environment. Taxation, in fact, is central for many
aspects of this environment: tax revenues fund public infrastructure, education and schools,
legal systems, and much more. Entrepreneurs and innovators often rely heavily on these public
goods, and higher taxation can be growth enhancing if it supports the stronger provision of
public goods because it raises the expected returns to entrepreneurial e¤orts.1
The overall e¤ects of taxation on growth thus depend upon how taxation’s incentive e¤ects
weigh against the public goods e¤ects. There are two likely corollaries to this statement.
First, the relationship of growth to taxation will likely be non-linear, as the marginal incentive
e¤ects and public goods e¤ects will di¤er greatly depending upon existing taxation levels— the
former becoming more painful and the latter becoming less e¤ective as taxation continues to
rise. Second, while the incentive e¤ects may be unambiguous, the public goods e¤ect rests
on a crucial assumption: that taxes are being spent on public goods and not just ine¢ ciently
wasted or appropriated. We would thus anticipate that the optimal taxation rate for a very
e¢ cient government will be higher than the optimal rate for the most corrupt. The public
good e¤ect presumably explains why some Nordic countries manage to innovate and grow at
sustained rates with taxes that are high and highly progressive, while other countries su¤er.
This paper takes up this task in three steps. In Section 2, we build an endogenous growth
model to analyze how corruption and government e¢ ciency a¤ect the relationship between
taxation and growth. Modifying the Klette and Kortum (2004) framework, we build a dependence upon public infrastructure and goods into the innovation and entry process. Taxation
revenues can support these public goods, but governments vary in their levels of e¢ ciency. The
model predicts an inverted-U relationship between taxation and growth, and the interaction
between taxation and corruption has a negative impact on growth to the left of the peak.
In Section 3, we provide empirical evidence on the relationships between taxation, corruption, and economic growth using state- and county-level variations within the United States.
Our employment and …rm count data are primarily from the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD) of the US Census Bureau. We measure corruption through convictions of local public
o¢ cials (e.g., Glaeser and Saks 2006), and we collect data on tax revenues from US tax records.
Our state-level analysis …rst considers how lagged tax revenues and corruption in‡uence future
growth in state GDP and employment. Over the 1983-2007 period, our panel analysis …nds
evidence that is consistent with the model’s predicted relationships for taxation and corruption
on economic growth.
Most important, taxation’s marginal impact for growth depends sharply on local corruption.
The marginal e¤ect of taxation for growth for a state at the 10th or 25th percentile of corruption
is quite positive and robust, and its economic and statistical importance only begins to taper
at the upper end of US tax ranges, if at all. On the other hand, the marginal e¤ects of taxation
1

Higher taxation and redistribution may help increase investment opportunities in an economy with imperfect
credit markets. For example, see Banerjee and Newman (1993), Galor and Zeira (1993), Benabou (1996), and
Aghion and Bolton (1997).

2

for growth for a state at the 90th percentile of corruption are much lower across the board, and
its values are rarely statistically di¤erent from zero except at the very lowest levels of initial
taxation levels. Even within the limited range of US state income taxes, we see evidence for
negative growth e¤ects of increased taxes for states with very high levels of corruption and
taxes. By contrast, we …nd it more di¢ cult to establish e¤ects of corruption for growth beyond
this link with taxes in the US context.
Despite using tight empirical speci…cations with lagged values that predict future growth,
a natural worry is that unmodeled factors by state may be driving the connections that we
are seeing among taxation, corruption, and growth. To make further progress on these endogeneity issues, we …rst perform Granger-style tests by regressing past instead of future growth
rates on current tax revenues and their interaction with local corruption, and …nd that the
corresponding regression coe¢ cients become insigni…cant. Then, we turn to county-level patterns. Picking up on the public goods rationale, we develop a circular ring around each county
that is 100 miles in radius for our base case. For some counties, this entire ring is still within
the county’s home state. For other counties, this ring includes parts of other states. We use
this ring to develop a localized taxation and corruption level that is speci…c to each county
by taking weighted averages of state-level values that are included in the ring. Taxations and
corruption in neighboring states are more strictly exogenous than the behavior of a county’s
home state. We …nd that the interaction of corruption and taxation for growth is stronger with
these localized levels. Moreover, the localized interaction e¤ects persist when looking at border
counties or counties that draw more than 50% of their weighted taxation and corruption values
from states other than their home state. Altogether, these …ndings give us con…dence that the
identi…ed link from taxation and corruption to growth is at least partly causal and not the
simple product of omitted factors. As we discuss later, our empirical results have important
limitations and are far from perfect, but they do shine light on this important question for the
United States and emphasize the need for continued study in this area.
Finally, to get a better sense of the importance of corruption on growth and welfare, we
calibrate a generalized form of our theoretical model using empirical moments generated from
the LBD data. Our list of moments includes key aspects of …rm dynamics such as entry, exit,
growth, and R&D intensity. The calibration exercise allows us to derive the optimal tax rate.
It also allows us to assess the detrimental impact of corruption on growth and welfare. The
calibrated model yields an empirical estimate of the taxation rate of 37%, which is fairly close
to the welfare maximizing taxation rate of 42%. More interestingly, removing corruption fully
from the calibrated solution results in a consumption equivalent gain of more than 20%, which
is quite important in size. The calibration strongly suggests that the most substantial growth
impacts can emerge from reduced corruption and more e¢ cient government, with optimal tax
calibration at our current e¢ ciency levels being second-order.
This paper relates to a whole body of literature on taxation, incentives, corruption, and
growth. Representative studies include Helms (1985), Barro (1990, 1991), Mo…di and Stone
(1990), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995), Mauro (1995, 1998), Fisman and Gatti (2002), Gordon
and Lee (2007), Straub (2008, 2011), Hassett and Mathur (2008), and Hauner and Kyobe
(2010). The literature on how entrepreneurship and investment are impacted by taxation
includes Gentry and Hubbard (2005), Petrescu (2009), Djankov et al. (2010), Rohlin et al.
(2010), and Nanda (2011). Public investment and economic growth are discussed by Aschauer
(1989), Calderon and Serven (2004), Singhal (2008), and Chakraborty and Dabla-Norris (2011).

3

Tanzi and Davoodi (2000) and Romp and de Haan (2007) provide comprehensive discussions
of the interlinkages among corruption, public …nances, and economic development and growth.
Prior work also describes how corruption can weaken the public goods necessary for growth
(e.g., Del Monte and Papagni 2001, 2007; Paserman et al. 2008, Fiorino et al. 2012), with
Italian regional variation being frequently exploited. Our work di¤ers from this prior literature
in its e¤orts to build these factors into an endogenous growth model and then empirically
characterize the marginal growth implications across the US taxation-corruption distribution.
This joint distribution provides a much richer portrait of how taxation’s e¤ects are realized.
The calibrated model also allows us to provide a micro-founded assessment of optimal taxation
levels given this trade-o¤. We hope this framework is useful to other researchers approaching
this important policy choice.2

2

Theoretical Model

We develop a Schumpeterian growth model of the relationship between taxation, corruption
or government e¢ ciency, and growth/innovation. This section outlines the structure of the
baseline model where we abstract from physical capital in the model. In a later section, we
generalize the model by introducing capital and then calibrate it to the US data. Proofs and
detailed mathematical derivations are contained in the appendix. Our model contains qualityimproving innovations that generate growth due to the actions of entrants and incumbents.
More speci…cally, it builds on Klette and Kortum (2004) the additional feature that the innovation production function depends on the quality of the infrastructure of the economy, which
is provided by the government through taxation. This framework has the attractive feature
of allowing simultaneous study of new entrants with the innovative behavior of multi-product
incumbent …rms. Variations in government corruption and e¢ ciency impact the quality of the
infrastructure provided per tax dollar, and thus economic growth.3

2.1
2.1.1

Basic Environment
Preferences

Consider the following continuous time model. The economy consists of a representative household with preferences over consumption and leisure
Z 1
U=
e t (ln Ct Lt ) dt;
(1)
0

2

Our model builds on the existing innovation-based growth literature (Romer 1986, 1990, Aghion and Howitt
1992, and Klette and Kortum 2004). See also Acemoglu (2009) and Aghion and Howitt (2009) for recent
overviews of that literature. Recent theoretical and empirical links of entry dynamics to economic growth
includes Acs and Armington (2006), Aghion et al. (2007), Akcigit and Kerr (2010), Acemoglu et al. (2011),
Haltiwanger et al. (2013), and Glaeser et al. (2015). Our work also connects to a literature on the determinants
of spatial location (e.g., Marshall 1920, Rosenthal and Strange 2004, Duranton and Puga 2004, Glaeser 2008,
Ellison et al. 2010). This work often emphasizes both theoretically and empirically taxation and the strength
of public goods. Finally, our paper connects to the allocation of talent and growth (e.g., Baumol 1990, Murphy
et al. 1991, Banerjee and Newman 1993).
3
Our model has a …xed population of workers and thus di¤ers from tax competition frameworks that model
increased business movements to jurisdictions with more favorable environments. Our empirical work below
considers these shifts as well.

4

where Ct is the consumption of the unique …nal good and Lt is the labor supply by the household. Labor can be used in four ways: production of the …nal good LP , innovation in incumbent
…rms LI , innovation in entrants LE , and government workers to provide infrastructure LG .
The household owns a balanced portfolio of all the …rms in the economy, therefore its
budget constraint is
Ct + A_ t = wt Lt + rt At + Tt ;
where wt is the wage, rt is dividend payment from the asset holdings, A_ t is the new investment
in assets, and Tt is the tax revenue collected by the government. We normalize the price of
the …nal good to Pt = 1 without loss of generality.
2.1.2

Production Technology

The unique …nal consumption good Yt is produced using capital Kt and the basket of intermediate varieties Zt according to the CRS production function
Yt = Kt Zt1

:

(2)

In this section, we abstract from capital by assuming = 0 (hence Yt = Zt ). This means that
…nal good is produced only through the intermediate goods basket Zt which itself is produced
using the CES aggregator
Z
1

ln Zt =

ln zt (i)di:

0

In this expression, i indexes a unique product line. Firms in the same product line compete a
la Bertrand, so only the latest innovator is active in equilibrium. Each intermediate variety is
produced using labor only according to the linear production technology
zt (i) = qt (i)lt (i):

(3)

Thus, the constant marginal cost of production is
M Ct (i) =

wt
:
qt (i)

Each innovation improves the productivity of a given line i from qt (i) to (1 + )qt (i). A …rm in
this economy is de…ned by a collection of product lines. In equilibrium, the number of product
lines summarizes the state of a …rm. We denote the number of product lines of an incumbent
…rm by n 2 Z+ : A …rm exits the economy and becomes an outsider when n = 0:
2.1.3

Innovation Technology

Firms obtain new product lines through innovation. Acquiring product lines contributes to
…rm value by increasing …rm pro…ts. Firms hire LI innovation workers to generate a Poisson ‡ow rate of new innovations. Infrastructure in the economy and …rm-speci…c knowledge
stock complement labor in the innovation production. In particular, the innovation ‡ow I is
generated according to
LI
I = t n1
;
(4)

5

where n is the …rm’s stock of existing product lines (the …rm-speci…c knowledge stock) and t
is the quality of the economy’s infrastructure. After a small time interval t; a …rm f invents
a new product with probability I t: Innovations are undirected, and a successful innovation
is realized throughout the unit interval [0; 1] with equal probability. When …rm f innovates in
product line j; two things happen. First, the innovating …rm obtains the new product line j
and therefore its number of product lines increases from n to n + 1: Second, the technology in
j increases by the step size .
For the sake of tractability, we will assume
= 1=2: Then the innovation production
function (4) generates the following innovation cost function
C (I; n) = wt LI = wt
where x
2.1.4

n
2

2

x

= nc (x) ;

t

I=n is the innovation intensity.
Infrastructure and Government

The economy’s infrastructure (broadly de…ned) aids the innovation e¤orts of …rms. The stock
of infrastructure t depreciates at the rate
2 (0; 1) at every instant. The government invests
Ft in new infrastructure through money derived from taxation. As a result, the law of motion
for the infrastructure can be expressed as
_t =

t

+ Ft :

(5)

The government hires LGt workers to produce Ft units of infrastructure with a one-to-one
technology
Ft = LGt :
(6)
The government taxes …rm operating pro…ts (net of innovation expenses) t at the rate
[0; ] : Tax revenue Tt is subject to corruption at a fraction 2 (0; 1). As a result, only (1
fraction of the tax revenue turns into government investment
Ft =

(1

) Tt
wt

;

2
)

(7)

R1
where Tt
0 t t (i) di: The same amount of tax payers’money turns into better infrastructure if the government is more e¤ective. Corrupted money Tt is added to the household
budget as a corruption income. The resource constraint is Yt = Ct , with all expenses in terms
of labor units.4
2.1.5

Entry and Exit

There is a mass of potential entrants into the intermediate sector of the economy. They
generate a ‡ow rate x
~ of new innovations by hiring LE innovation workers according to
x
~=
4

t

LE ;

The generalized model in Section 4 adds capital investment to the resource constraint.

6

where is a constant entry cost parameter. When an outsider innovates, it captures a new
product line that has value Vt de…ned below. Therefore the value of an outsider V out can be
written as
wt
x
~+x
~ Vt V out :
rV out = max
x
~

t

This value function captures the instantaneous ‡ow cost (wt = t )~
x of attempting to enter the
market and the change in the outsider’s value Vt V out upon success, which happens at the
rate x
~: An incumbent …rm joins the pool of outsiders when it loses all of its product lines and
obtains the value V out :

2.2

Equilibrium

Our focus will be on balanced growth path equilibrium. All equilibrium values will be denoted
by an asterisk “*”. Henceforth we will drop the time subscripts.
De…nition 1 A balanced growth path equilibrium (BGP) of this economy consists of constant prices (r ; w ), a constant value of incumbent …rms V (n), constant incumbent …rm
innovation I (n) and entrants’ innovation x
~ yielding the destruction rate , constant infrastructure level , constant government investment F ; constant tax rate and the allocation
fY (t); C (t); L ; LP ; LI ; LE ; T , fyi (t); li gi2[0;1] gt>0 with the price sequence fpi (t)gi2[0;1];t>0
such that (i) pi ; yi ; and li maximize incumbent …rm (operational) pro…t for each i and t, (ii)
innovation decisions I (n) and x
~ maximize the incumbent and entrant …rm values, respectively, with the outside …rm value being V out = 0, (iii) households maximize their utility given
the prices (r ; w ), (iv) w and r are compatible by household optimization, (v)
evolves
following (5), (vi) F satis…es (6) ; (vii) L ; LP ; LI ; LE ; and LG satisfy market clearing given
w , and (viii) the resource constraint satis…es Yt = Ct .
Next we will solve for the balanced growth path equilibrium.
From the household’
s problem,
h
i
we can express the Hamiltonian as H = ln C L + wL + rA + T C A_ ; which delivers
the equalities
g=r
and w = C = Y:
(8)
Next we turn to the monopolist’s problem. Since the …nal goods production function is
CRS Cobb-Douglas, and since factors are paid their marginal product, Euler’s theorem implies
that expenditure on intermediates is Pt Zt = Yt . Furthermore, logarithmic aggregation of
intermediates implies that expenditure on each variety is the same. Therefore, demand for
variety i is given by:
Yt
zt (i) =
:
pt (i)
Bertrand limit pricing in each product line i implies that the current innovator …rm prices at
the marginal cost of previous innovator (i.e., pt (i) = (1 + )wt =qt (i) as the previous owner’s
technology level is qt (i)=(1 + )) and therefore
pt (i)

M Ct (i) =

7

wt
:
qt (i)

So monopolist pro…ts are
= Yt

:
(9)
+1
We choose the parameters such that (i) …rms generate positive pro…ts in equilibrium and (ii)
the maximum possible tax level is su¢ ciently large that one can generate a non-monotonic
relationship between taxation and growth.
t

Assumption 1 Parameters of the model are such that the operating pro…t is positive for all
tax rates and the upper limit of the maximum tax rate is su¢ ciently large, i.e.,
1>

1+
2 [1
]2

2

>

1 2
:
1+2

To solve for the optimal innovation decisions, we express the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equation for an n-product incumbent …rm. Let
denote the aggregate equilibrium innovation
rate in the economy. Since each of the product lines will be lost to a competitor at this ‡ow
rate, the value function of a …rm with n product lines is written as
h
i 9
8
2
>
>
] n t wt nx
< [1
=
2 2
_
r Vt (n) Vt (n) = max
(10)
+xn [Vt (n + 1) Vt (n)] > :
x >
:
;
+ n [Vt (n 1) Vt (n)]

This value function takes an intuitive form. The instantaneous safe return on the left-hand
side is equal to the risky expected return on the right-hand side. The …rst term on the right
is the after-tax operating pro…t of a …rm that generates a gross pro…t of n t and pays an
innovation cost of nwt x2 =2 2 every instant. The …rm innovates at rate xn, in which case its
value increases by Vt (n + 1) Vt (n) : Similarly, the …rm loses a product at rate n, in which
case the change is simply Vt (n 1) Vt (n) :
Since the …rm problem is scales up linearly with …rm size, the following lemma holds.

Lemma 1 The value function Vt (n) is linear in n and Yt such that Vt (n) = v nYt ; where
v > 0 is a constant. Moreover the optimal innovation decision is x = 2 v = [1
]:
Next, we turn to the entrant’s problem. We will have an equilibrium with positive entry
if wt = v Yt Vtout : When there is positive entry, an outsider’s value is simply V out = 0
and 1=
= v : Therefore,
1
v =
and x =
:
(11)
[1
]
Along the BGP, infrastructure
and government investment F are constant. From the
law of motion, F =
in steady state. Then the balanced budget in (7) gives
F = (1

)

;

(12)

where
= (1 + ) 1=2 2 (1
)2 is the equilibrium operating pro…t. Note that the
equilibrium operating pro…t is decreasing in the tax rate which highlights the disincentive
e¤ect of taxation. The equilibrium level of infrastructure is
=

(1

)

8

:

(13)

The government sustains a lower infrastructure in equilibrium if corruption or depreciation is
high. The e¤ect of the tax rate on the equilibrium level of infrastructure is non-monotonic.
The entrant’s innovation rate is determined from the optimal values (11) and the value
function (10),
x
~ ( ) = (1
)
:
(14)
Overall, the aggregate innovation rate
=

(1

)

=x +x
~ from (11) and (14) is
+ (1

)

:

(15)

Then, using the fact that the aggregate growth rate is
g =

ln (1 + ) ;

(16)

we easily obtain:
Proposition 1 For any given level of government e¤ ectiveness ; the e¤ ect of an increase in
the tax rate has an inverted-U e¤ ect on equilibrium growth,
8
< > 0 for < g
@g
= 0 for = g :
=
:
@
< 0 for > g
Moreover, the positive impact of tax on growth is smaller if the government is less e¤ ective
(when is higher)
@2g
< 0 for < g :
@ @

In words: (i) aggregate growth rate is determined by the rate of new innovation arrivals
and the size of their contributions ln (1 + ); (ii) taxation and corruption impact innovation e¤orts and thereby the arrival rate of new innovations; (iii) while taxation discourages
innovation through reducing ex-post rents, it also encourages innovation and growth through
better provision of infrastructure; (iv) taxation contributes to growth initially as there has to
be at least some government revenue to be able to provide the necessary infrastructure in the
economy; however, excessive taxation deters ex ante innovation by reducing the ex-post pro…ts
too much; (v) the higher the degree of corruption, the lower the potential contribution of
a tax dollar on the economy since less of this tax revenue will go into infrastructure.
Finally, one can look at the e¤ects of taxation and corruption on equilibrium entry and on
the size distribution of …rms. One can …rst establish:
Proposition 2 For any given level of government e¤ ectiveness ; the e¤ ect of an increase in
the tax rate has an inverted-U e¤ ect on the entry rate,
8
< > 0 for < x~
@x
~
= 0 for = x~
=
:
@
< 0 for > x~
where the cuto¤ is implicitly de…ned as

(1 2

1+2 x~
x
~ )(1

9

x
~)

2

=2

2

:

3

Empirical Analysis

We now provide empirical evidence on the impact of income taxation and corruption on economic growth using panel variation across states and counties within the United States over
a 25-year period. We …rst describe the data assembled and our econometric strategy. We
then consider state-level analyses of economic growth. We close this empirical section with a
state-border analysis that uses county-level data and possesses attractive inference properties
outlined below. In the next section, we consider a calibrated form of the model to provide
more-structured quantitative evidence.

3.1

Data Structure

Our starting point is to empirically examine whether patterns of state-level economic growth for
the United States are consistent with our model’s emphasis on the interaction between taxation
and corruption. We consider these issues using state-level variations in the United States for
several reasons. First, metrics like taxation and corruption are notoriously di¢ cult to compare
across countries, and by focusing on state-level experiences we have greater con…dence for an
apples-to-apples comparison. This approach also allows us to better isolate our taxation and
corruption interests from other national features (e.g., trade reforms, stock market booms),
although we must remain diligent for other state-level factors connected to growth. Second
and related, our econometric strategy utilizes a panel analysis to push the achieved level of
identi…cation as far as possible. Such a panel analysis requires a su¢ ciently long data span
to measure …xed e¤ects for spatial units, and US data provide this necessary panel length in
addition to their homogeneous measurement.
Typical of endogenous growth frameworks, the focus of our model and upcoming numerical
calibrations is GDP per worker, and we accordingly devote extra attention to this particular
outcome in our empirical work. An empirical analysis using regional variations, however,
can also encounter another form of growth through the spatial movement of activity towards
places with improving attributes. Indeed, many varieties of the spatial equilibrium model from
the urban literature (e.g., Glaeser 2008) require real wages be …xed over cities, thus forcing
adjustments over cities to occur via population changes to keep the spatial equilibrium. In more
practical terms, the business press frequently connects a state’s business climate to its ability
to attract …rms and workers from other states, which is not present in an endogenous growth
model with …xed populations. We thus complement our model’s growth in GDP per worker
with a broader set of metrics that include growth in GDP, workers, establishment counts, and
so on. We also consider drivers connected to growth like entry/exit, patenting, etc. Our goal
is to provide a broad and robust depiction of these novel patterns, even where they extend
beyond the model, to establish a comprehensive perspective.
We collect estimates of state GDP from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We
draw our employment and establishment data from the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD). The LBD is the business registry for the United States and contains annual
observations for every private-sector establishment with payroll from 1976 onward. Sourced
from US tax records and Census Bureau surveys, the micro-records document the universe
of establishments and …rms rather than a strati…ed random sample or published aggregate
tabulations. Jarmin and Miranda (2002) describe the LBD construction. As a representative
year, the data include 108 million workers and 5.8 million establishments in 1997. This data
10

platform provides great ‡exibility for disaggregating employment growth e¤ects into separate
parts.
Our empirical estimations consider the 1983-2007 period, and we structure our data into
…ve-year time periods that run from 1983-1987 to 2003-2007.5 Within each time period, we take
the average of our economic variables like GDP and employment. We believe that these …veyear periods provide us the best time horizons for measuring the medium-term growth impacts
from taxation and corruption. Most estimations focus on 46 states and the District of Columbia
that have non-zero state income taxes throughout the period studied. The four excluded states
are Nevada, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming. We have conducted an extensive number
of tests regarding these states and …nd very similar results if we incorporate them in some
manner (e.g., assigning them the lowest possible value of income tax revenue per government
expenditures observed in their region over the corresponding period). We occasionally exclude
Alaska and Hawaii when modelling covariates due to data limitations.
Table 1 provides the mean and standard deviation of metrics across observations. States
average $167 billion in annual economic activity over the period studied (for a sample total
of almost $8 trillion), and the average GDP per worker is about $70,000. In a typical year,
the average state has 2.3 million workers (for a sample total of 108 million workers). About
one-quarter of these workers are typically in young establishments, which we de…ne to be
establishments aged four years or less. Around one in ten workers in a given year is employed
in an entering or exiting establishment. The average state has 120,000 establishments with an
average employment size of 21 workers. We measure log growth across the …ve-year periods
of our data structure, and we winsorize growth rates at their 1% and 99% levels to guard
against outliers. Five-year growth rates average about 5% for de‡ated state GDP per worker
and 7%-8% for employment and establishment growth.
We next describe our measures of state taxation and corruption. State income taxation
comes from the BEA and averages $3 billion in annual revenues. We use a combined measure
of corporate and personal income tax given the equivalence for many small businesses that are
"pass-through entities" (e.g., sole proprietorships, limited liability corporations). As described
further below, our empirical work normalizes state income tax revenues by initial government
expenditures in the state. This share averages 16%, recognizing that the denominator is funded
to a substantial degree by federal transfers and states can run unbalanced budgets. The most
substantial part of state taxation not included in our analysis is state sales tax.
The …nal row of Panel A provides our corruption metric. This is the most di¢ cult data
piece to measure from a conceptual perspective, as the e¢ ciency with which tax revenues
are translated into useful infrastructure can be dampened by factors beyond overtly corrupt
behavior (e.g., incompetence, laziness). While some think tanks are now "grading" states on
their e¤ectiveness of government, these report cards are only very recent and do not o¤er a long
history to analyze. We follow prior work by considering federal convictions of corrupt public
o¢ cials by state. These data are collected and published by the Public Integrity Section of
the Department of Justice for 93 districts, including some US territories like Guam and Puerto
Rico, which we aggregate to states.6 The corruption cases include local, state, and federal
o¢ cials and stretch back to the 1970s. There are some instances of unreported conviction
5

For most employment-related outcomes, the last period is calculated over 2003-2005 due to LBD data
releases, although we have con…rmed our aggregate employment e¤ect across the full 2003-2007 period using
County Business Patterns.
6
United States Department of Justice (Public Integrity Section): http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/pin/.

11

totals for small districts in a given year, and we code these and zero convictions to be a single
conviction minimum. These choices are not very important as the major bouts of corruption
can see a district jump from 4-5 cases per year to over 50. Measures of convictions are not
perfect, especially as they do not re‡ect the legal but damaging ways that tax money could
end up being diverted from productive uses (e.g., the proverbial "bridge to nowhere"), but
they are the best available options given their long history and impartial measurement across
states. The average state has 18 convictions per annum.
Panel B of Table 1 provides county-level data, with the levels and growth rates of LBD
activity aligning with the state data in Panel A. We describe later the shares of counties on
state borders.

3.2

Econometric Strategy

Our basic empirical speci…cation takes the form
Ys;t =

1 ln(taxs;t 1 )

+

ln(corruptions;t
1 ln(taxs;t 1 )

2
2 [ln(taxs;t 1 )]
1)

2 [ln(taxs;t 1 )]

(17)

+

ln(corruptions;t
2

+

1)

ln(corruptions;t

+

1)

+

s

+

t

+

s;t ;

where s and t are state and period …xed e¤ects, respectively. The variable taxs;t 1 is the
average income tax revenues collected in the previous …ve-year period converted into constant
2000 dollars. The variable corruptions;t 1 is the average number of o¢ cials convicted of crimes
in the previous period. The …nal terms interact the tax variables with the corruption measure.
Our two main regressor variables are normalized by a time-invariant measure of state size.
Our reported speci…cations use average government expenditures in the state from the initial
period as the measure of state size, and we …nd similar results using other state size measures
such as initial state employment or GDP. With the log speci…cation, this normalization choice
only impacts the estimation through the interaction e¤ect, and the added baseline provides a
relative sense of the magnitude of the tax or corruption changes for interaction. Similar to our
growth metrics, we winsorize our explanatory variables at their 1% and 99% values.
We demean both the taxs;t 1 and corruptions;t 1 regressors prior to interaction to restore
their main e¤ects. We thus anticipate a positive 1 coe¢ cient and negative 2 coe¢ cient.
This coe¢ cient pattern would suggest an inverted-U shape to marginal tax e¤ects: at the
mean value of corruption, increases in lagged tax revenues are associated with increases in the
outcome variables Ys;t so long as taxes are not too high. As we return to later, both in our
empirical work and in our calibration, the state-level variation that exists in the United States
appears to be mostly, if not fully, contained on the left-hand side of any inverted-U, which may
limit the precision with which we can measure the curvature.
We also anticipate a negative coe¢ cient as increases in lagged corruption, everything
else equal, should decrease future economic activity. Finally, we anticipate negative 1 and
2 coe¢ cients: higher corruption should weaken any positive taxation e¤ects, and this discouragement should be particularly strong when taxes and corruption are very high. Negative
interaction e¤ects would suggest that periods of high tax revenues per capita, which have the
capacity to promote unmeasured public goods when used correctly, were not followed by better growth in states that were particularly corrupt during the period. In many respects, we
12

concentrate most on the presence of a negative 1 given the central importance in our theory
of the interaction between taxation and corruption.
There are several potential challenges to this econometric strategy that we should note.
First, we have standard omitted variable bias questions about whether our model captures all
of the relevant growth factors necessary for teasing out the roles of taxation and corruption.
These concerns are our central motivation for pursuing …rst and foremost panel analyses that
allow us to control for persistent state traits connected to economic growth over the last three
decades (e.g., warm climate, right to work laws). To bias our estimates, this approach requires
that the missing factors move in a correlated manner with our explanatory variables, which is
a …rst but crucial defense, and we also test directly for robustness to other state-level factors
below. Of course, the ‡ip-side of this controlled platform is that we are measuring relationships
through deviations from means for states, which could be transient and mean reverting, and
so we also consider below less-structured approaches as well.
Second, we face di¢ cult questions about reverse causality. Corruption can be exogenous
or endogenous. An example of the former, from the perspective of our study, is simply the
unexpected “bad apple”politician who starts to behave corruptly without new economic conditions to prompt the behavior. The more-worrisome endogenous channel for our work would
be where a change in growth prospects or economic conditions for a region give rise to the corruption itself. This reverse channel could work equally for or against …nding the anticipated
negative e¤ect. It could be, for example, that heightened growth prospects give more scope
for corruption to occur (e.g., demand for regulatory approvals give rise to bribery); it could
alternatively be that declining growth prospects of a state shift activity towards corruption as
rent seeking becomes the most productive way to make money (e.g., Baumol 1990).
We have two main routes to assess whether the results that we observe are due to reverse
causality. The …rst is to consider the timing of variables, and speci…cation (17) models lags of
explanatory variables. As a pseudo Granger test of causality, we test reversing this timing and
model whether forward explanatory variables predict current growth. Our results generally
con…rm that the timing of corruption versus growth consequences is more in line with the
theory laid out rather than the reverse.
The second route is to study settings where we believe the corruption that is impacting
economic outcomes is more exogenous in terms of not being the focus of the corrupt politician.
This concept is built into our state-border analysis using county-level data. The core idea
is expressed in the Florida panhandle, although there are many geographic examples of this
form. Counties in the Florida panhandle can be substantially in‡uenced by the functioning
of the counties in Alabama and Georgia that share the border with them. The bordering
counties are in‡uenced by the corruption/e¤ectiveness of activity in the state capitals located
in Montgomery and Atlanta, which are respectively about 100 and 250 miles from the closest
border point with Florida. Our identifying assumption for this work is that the corruption
levels in these state capitals are being made without strong reference to these border counties,
but that they can still matter (e.g., due to misappropriation of highway funds that impact
roads throughout the state). As we pick up in more detail later, we con…rm our results in such
settings to provide reassurance against reverse causality being the factor behind our outcomes.

13

3.3

State-Level Results

Tables 2a and 2b consider the log of state GDP as the left-hand variable Ys;t . In the presence
of the state …xed e¤ects s , these estimations measure how changes in the income taxation
and corruption levels of a state correlate to subsequent expansions in economic activity. This
is the simplest test of Propositions 1 and 2, where better business environments are predicted
to increase the rate of new innovation arrivals that engender growth. After studying these
levels estimations, we turn to whether the e¤ects are powerful enough to measure statistically
signi…cant accelerations in growth rates, which are the stronger predictions of the model. The
regressions have 188 observations from the cross of 47 states and four time periods. We cluster
standard errors by state.
Column 1 of Table 2a begins with a simpler model than speci…cation (17) where we drop
the squared values for taxation. This estimation shows a very stable and well-de…ned pattern.
The 1 coe¢ cient for income taxation revenues is positive and statistically signi…cant, the
coe¢ cient for corruption is negative but not economically nor statistically important, and the
1 interaction of corruption and taxation is negative and statistically signi…cant. We provide
shortly an interpretation of the joint size of the results and, for now, focus on their stability.
We weight our baseline speci…cations by the initial employment count in the state to provide a
sense of mean treatment e¤ects. Column 2 shows similar results when excluding these sample
weights, although the interaction falls just short of statistical signi…cance due to the larger
standard errors. Sample weights tend to focus attention on better quality data as very small
states are more likely to show outlier behaviors, but the results are overall quite comparable
in unweighted formats.
Columns 3 and 4 incorporate region x period …xed e¤ects to capture broad di¤erences
across areas of the United States in terms of their pace of growth, corruption, and so on. As a
very noticeable example, much of US growth during the last three decades has been in warmer
and sunnier cities in the South and West, compared to the Northeast and Midwest. Column
3 models four large Census regions, while Column 4 models nine Census divisions. The main
e¤ect of taxation in Column 4 is sensitive to including period …xed e¤ects interacted with
the nine census divisions, but otherwise the results are extremely stable, which is encouraging
given the di¤erent stress tests performed. The region-period …xed e¤ects help con…rm that our
results are not due to di¤erential growth trends across the United States.
Column 5 tests introducing controls for time trends interacted with the traits of states
in 1987, at the start of our sample period. We measure for states their initial log levels of
population, patenting (re‡ective of R&D investments), and high-school educated workers. We
interact these baseline levels with a trend for years and introduce these three controls into the
speci…cation. The state …xed e¤ects control for the initial traits, while the period …xed e¤ects
control for common time e¤ects. If anything, these controls sharpen our estimation further,
suggesting that the growth results are not capturing ongoing trends in these modelled factors.
It is worth noting, however, that we do not …nd consistent results when taking this approach
to an extreme and modelling separate time trends for each state. Given that we only have four
observations per state, this latter sensitivity is anticipated if also disappointing, and we must
stop at modelling factors directly.
Column 6 considers whether the estimated e¤ects are descending from a single block of
states in the tax distribution behaving in a uniform manner. One example of this could be
lower-tax states persistently lagging as a group the performance of higher-tax states; a second
14

example might be states in the middle of the tax distribution consistently targeting taxation
breaks and subsidies to lure …rms from high-tax neighbors, which would be comparable to
the …ndings of Wilson (2009) for R&D tax breaks at the state level. To test for these types
of concerns, we group states by their initial taxation levels into quartiles. We then include
quartile x period …xed e¤ects that require the identifying variation to be within these groups.
The results are robust to this control, providing comfort that our …ndings are not due to one
particular block of states in terms of taxes behaving in a uniform manner to give us an in‡ated
sense of precision. We likewise …nd this robustness when allowing assignment to tax quartiles
to be time varying or when using terciles/halves.
The results further hold up well when including lagged state GDP in Column 7, and we
similarly …nd consistent results when dropping the state …xed e¤ects and modelling just a single
control for initial state GDP. In both cases, the main e¤ects for taxation weaken somewhat,
while the interaction e¤ect remains very strong. We have further con…rmed that our results
are not dependent upon any one state or time period being included in the sample.
Column 8 includes the squared terms present in speci…cation (17). The results here are
mixed. On one hand, the point estimates for 2 and 2 are negative, indicative of the invertedU shape present in theory. Moreover, the economic magnitudes implied are of reasonable
economic size, as we map out further in Table 2b. To give a rough sense, holding corruption
…xed at the US median, moving from the 25th to 75th percentile of state income tax levels (the
interquartile range) is associated with an 18% reduction in the positive connection between
GDP expansion and taxation. At the 90th percentile of corruption, this implied reduction
across the interquartile range is 40%. On the other hand, the squared terms are not statistically
signi…cant ( 2 is close) and the overall curvature quanti…ed by these estimates means that we
are measuring all e¤ects on the left-side portion of the curve where taxes and growth are
positively related given US conditions.
We next calculate the "marginal e¤ects" for GDP expansion for an income tax or corruption
increase at various points in the taxation-corruption distribution. We place quotes around
marginal e¤ects for two reasons. First, we remain a long ways from establishing causality at
this point, and even where the paper ultimately makes the best progress (e.g., the state-border
analysis) these techniques do not cover all outcomes. Thus, we use the term for convenience but
under these caveats. Second, we are using localized variations of states around their long-term
averages of taxation, corruption, and growth. This is of course necessary, as the long-term
levels of states are di¤erent, and no one state can map out the whole distribution. Thus
our approach requires the important identifying assumption that the within-state movements
observed in one part of the distribution would hold true for other states were they in that
range.7
Panel A of Table 2b provides marginal e¤ects for the baseline linear speci…cation in Column
1 of Table 2a, while Panel B considers the estimation with squared tax terms in Column 8.
In Panel B, we show statistical signi…cance using the indicated line for visual ease— estimates
7

Along these lines, it is important to clarify how the long-term positions of states with respect to taxes and
corruption in‡uence our estimates. When looking at the simple linear interaction of taxation and corruption,
we identify o¤ of local shifts in variables, not their rank order. Estimates with squared terms utilize more of the
state-level distribution to map out the non-linear relationship, but the estimates are still using variation within
states. Thus, we do not need to argue that the full state distribution is exogenous, but we do need to maintain
our identifying assumption that the within-state movements observed in one part of the distribution would hold
true for other states were they in that range.

15

to the left and above the line are precisely measured at a 10% level. The marginal e¤ects are
most powerful in states with low taxation and corruption (the upper left of Panel B). They
are not distinguishable from zero in states with high taxes and corruption (lower right). In low
corruption states, the marginal e¤ects of taxation are statistically di¤erent from zero at all tax
levels. In settings with high corruption, the marginal e¤ects are only strong when taxes are
very low. These patterns conform to the basic trade-o¤s discussed in the introduction.
We …nd similar results when using a …rst-di¤erenced format, with the coe¢ cients for
taxation, corruption and their interaction being 0.088 (0.045)*, -0.005 (0.010), and -0.034
(0.013)***, respectively. The e¢ ciency of the …rst-di¤erenced format versus the levels speci…cation turns on whether the error term is autoregressive. If autoregressive deviations are
substantial, the …rst-di¤erenced form is preferred; a unit root error is fully corrected. If there
is no serial correlation, however, …rst-di¤erencing introduces a moving-average error component. The residual correlation is modestly lower for the levels estimations at 0.072, making it
the preferred technique. Either way, the results are quite comparable and continue to show
expansions in economic activity that are connected to taxation, corruption, and their interactions.
Table 3a next considers growth rates as dependent variables Ys;t . We retain the state
…xed e¤ects, so that these estimates test whether growth accelerates or declines for a state
based upon lagged corruption and tax revenues. This approach tests the even stronger forms
of Propositions 1 and 2. We include period …xed e¤ects and control for the lagged level of
the state to capture convergence or mean reversion processes. We consider four log growth
measures: growth in state GDP, growth in state GDP per worker, growth in state employments,
and growth in state establishment counts. As noted earlier, our model most centrally focuses on
the GDP-linked measures, but we seek the broader estimates of employment and establishments
as well.
Overall growth elasticities are strongest for state GDP growth. State employment growth
and growth in state GDP per worker both contribute to overall GDP growth, in roughly equal
proportions. This decomposition is not exact because we allow the lagged state level to adjust
across speci…cations to match the dependent variable. These results are robust to including
the regional or initial tax quartile controls. Growth in establishments is weaker than growth
in employments. These patterns suggest that favorable taxation and corruption environments
encourage more …rms, more workers per …rm, and higher productivity per worker.
Tables 3b and 3c provide the distributional patterns for growth in state GDP and GDP
per worker. Growth robustly accelerates in the least corrupt states until at least the 75th
percentile of taxes. On the other hand, growth only accelerates with taxation at very low tax
rates in the most corrupt states, and the point estimates suggest growth actually declines with
higher tax rates in the most corrupt states. Marginal e¤ects for employment and establishment
growth are similar in shape but not precisely measured.
In addition to the precision of individual coe¢ cients, these models have a good overall …t as
measured through partial R-squared values. These are determined by regressing the outcomes
and our three core right-hand side variables on panel …xed e¤ects and predicting the residuals.
For growth regressions, we also include the lagged terms with the …xed e¤ects. The R-squared
value of residuals for the outcome variable on the residuals for the core right-hand side variables
quantify the predictive power of the estimation after the …xed e¤ects are removed. The partial
R-squared values in the levels framework are 7%-9%, and they are 3%-4% in the growth panels.

16

Table 4 tests a di¤erent econometric approach where we drop the state …xed e¤ects and
instead model growth covariates. While we design our …ve-year panels to capture the mediumterm impact of taxation and corruption, we noted earlier the importance of testing sensitivity
of looking at deviations around state …xed e¤ects. We focus on core traits that the urban
economics literature identi…es as important for US city growth since the 1970s. We connect
to this literature for two reasons. First, US growth has been concentrated in cities over the
past decades, and we can provide sharper controls by building up from cities to states. As an
example, temperature and housing supply capacity vary across cities within a single state, and
so we design our controls for growth traits as population-weighted averages over cities within
each state. Second, entrepreneurship is known to be the key driver in this urban growth
literature (e.g., Glaeser et al. 2010, 2015), and thus we can connect to a broader line of
research in this project with this approach.
We model both constant and time-invariant traits. The city growth literature strongly
emphasizes the importance of climate and human capital to explain recent growth. Accordingly,
our simplest covariate model includes a control for January temperature, to re‡ect the large
shifts in population towards warmer climates, and a time-varying measure of the log share of
workers with a bachelors’education, taken from the Decennial Censuses, to model the rise of the
skilled city. We also consider an extended covariate model that further includes four additional
controls: housing prices, population density, Bartik-style growth projections for employment
using the initial industry distribution interacted with national growth by industry, and the
housing supply elasticity of cities measured by Saiz (2010) through geographic features of
cities like coastlines, elevation and mountains, and so on.
The encouraging news in Table 4 is that this approach yields many similar results to
our …xed e¤ect estimations. Our key focal point has been the negative interaction between
taxation and corruption, which is robustly con…rmed with the alternative speci…cation. The
main e¤ects for taxation are weaker than in Table 3a, but they remain precisely estimated for
GDP per worker growth. Beyond these six factors, we considered other growth-related traits
like the number of highway lanes in the state in 1970, July temperature levels, annual snowfall
totals, and aggregate population levels. While these factors often have univariate correlations
with city growth, they do not stand out in multivariate frameworks with the other factors
developed. Most important, however, is that the additional factors do not further in‡uence
the core interaction between taxation and corruption that is our focus.
Table 5 next extends our basic speci…cation to various components of employment growth
in a second decomposition exercise. The LBD dataset allows us to identify establishment ages,
and we quantify the extent to which employment growth is in younger or older establishments.
Both groups have comparable interaction e¤ects, while the main e¤ect of taxation for older
establishments is larger. The third column measures how taxes and corruption in‡uence entry/exit by summing employment in entering or exiting establishments. This pattern is very
close to the young establishment estimations in Column 1. We …nd comparable results on the
entry and exit margins individually. For entry, we also …nd mostly uniform patterns across
di¤erent initial employment sizes of establishments. The fourth column estimates how taxes
and corruption in‡uence the average employment size of continuing establishments in the state.
While borderline in statistical signi…cance, these latter e¤ects are important contributors to
our overall growth patterns as continuing establishments typically account for over 80% of
employment.

17

Looking across these four columns, the overall employment growth e¤ects are not due to
any single channel, but instead a consequence of growth on multiple margins. This parallels our
earlier patterns of equal contributions to state GDP growth from both growth in worker counts
and growth in GDP per worker. Marginal e¤ects across the taxation-corruption distribution for
these outcomes are positive and have the predicted shapes. The consequence of the weaker main
e¤ects for taxation, however, is that these marginal e¤ects are mostly statistically insigni…cant.
The more precise estimates are for the older or continuing …rms given their more powerful main
e¤ects.
Throughout this paper, we take a very broad view of the term innovation to mean any
entrepreneurial e¤orts that seek to enhance a …rm’s sales and performance. These can include
classic R&D type activities, but much of the state GDP and employment patterns that we are
observing here are related instead to non-R&D …rms: opening or expanding a new restaurant
concept, launching a temporary help agency or gardening service, designing new chemical
products for local customers, and so on. All of these innovators face the disincentive e¤ects of
taxation and the positive enhancement from local public goods being better provisioned.
While this broader picture is important for this paper, it is interesting to look brie‡y at
one innovative activity— patenting— where we can also examine di¤erent types of …rms (e.g.,
Hall et al. 2001). We assign patents to states based upon the location of inventors. Columns 5
and 6 look at the patenting by assignee age similar to Columns 1 and 2. The patterns are quite
comparable, with a slightly larger point estimate for older patenting …rms and a very sharp
interaction e¤ect of taxation and corruption for young patenting assignees. This suggests that
the development of new patenting …rms is particularly sensitive to the interaction between
taxation and corruption. This exercise also has the bene…t of showing our patterns in an
additional data source beyond state GDPs and our LBD data.
To conclude this state-level analysis, we run Granger-style reverse regressions where the
left-hand side outcomes are the previous period values of log state GDP, log state employment,
log state GDP growth, and log state employment growth. As emphasized above, this test of
timing is an important starting point for establishing a causal relationship. Table 6 shows that
the interaction term between taxation and corruption is weak and statistically insigni…cant
in these regressions. This provides some baseline con…dence, if incomplete, that the panel
outcomes observed thus far do not solely re‡ect reverse causality.

3.4

County-Level Results

The state-level results provide a comprehensive view of the linkages between taxation, corruption, and growth. Despite using lagged values of corruption and taxation to predict future
growth, natural worries persist around potential endogeneity (e.g., local politicians become
more corrupt with diminished growth prospects) or omitted factors correlated with our explanatory variables. Our empirical setting unfortunately does not lend itself to instrumental
variables. While prior work has identi…ed ways of instrumenting for one region’s taxation with
its neighbors (e.g., Gordon and Lee 2006), our main interest is in the interaction of taxation
and corruption in a panel setting. We would thus require time-varying instruments for taxation
and corruption across a 20-year period, which presents insurmountable challenges (especially
for exogenous changes in local corruption).
We can make progress, however, towards this identi…cation using spatial variations across
counties in the extent to which they are in‡uenced by the taxation and corruption of other
18

states. Some counties are in the middle of big states and thus are only weakly in‡uenced by
other states, if at all. Other counties are on the edges of states and therefore are substantially
in‡uenced by what happens in other states. The identi…cation concept is that Alabama’s and
Georgia’s taxation, provision of public goods, corruption, etc. impact counties in the northern
Florida panhandle much more than counties surrounding Miami, several hundred miles from
the border. Moreover, while lagged corruption and taxation for state variables are perhaps
endogenous to that state, they can be treated as exogenous for counties in other states. Taxation and corruption in Alabama and Georgia are most directly determined by what happens in
their own big cities and state capitals (e.g., Atlanta, Birmingham, and Montgomery), yet the
e¤ects can be felt throughout the states (e.g., quality of roads and schools) and thus impact
the counties in northern Florida.
Holmes (1998) provides a seminal application of using border e¤ects to discern the economic
e¤ects of state policies, and Rohlin et al. (2010) provide an excellent recent application to
the link between taxes and entrepreneurship. Border e¤ects papers like these two typically
describe whether there is more or less activity in a narrow spatial range on one side of the
border versus the other side that is consistent with a policy di¤erence between the states.
Our approach di¤ers from this work in two key ways. First, the nature of our underlying
mechanisms requires a larger spatial range than a strict border discontinuity: corruption and
public goods well beyond the …rst ten miles on the opposite side of the border can matter
deeply for counties at the edge of states.8 Second, we only look at panel variation in economic
determinants and outcomes. Thus, permanent di¤erences in economic activity around the
border due to long-term policy choices or corruption levels— which are typically the focus of
border studies like Holmes’(1998) …ndings regarding right-to-work laws— are controlled for by
panel e¤ects.
While this spatial analysis provides a path towards a more causal statement, the impact
that this approach will have on some of our coe¢ cient magnitudes is less clear. For example,
greater taxation that is e¢ ciently translated into public goods in neighboring states should have
positive e¤ects for a border county, similar to our base estimation (17). It might be tempting
to argue as well that there are no disincentive e¤ects, as the entrepreneur in the border county
is not immediately subject to the other state’s taxes, so that the taxation-growth connection
would be unambiguously positive. This argument, however, misses two pieces. First, as a
technical matter, businesses pay taxes in states in which they sell products even if the …rm
is not physically located there, so this border e¤ect for local taxes is not as sharp for many
types of …rms. But more importantly, taxes in the neighboring states can have disincentive
e¤ects for entrepreneurs in those states, and the resulting reduced growth can weaken sales
opportunities and entrepreneurial incentives for …rms in the border counties. Thus, many
of the trade-o¤s we identi…ed earlier persist, but we now have a setting where policies and
corruption are determined with less reference to the border counties themselves.
Operationally, we construct a spatial ring around each county using its geographic centroid.
We identify all counties that are within 100 miles of the focal county within both home and
neighboring states. We then use employment in these identi…ed counties to determine the share
8
Audretsch and Feldman (1996), Rosenthal and Strange (2001, 2004), Ellison et al. (2010), and Kerr and
Kominers (2015) describe the spatial lengths through which technology, product and labor markets can impact
…rms. Recent empirical work also highlights that entrepreneurs disproportionately operate in their home regions
(e.g., Figueiredo et al. 2002, Michelacci and Silva 2007), which limits the extent to which entrepreneurs would
simply move to better opportunities.

19

of economic activity in the 100-mile radius that comes from each identi…ed state. Every county
has at least some share from its home state; the average share is 68%, and the home state share
is 100% for many counties. But many counties are in‡uenced by one or more states other than
their home states. We then use these state shares within 100 miles to develop more localized
measures of tax revenues, corruption, and their interactions by taking the employment-weighted
average across states. 38% of counties are on at least one state border, and 26% of counties
draw more than half of their e¤ective in‡uence from states other than their home states. These
measures are speci…c to focal counties, and thus they vary across counties within states.
Table 7a considers county employment growth as the dependent variable in a framework
akin to Column 5 of Table 3a. We include county and time period …xed e¤ects, and we continue
to cluster standard errors by state. The results are quite similar to those in our baseline statelevel estimates, but the estimates are stronger and more precisely measured. Moreover, the
relative importance of the interaction e¤ect to the baseline taxation e¤ect has increased. This
pattern is also repeated in Column 1 of Table 7b for county growth in establishments, where
the gains from Table 3a are even stronger. The deterioration in taxation’s impact for growth
due to corruption is sharper with these more localized measures. (Unfortunately, we do not
have data to replicate the state GDP e¤ects at the county level.)
The next four columns in both tables split the sample of counties. Columns 2 and 3 separate
counties by whether or not they are on a state border. Columns 4 and 5 separate counties
by whether or not they have over 50% of the localized activity around them determined by
other states (which is the basis for the county-speci…c measures of taxation and corruption).
Elasticities in these periphery counties are very similar to those in the interiors of states. Across
the two tables, the main e¤ects for taxation are stronger in the periphery areas in three of
the four pairings, and the interaction e¤ects are stronger in all four decompositions for the
periphery areas. The standard errors for the periphery areas tend to be larger, but that is a
natural consequence of the reduced sample size for estimations. The last two columns show
similar results if we narrow or widen the radius of the county-centered area to 50 miles or 200
miles, respectively.9
Looking across Tables 7a and 7b, the persistence of the interaction e¤ects provides strong
support for the idea that local corruption can deteriorate potential positive bene…ts of taxation
for public goods and economic growth. While corruption and taxation choices will always have
endogenous elements, the patterns we observe continue to hold when examining periphery
counties where most of the surrounding taxation and corruption come from other states. This
spatial robustness gives us additional con…dence in our main growth results in Table 3a.

3.5

Discussion

Before turning to our quanti…cation exercises, we pause to re‡ect on this section’s empirical
…ndings and the extent to which they align with our theoretical model. Our empirical evidence
as whole provides reasonable evidence for the model’s predictions; not perfect by any means,
but hopefully allowing some con…dence regarding the usefulness of our upcoming calibrated
estimates. We see two places where the results are strong. The …rst is the core model prediction
that corruption dampens or reverses a potential positive growth stimulus from taxation at low
tax rates. We have been impressed by the degree to which the data align with this prediction as
9
These patterns are quite similar when including squared taxation terms in periphery estimations. The
squared terms are almost always statistically insigni…cant and small in economic size.

20

the prediction is rather complex, involving interactions of two variables in a panel econometric
setting. The result also holds in a variety of robustness checks and in state- and countylevel growth outcomes. A second place where we believe the results speak pretty well is in
the direction of causation: that corruption and taxation can in‡uence growth. We readily
acknowledge that we remain far from a complete proof in this regard, but the accumulated
evidence using Granger-style tests and state borders is encouraging. We hope future research
can further push on this front.
There are other areas where the model receives less support. First, our evidence for the
predicted inverted-U format of taxation for growth is modest. We almost always …nd a negative
coe¢ cient on the squared taxation term when it is included in estimations. It is statistically
signi…cant for growth of state GDP and in the levels approaches, while it is smaller and not
di¤erent from zero for the other growth measures. While a limitation of our empirical results,
we are comfortable with this outcome as the inverted-U shape is less critical than the negative
interaction e¤ect. Moreover, the root cause of this limited …nding appears to be that the
empirical variation across US states in taxation, corruption, and growth is limited to the lefthand-side of the inverted-U curve. The calibration in the next section will suggest this for
the United States as a whole. That is, we do not have Zimbabwe-type corruption scenarios in
our sample, and we do not have settings with 50%+ tax rates. As the variation in the United
States is more modest, it is natural that we mostly capture the concavity of the relationship
to the left of the peak. This too is a natural vein for future work as consistent cross-country
data become available.
Perhaps the largest gap between the theory and empirics is for the negative main e¤ect
of corruption. Most of our point estimates for corruption’s impact are negative, consistent
with the theory, but they are only really powerful in the growth regressions that lack state
…xed e¤ects. In other words, our empirical work …nds it hard to really nail down this main
prediction using the panel variation that we feel important for identi…cation. We can identify a
connection that corruption has to taxes, but overall the implications of corruption and e¢ ciency
have residual uncertainty to them. This is an important limitation to acknowledge given that
the calibrations strongly emphasize the impact that improved government e¤ectiveness can
have on growth. Glaeser and Saks (2006), using data similar to those we use in this paper,
also …nd overall evidence of a decline in state-level growth with higher rates of corruption, but
their work too notes di¤erences across outcome variables and speci…cations in the strength of
this result, which we are also seeing evidence for. Given the empirical and data advantages of
regional variation in the United States, we hope new measures beyond convictions of public
o¢ cials emerge for further analysis.10
Finally, we have focused the empirical work in this paper on panel econometric approaches,
whereas recent research …nds important insights about related problems using applied-macro
techniques like panel cointegration (Coe et al. 2009, Bronzini and Piselli 2009). Many of the
series that we consider in this paper do not have unit roots (e.g., corruption measured through
convictions of public o¢ cials relative to state size), and thus the core of this methodology does
not connect well to our current work. We do believe, however, that it is important to bring
10
Other settings appear to yield this result more easily— Prakash et al. (2014) …nd stronger direct support for
corruption’s implications on growth in India; Olken and Pande (2012) provide a broader review in the developing
country context. While the micro and case study evidence tend to point towards a negative e¤ect of corruption,
the macro evidence is inconclusive (e.g., Mauro 1995, Svensson 2005). Paserman et al. (2008) show the degree
of country openness moderates the impact of corruption.

21

a variety of techniques to studying this complex problem, and we hope that future work can
consider some of these parallel approaches.

4

Generalized Model with Capital and Calibration

In this section, we generalize the previous model by introducing capital. We then calibrate the
model to estimate the growth consequences of adjustments in taxation and corruption levels.

4.1

Introducing Capital into the Model

Consider the previous economy with the following modi…cations. The household also owns a
balanced portfolio of all the …rms At and the entire capital stock Kt in the economy, which
depreciates at the rate k , and the household chooses its level of investment in terms of units
of the …nal good. The ‡ow rate of capital is given by
K_ t =

K Kt

+ Ht ;

where Ht is the household’s capital investment. Therefore, the household’s budget constraint
is
Ct + Ht + A_ t = wt Lt + Rt Kt + rt At + Tt ;
where Rt is the rental rate of capital. The unique …nal consumption good Yt is produced using
capital Kt and continuum of intermediates z (indexed by i) according to the CRS production
function
Yt = Kt Zt1 ;
where Zt is the basket of intermediate varieties as before.
With these modi…cations, following similar steps as before that are shown in the appendix,
the equilibrium growth rate is equal to
"
#
2
(1
)
(1
) (1
)
g =
ln (1 + ) ;
+
(1 s ) (1
)
1 s
where

(1
)
1+

(1 s )
2 2 (1
)2

is the operating pro…ts. Note that these expressions depend on the saving rate s
The equilibrium saving rate can be expressed as
s =

g + K
g + K+

:

1

C=Y:

(18)

We take this generalized model to the data and calibrate it. In the calibrations below, we
shall also look at the e¤ects of taxation and corruption on aggregate welfare. Since welfare is
a¤ected not just by growth but also by initial consumption, the e¤ect of taxation on welfare

22

will also operate through its e¤ect on the allocation of workers in the economy. More precisely,
equilibrium welfare is equal to
Z 1
e t ln C0 eg t L dt
(19)
U =
0

=

1

[ln C0

L ]+

g

2

:

In our analysis, we will consider consumption equivalent measures of welfare. The following
lemma will help us evaluate how changes in taxation a¤ect welfare:
Lemma 2 Let be de…ned as the consumption equivalent change in welfare between two different policies and 0 such that
U (C0 ( ); L ( ); g ( )) = U ( C0
Consumption equivalence

0

;L

;g

0

):

is given by

C0 ( 0 )
exp L ( )
=
C0 ( )

4.2

0

L

0

0

+

g ( )

g ( )

!

:

Calibration

This section calibrates our model to provide quantitative insights into the possible growth
implications of adjustments in US taxation rates and corruption/e¢ ciency levels. To do so,
our model requires calibrating the following parameters: the discount rate , the innovation
step size , the corruption level , the tax rate , the infrastructure depreciation rate , the
capital depreciation rate K , and the entry cost .
We …rst set several parameters using benchmark values from the literature. We set the
discount rate as = 0:04; which corresponds to the average 10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate minus in‡ation over 1982-2007. We next …x the depreciation rates
= K at
the benchmark 15% rate for equipment and machinery. We …nally set the capital share of
expenditure at 29.5% ( = 0:295) following Aghion et al. (2013) and typical values from the
business cycle literature.
We use the key moments predicted by our model to identify the remaining parameters. The
…rst moment M1 is the employment share of entrants that is computed from the Census Bureau
data over 1982-2005. The second moment M2 is the aggregate growth rate of the innovating
sector in the US economy that is also calculated from Census Bureau data by Acemoglu et
al. (2011). The third moment M3 is the average pro…tability of US …rms before taxation,
obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis for 1982-2007. The …nal moment M4 is the
corporate tax revenue share of GDP over 1982-2007. Our target moments and their values are
summarized as:
Moment
M1
M2
M3
M4

Value
0.058
0.022
0.091
0.034

Description
Entrant employment share
Growth rate
Average pro…tability before tax
Corporate tax revenue over GDP
23

We divide M4 by M3 to pin down the average tax rate . Next, we use M2, M3 and M4 jointly
to solve for ; and : The calibrated values are:
Parameter

K

Value
0.205
5.794
0.243
0.374
0.150
0.295
0.150

Description
Innovation step size
Outsider’s innovation technology
Average corruption
Average corporate tax rate
Infrastructure depreciation rate
Capital share of expenditure
Capital depreciation rate

We next report the equilibrium values of some of the endogenous variables. The …rst two
rows provide shares of GDP, with labor income and capital income shares being 67.4% and
29.5%, respectively. Our calibrated model predicts that corruption revenue amounts to a little
less than 1% of GDP.
The next three rows provide the allocation of labor across functions. 86.9% of workers are
involved in production activities, while about 9.3% are involved in innovation e¤orts as either
incumbents or outsiders. This innovation employment share is quite reasonable given our broad
de…nition of innovation e¤orts. To take manufacturing as an example, in 1997 there were 363
thousand establishments that employed 12.1 and 4.7 million production and non-production
workers, respectively. A strict lower bound would be that there is one innovation worker per
establishment (e.g., the business owner), which would imply an innovation worker share of 2%.
On the other hand, saying that all non-production workers are involved in innovation would
result in a share of 28%. Our calculation suggests that one in every three non-production
workers is involved in innovation e¤orts.11;12
Finally, the calibration estimates that the innovation rate per product line is about 12%
(6.2% + 5.8%). At this rate, an innovation occurs in a product line on average every eight
years. The calibration suggests that the rate coming from incumbents is 7% (=6.2/5.8-1) more
than the rate of successful outsiders.
Variable
Lw=Y
s
T =Y
LP =L
(LI + LE )=L
LG =L
x
x
~

Value
67.40%
23.94%
0.83%
86.88%
9.30%
3.82%
6.22%
5.80%

Description
GDP share: Labor income
GDP share: Investment
GDP share: Corruption
Labor share: Production workers
Labor share: Innovation workers
Labor share: Government workers
Incumbent’s innovation intensity
Entry rate

We next consider the relationship between corruption, taxation, and growth. Figure 1
plots the equilibrium growth rate as a function of the corporate tax rate. As predicted by our
11

As a second benchmark, US Census Bureau reports that 3% of the population (above 25 years of age) hold
advanced degrees.
12
The government share of the workforce is 4%, which is low compared to the roughly 15% of US workers
employed by state and local governments. This di¤erence is mostly due to our one-for-one technology for
infrastructure provision embodied in (6).

24

analysis in the previous section, the relationship between taxation and growth is an inverted-U
shaped pattern. The peak occurs at max = 42:47%; marked by the dashed line, which indicates
that the empirical tax rate (37%) is quite close to the growth maximizing level for the current
level of corruption. Figure 2 plots the equilibrium growth rate as a function of the tax rate
and the corruption rate : For any given tax rate, higher corruption leads to a lower growth
rate. According to the calibrated numbers and holding constant the tax rate at its current
level, removing corruption completely ( = 0) from its current level of = 0:243 improves the
growth rate to 3.23%. This is a substantial increase of 22% in consumption equivalent terms.
The intuition behind the inverted-U shaped pattern comes from the two opposing e¤ects
of taxation. Taxation allows the government to provide better infrastructure, which in turn
makes …rms more productive and enhances growth. On the other hand, higher taxation lowers
monopoly rents, and this negative e¤ect becomes the dominant factor beyond a certain tax
rate. Higher corruption dampens the positive e¤ect of taxes by simply taking away the available
resources that could have been utilized for growth enhancing infrastructure.
Turning to welfare, we use expression (19). It is more informative to discuss the consumption equivalent variation ( ) after tax changes, and Figure 3 plots as a function of the tax
rate . Note that by construction, = 1 at the empirical tax rate = 37%: The plot indicates the percentage change in initial consumption that would make the household indi¤erent
between the empirical tax rate and the counterfactual tax rate. The main di¤erence between
welfare and growth is the labor supply component in the former, which is simply equal to
the disutility of work. However, our quantitative analysis shows that the e¤ect of taxation on
welfare is driven mostly through its impact on growth. Hence, the growth and welfare maximizing tax rates are very close to each other. The welfare maximizing tax rate is computed
as 42:3%, which is 5:3 percentage points higher than the current calibrated tax rate = 37%:
We estimate that a modest 1:1% welfare gain would accrue from setting the optimal tax rate
while holding …xed current corruption levels.
More interestingly, Figure 4 plots the consumption equivalent gain from changing the corruption level. The value is one at
= 0:243 by construction. At the extreme, removing
the corruption completely ( = 0) results in a 22% consumption equivalent welfare gain, and
reducing corruption by very modest amounts provides the same welfare gain as optimizing taxation for the current level of corruption. Taken a step further, eliminating corruption would
raise the optimal tax to 42:5%, which would further boost growth to 3:3% and welfare by 24%
in consumption equivalent terms.
Turning to extensions, the impact of taxation and corruption on the equilibrium …rm size
distribution (FSD) is ambiguous due to two opposing e¤ects. Better environments enhance
the productivity of incumbent …rms, leading to growth in average …rm size through additional
product lines, but higher entry rates and incumbent displacement are also encouraged. Figures
5 plots the FSD against tax rates, whereas Figure 6 plots average …rm size against tax rates.
Initially, taxation increases reduce average …rm size. As the tax rate increases, after a certain
point, the tail of the distributions starts getting fatter. Figure 6 shows that the average …rm
size initially decreases and then starts rising for beyond around 23%: This is mainly driven
by the competitive pressure imposed on incumbents from new entrants.
The tax rate that maximizes economic growth also maximizes innovation for a given corruption level. We earlier noted that incumbents’innovation rate per product line in this calibration
is higher than the success rate of outsiders for acquiring their …rst product line. Figure 7 plots

25

the ratio of the entrants’ innovation intensity to total innovation intensity x
~= (x + x
~) by tax
rate for the calibrated corruption level. The relative innovation rate by the entrants features
an inverted-U shaped pattern. Starting from zero, initial taxation bene…ts entrants more than
incumbents. As a result, incumbent …rms face tighter competition and cannot grow in size
as much. This competitive pressure initially increases with higher tax rates due to more innovation by entrants. However, when the tax rate is already su¢ ciently large, the negative
e¤ect of taxation starts to dominate and discourages entrants from investing in innovation due
to lower returns. This weakens the competitive pressure on incumbents, they expand in size,
and they thereby generate a greater share of the economy’s innovations. As the incumbents’
innovation rate per product line is higher than the success rate of outsiders for acquiring their
…rst product line, the tax rate that maximizes the entrant share is lower than the tax rate that
maximizes growth. Removing corruption increases the entrant share at all tax rates, while
further pushing down the tax rate that maximizes the entrant share.13
To conclude, our calibrated model estimates substantial growth rate reductions and welfare
losses are present in the US economy due to corruption and non-optimal tax rates. The gains
from optimizing the tax rate are fairly modest, in the range of 1%. The potential gains from
improving government e¢ ciency are estimated to be much larger and over 20%. Most of the
welfare losses come from poor use of government funds, not from the sub-optimal tax.

5

Conclusion

In this paper we have analyzed the e¤ect of taxation and corruption on growth, innovation, and
entry. First, we have built an endogenous growth model with quality-improving innovations
that lead to the new product lines, and then calibrated this model to assess the welfare e¤ects
of the interaction between taxation and corruption. Then, using cross-state and then crosscounty panel data from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) of the US Census Bureau,
we have obtained evidence that is consistent with the theoretical prediction that the e¤ect of
taxation on growth and innovation should be increasing and concave, and that higher local
corruption should weaken the positive e¤ect of taxation on growth, innovation, and entry.
Evidence also suggests this e¤ect operates through entrepreneurial channels consistent with
the model’s structure.
This paper is a very …rst step in a broader research agenda on how to factor in growth
and innovation considerations in optimal tax design. In particular, there are large debates in
the US Congress and among European countries on how progressive the income tax should be
and on the desirable corporate tax rate. However, analyses of these issues often do not feature
innovation and growth as leading criteria in the design of a desirable tax system. We believe
it very important to begin linking the growth and revenue sides of the public ledger to the
spending side and the overall e¤ectiveness on how public funds are spent. This paper makes
several forays into theoretical and empirical dimensions, and we believe we are just scratching
the surface of what could be exciting and important research aimed at better linking public
…nance conditions to entrepreneurship, innovation, and growth.
13

This model does not allow entrants and incumbents to engage in di¤erent types of innovation or to have
di¤erent step sizes to their innovations (e.g., Akcigit and Kerr 2010). Building these di¤erences into the model
would have a larger impact on this part of the calibration and the comparison of entrants and incumbents than
on other parts of the model.

26

References
[1] Acemoglu, D (2009), Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
[2] Acemoglu, D, Akcigit, U, Bloom, N, and W. Kerr (2011), "Innovation, Reallocation, and
Growth", Working Paper.
[3] Acs, Z, and C. Armington (2006), Entrepreneurship, Geography and American Economic
Growth, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
[4] Aghion, P, Akcigit, U, and J. Fernandez-Villaverde (2013), "Optimal Capital Versus Labor
Taxation with Innovation-Led Growth", Working Paper.
[5] Aghion, P, and P. Bolton (1997), "A Trickle-Down Theory of Growth and Development",
Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151-172
[6] Aghion, P, Fally, T, and S. Scarpetta (2007), "Credit Constraints as a Barrier to the
Entry and Post-Entry Growth of Firms: Theory and Evidence", Economic Policy, 22: 52,
731-779.
[7] Aghion, P, and P. Howitt (1992), "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction",
Econometrica, 110, 323-351.
[8] Aghion, P, and P. Howitt (2009), The Economics of Growth, MIT Press.
[9] Akcigit, U, and W. Kerr (2010), "Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations", NBER
Working Paper 16443.
[10] Aschauer, D (1989), "Is Public Expenditure Productive?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 23, 177-200.
[11] Audretsch, D, and M. Feldman (1996), "R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation
and Production", American Economic Review, 86, 630-640.
[12] Banerjee, A, and A. Newman (1993), "Occupational Choice and the Process of Development", Journal of Political Economy, 101:2, 274-298.
[13] Barro, R (1990), "Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth",
Journal of Political Economy, 98, 103-125.
[14] Barro, R (1991), "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries", Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 106, 407-443.
[15] Barro, R, and X. Sala-i-Martin (1995), Economic Growth, Cambridge: MIT Press.
[16] Baumol, W (1990), "Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive",
Journal of Political Economy, 98, 893-921.
[17] Benabou, R (1996), "Inequality and Growth", in B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, eds,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 11, MIT Press.
[18] Bronzini, R, and P. Piselli (2009), "Determinants of Long-Run Regional Productivity with
Geographical Spillovers: The Role of R&D, Human Capital and Public Infrastructure",
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39:2, 187-199.
[19] Calderon, C, and L. Serven (2004), "The E¤ects of Infrastructure Development on Growth
and Income Distribution", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3400.

27

[20] Chakraborty, S, and E. Dabla-Norris (2011), "The Quality of Public Investment", The
B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 11:1, 1-29.
[21] Coe, D, Helpman, E, and A. Ho¤maister (2009), "International R&D Spillovers and Institutions", European Economic Review, 53:7, 723-741.
[22] Del Monte, A, and E. Papagni (2001), "Public Expenditure, Corruption, and Economic
Growth: The Case of Italy", European Journal of Political Economy, 17:1, 1-16.
[23] Del Monte, A, and E. Papagni (2007), "The Determinants of Corruption in Italy: Regional
Panel Data Analysis", European Journal of Political Economy, 23:2, 379-396.
[24] Djankov, S, Ganser, T, McLiesh, C, Ramalho, R, and A. Shleifer (2010), "The E¤ect
of Corporate Taxes on Investment and Entrepreneurship", American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 2, 31-64.
[25] Duranton, G, and D. Puga (2004), “Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration
Economies", in J.V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse, eds, Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2063-2117.
[26] Ellison, G, Glaeser, E, and W. Kerr (2010), “What Causes Industry Agglomeration?
Evidence From Coagglomeration Patterns", American Economic Review, 100, 1195-1213.
[27] Figueiredo, O, Guimaraes, P, and D. Woodward (2002), "Home-Field Advantage: Location Decisions of Portuguese Entrepreneurs", Journal of Urban Economics 52:2, 341-361.
[28] Fiorino, N, Galli, E, and I. Petrarca (2012), "Corruption and Growth: Evidence from the
Italian Regions", European Journal of Government and Economics, 1:2.
[29] Fisman, R, and R. Gatti (2002), "Decentralization and Corruption: Evidence Across
Countries", Journal of Public Economics, 83, 325-345.
[30] Galor, O, and J. Zeira (1993), "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics", Review of
Economic Studies, 60, 35-52.
[31] Gentry, W, and G. Hubbard (2005), "Success Taxes, Entrepreneurial Entry and Innovation", in A. Ja¤e, J. Lerner and S. Stern, eds, Innovation Policy and the Economy,
Volume 5, Cambridge: MIT Press, 87-108.
[32] Glaeser, E (2008), Cities, Agglomeration and Spatial Equilibrium, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[33] Glaeser, E, Kerr, S, and W. Kerr (2015), "Entrepreneurship, Mines, and Urban Growth",
Review of Economics and Statistics, 92:7, 498-520.
[34] Glaeser, E, Kerr, W, and G. Ponzetto (2010), "Clusters of Entrepreneurship", Journal of
Urban Economics, 67:1, 150-168.
[35] Glaeser, E, and R. Saks (2006), "Corruption in America", Journal of Public Economics
90:6-7, 1053-1072.
[36] Gordon, R, and Y. Lee (2007), "Interest Rates, Taxes and Corporate Financial Policies",
National Tax Journal, 60:1, 65-84.
[37] Hall, B, Ja¤e, A, and M. Trajtenberg (2001), "The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools", NBER Working Paper 8498.
[38] Haltiwanger, J, Jarmin, R, and J. Miranda (2013), "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large
vs. Young", Review of Economics and Statistics, 95:2, 347-61
28

[39] Hassett, K, and A. Mathur (2006), "Taxes and Wages", American Enterprise Institute
Working Paper 128.
[40] Hauner, D, and A. Kyobe (2010), "Determinants of Government E¢ ciency", World Development, 38:11, 1527-42.
[41] Helms, L (1985), "The E¤ect of State and Local Taxes on Economic Growth, A Time
Series-Cross Section Approach", Review of Economics and Statistics, 67, 574-582.
[42] Holmes, T (1998), "The E¤ects of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence from State Borders", Journal of Political Economy, 106, 667-705.
[43] Hulten, C (1996), "Infrastructure Capital and Economic Growth: How Well You Use It
May Be More Important than How Much You Have", NBER Working Paper 5847.
[44] Jarmin, R, and J. Miranda (2002), "The Longitudinal Business Database", CES Working
Paper.
[45] Kerr, W, and S. Kominers (2015), "Agglomeration Forces and Cluster Shapes", Review
of Economics and Statistics, 97:4, 877-899.
[46] Klette, T-J, and S. Kortum (2004), "Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation", Journal
of Political Economy, 112:5, 986-1018.
[47] Marshall, A (1920), Principles of Economics, London, UK: MacMillan and Co.
[48] Mauro, P (1995), "Corruption and Growth", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110:3, 681712.
[49] Mauro, P (1998), "Corruption and the Composition of Government Expenditure", Journal
of Public Economics, 69:2, 263-279.
[50] Michelacci, C, and O. Silva (2007), "Why So Many Local Entrepreneurs?", Review of
Economics and Statistics, 89:4, 615-633.
[51] Mo…di, A, and J. A. Stone (1990), "Do State and Local Taxes A¤ect Economic Growth?",
Review of Economics and Statistics, 72:4, 686-691.
[52] Murphy, K, Shleifer, A, and R. Vishny (1991), "The Allocation of Talent: Implications
for Growth", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 503-530.
[53] Nanda, R (2011), "Entrepreneurship and the Discipline of External Finance," HBS Working Paper 11-098.
[54] Olken, B, and R. Pande (2012), "Corruption in Developing Countries", Annual Review of
Economics, 4, 479-505.
[55] Paserman, D, Neeman, Z, and A. Simhon (2008), "Corruption and Openness", Berkeley
Electronic Journal for Economic Analysis and Policy, 8:1, Article 50.
[56] Petrescu, I (2009), "Income Taxation and Self-Employment: The Impact of Progressivity
in Countries with Tax Evasion", Working Paper, Harvard University.
[57] Prakash, N, M Rockmore, and Y. Uppal (2014), "Do Criminally Accused Politicians A¤ect
Economic Outcomes? Evidence from India", Working Paper.
[58] Rohlin, S, Rosenthal, S, and A. Ross (2010), "State Tax E¤ects and Entrepreneurship: Estimates from a Border Model With Agglomeration Economies", Working Paper, Syracuse
University.
29

[59] Romer, P (1986), "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth", Journal of Political Economy, 94:5, 1002-1037.
[60] Romer, P (1990), "Endogenous Technological Change", Journal of Political Economy,
98:5, S71-S102.
[61] Romp, W, and J. de Haan (2007), "Public Capital and Economic Growth: A Critical
Survey", Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik, 8:1, 6-52.
[62] Rosenthal, S, and W. Strange (2001), “The Determinants of Agglomeration", Journal of
Urban Economics, 50, 191-229.
[63] Rosenthal, S, and W. Strange (2004), “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration Economies", in J.V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse, eds, Handbook of Regional and
Urban Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2119-2171.
[64] Saiz, A (2010), "The Geographical Determinants of Housing Supply", Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 125:3, 1253-1296.
[65] Singhal, M (2008), "Special Interest Groups and the Allocation of Public Funds", Journal
of Public Economics, 92, 548-564.
[66] Straub, S (2008), "Infrastructure and Growth in Developing Countries: Recent Advances
and Research Challenges", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4460.
[67] Straub, S (2011), "Infrastructure and Development: A Critical Appraisal of the Macro
Level Literature", Journal of Development Studies, 47:5, 683-708.
[68] Svensson, J (2005), "Eight Questions about Corruption", The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19:3, 19-42.
[69] Tanzi, V, and H. Davoodi (2000), "Corruption, Growth, and Public Finances", IMF
Working Paper 00/182.
[70] Wilson, D (2009), "Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate
E¤ects of R&D Tax Credits", Review of Economics and Statistics, 91:2, 431-436.

30

6

Theoretical Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1. We simply verify the conjecture V (n) = v nYt :
r vnYt = max [1

]n

x

r vn = max [1

x2
wt + xnvYt
2 2

Yt

x2
+ xnv
2 2

]n

x

nvYt :

nv :

As a result, the optimal choice is
v 2
:
1
Substituting this value back into the value function we get
x=

v2
2 [1

2

v [r +

]

] + [1

]

= 0:

Derivation of Growth Rate. From (2) and the optimal quantity of intermediate good
j,
where ln Qt

R1
0

ln Yt = ln Qt

ln (1 + ) ;

(20)

ln qt (i) di is de…ned as the quality index at time t: Therefore,
Y_
Q_
= :
Y
Q

g=

Next consider the change in the quality index after a small time interval t;
Z 1
[
t ln (1 + ) q (i) + (1
t) ln q (i)] di:
ln Qt+ t
0

Some simple algebra leads to ln Qt+ t
and taking the limit as t ! 0 delivers
g =

ln Qt =
Q_
=
Q

Proof of Proposition 1. Using (13)
g ( )=

[1

] [1

ln (1 + ) :

(16), the growth rate is

2

]

[1 + ]

Then the derivative with respect to
@g ( )
=
@

t ln (1 + ) : Dividing both sides by

2

4

4

1
[1

|

2 )

ln (1 + )

ln (1 + ) :

]4

]4

is
2

(1

]4

2

(1 + )
{z

( )

31

4

4

1
[1

4

}

[1

;

t

where

[1

1. Therefore

] ln(1+ )
@g ( )
@

:

=0

( ) is monotonically decreasing in

> 0 and

@g ( )
@

=

2

[1

g]

and

(0) > 0 by Assumption

= 0 when
g

s

1 2
1+2

g

=

g

1+
:
2 2

Proof of Proposition 2. The entry rate is
x
~ = [1

]

[1

2

1
2
2 [1

]

:

]2

The derivative with respect to the tax rate is
@x
~
@

2
1
2 2 [1
]2
1
[1 2 ]
[1 + 2 ]
[1 + 2 ]
2 [1
]2
{z
|

= [1
=

2 ]

2

2
[1

1
2

]

2

}|

( )

2 [1
1
2 [1
]2
{z

]2
2

( )

2

;
}

where
[1
] = : Note that ( ) > 0 for all 2 [0; ] : Moreover ( ) is monotone
decreasing in ; ( ) < ( ) and (0) > 0: The peak of the inverted-U happens when
( x~ ) = 0 such that
2
[1 2 x~ ] [1
1
x
~]
=
2:
[1 + 2 x~ ]
2
Then @@x~ > 0 if and only if < x~ .
Proof of Lemma 2. De…ne consumption equivalence as
0

U (C0 ( ) ; L ( ) ; g ( )) = U ( C0

0

;L

0

;g

):

From (19) this implies
ln C0 ( 0 )

L ( 0)

+

g ( 0)
2

=

ln C0 ( )

L ( )

+

g ( )
2

;

which delivers the desired result
=

C0 ( 0 )
exp L ( )
C0 ( )

L

0

+

g ( 0)

g ( )

:

Derivation of the Equilibrium with Capital. Household maximizes discounted sum
of future utilities subject to the budget constraint
Ct + Ht + A_ = Rt Kt + wt Lt + Tt + rA;

32

where H denotes the capital investment. This maximization delivers
w =C
R =

+

K

+g :

The interest rate is r = R
K = +g .
Next, we solve the monopolist’s problem. Since the …nal goods production function is CRS
Cobb-Douglas, and since factors are paid their marginal product, Euler’s theorem implies that
expenditure on intermediates is (1
)Yt (i.e. expenditure share of Zt is 1
). Furthermore,
logarithmic aggregation of intermediates implies that expenditure on each variety is the same.
Therefore, demand for variety i is given by:
zt (i) =

(1

)Yt
:
pt (i)

Bertrand limit pricing in each product line i implies that the current innovator …rm prices at
marginal cost of previous innovator, and therefore
pt (i)

wt
:
qt (i)

M Ct (i) =

So monopolist pro…ts are:
Yt =

(1
)
Yt =
1+

1
1

s

1+

w ;

where Ct = (1 s)Yt . Next, we move onto the incumbent’s innovation problem; the incumbent’s
value function of operating n product lines is
8
9
"
#
2
>
>
w
x
>
>
> (1
>
Yt
+ xn[Vt (n + 1) Vt (n)] >
)n
>
>
>
>
>
|
{z
}
2
t
<
=
gain product line
{z
}
|
_
rVt (n) Vt (n) = max
instantaneous return
x >
>
>
>
>
>
+ n[Vt (n 1) Vt (n)]
>
>
>
>
|
{z
}
>
>
:
;
lose product line

where

is the aggregate innovation rate in the economy. Conjecture V (n) = v nYt :
x =

2v

(1

s)(1

)

:

Examining the entrant’s problem, free entry means V out = 0. Also, Ev = v ; therefore
v =

wt
(1
=
Yt

s)

and
x =

(1

33

)

:

Along the BGP, the level of infrastructure is constant, which implies that
F =
Operating pro…ts

:

are
x2 (1 s)
=
2( )2

(1 s)
:
2 2 (1
)2

Government’s balanced budget implies
F =

(1

)
(1 s)

:

So, equilibrium level of infrastructure is
=

(1

)
(1

s)

:

Solving for the entrants innovation ‡ow rate,
(1
)
(1 s)

x
~ =

;

and the aggregate innovation rate is
=

(1

)

+

(1
)
(1 s)

:

On the BGP, labor supply L remains constant over time. Productivity growth (growth in
Q(t)) will be determined by the aggregate destruction rate :
g =

log(1 + ):

The next step is to derive the consumption share of output 1 s. Capital stock has to grow
at the same rate as productivity and output. Assume investment H(t) is proportional to K(t)
(i.e. H(t)=K(t) = ). Then, from the law of motion for capital,
g =

K:

So, investment H(t) = (g + K )K(t). Applying the Euler theorem to the …nal goods production
gives R K(t)=Y (t) = , which implies that
H(t) =

(g +
R

K)

Y (t);

and from the resource constraint, H(t)=Y (t) = s, which solves implicitly for the investment
share of consumer expenditure
g + K
s=
:
g + K+

34

Figure 1: Growth as a function of the tax rate

Figure 2: Growth as a function of the tax rate and corruption rate

Figure 3: Consumption equivalence as a function of the tax rate

Figure 4: Consumption equivalence as a function of the corruption rate

Figure 5: Firm size distribution as a function of the tax rate

Figure 6: Average firm size as a function of the tax rate

Figure 7: Entrant share of innovation as a function of the tax rate

Table 1: Descriptive statistics
Mean

SD

(1)

(2)

State GDP (billions)
State GDP per worker (thousands)
Employment levels in LBD (millions, non-agriculture private-sector employer firms)
Young establishments
Old establishments
Entering or exiting establishments
Establishment counts in LBD (millions)
Employment size of continuing establishments

167.46
69.77
2.29
0.54
1.76
0.25
0.12
20.80

214.85
19.96
2.44
0.63
1.83
0.29
0.13
3.54

Log growth rates across periods with 1% winsorization
State GDP
State GDP, deflated
State GDP per worker
State GDP per worker, deflated
Employment
Establishments

0.275
0.132
0.194
0.051
0.081
0.074

0.072
0.073
0.060
0.077
0.063
0.051

State income tax revenues (billions)
State income tax revenues per initial government expenditures
Convictions of government officials

3.03
0.16
17.7

4.88
0.07
22.2

Employment levels in LBD (thousands)
Establishment counts in LBD (thousands)

38.22
2.00

136.60
6.41

Log growth rates across periods with 1% winsorization
Employment
Establishments

0.086
0.077

0.128
0.091

Fraction of counties on state border
Fraction with more than 50% of economic activity within 100-mi radius being within home state

0.38
0.68

A. State analysis

B. County border analysis

Notes: Panel A provides descriptive statistics for state-period estimations of taxation, corruption, and economic activity. The panel consists of 47
states with four time periods of five years each (1988-1992 to 2003-2007), using earlier and later years as appropriate for growth calculations. Variables
are calculated as annual average for each five-year period. Panel B provides descriptive statistics for county-border analysis across the same four time
periods.

Table 2a: Panel relationship of taxation, corruption and state economic activity
Base
estimation
with state and
time period
fixed effects
(1)

Excluding
initial
employment
weights

Including
period fixed
effects by
four census
regions

Including
period fixed
effects by
nine census
divisions

(2)

(3)

(4)

Including
Including
time trends for
fixed effects
1987 population,
for period x
patents, and
initial tax
education levels quartile of state

Including
lagged
state activity
in prior period

Including
squared
taxation term
and corruption
interaction

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.171*
(0.106)

0.081
(0.059)

0.182*
(0.096)

(5)

Dependent variable is log state GDP in period
Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in prior period

0.183*
(0.096)

0.140*
(0.073)

0.140**
(0.067)

0.048
(0.045)

0.165*
(0.082)

Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in prior period SQ
Log corruption per
gov. exp. in prior period
Interaction of taxes and
corruption in prior period

-0.033
(0.024)
-0.017
(0.015)

-0.006
(0.019)

-0.014
(0.015)

-0.009
(0.010)

-0.018
(0.014)

-0.017
(0.015)

-0.012
(0.012)

-0.012
(0.019)

-0.060**
(0.023)

-0.049
(0.033)

-0.055**
(0.022)

-0.039**
(0.017)

-0.053***
(0.017)

-0.053**
(0.020)

-0.040***
(0.013)

-0.072*
(0.040)

Interaction of taxes and
corruption in prior pd. SQ

-0.021
(0.028)

Log state GDP
in the prior period
State and period effects
Observations

0.465***
(0.123)
Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Notes: Estimations consider the panel relationship among taxation, corruption, and economic activity. The panel consists of 47 states with four time periods of five years each (1988-1992
to 2003-2007), using lagged values from prior periods. The dependent variable is log state GDP in the current period. The variable of interest is the interaction of lagged state income tax
receipts and corruption (i.e., criminal convictions of public officials). Both metrics are normalized by initial state public expenditures and demeaned prior to interaction. Estimations
weight by initial state employment, cluster standard errors by state, include state and period fixed effects, and have 188 observations. There is less future economic expansion and growth
following periods of high tax revenues when corruption is high. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 2b: Estimated marginal taxation effects for state GDP
Taxation
percentile

10th

25th

(1)

(2)

Corruption percentile
50th
(3)

75th
(4)

90th
(5)

A. Estimated marginal tax effects from linear estimation in Column 1 of Table 2a
Overall

0.231 (0.098)

0.207 (0.096)

0.182 (0.096)

0.159 (0.096)

0.133 (0.097)

B. Estimated marginal tax effects from squared estimation in Column 8 of Table 2a
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

0.267
0.245
0.235
0.228
0.221

(0.098)
(0.100)
(0.103)
(0.106)
(0.110)

0.252
0.219
0.204
0.193
0.183

(0.100)
(0.097)
(0.098)
(0.100)
(0.102)

0.237
0.192
0.171
0.157
0.144

(0.102)
(0.096)
(0.097)
(0.099)
(0.102)

0.223
0.167
0.142
0.123
0.108

(0.105)
(0.097)
(0.100)
(0.104)
(0.109)

0.207
0.139
0.107
0.085
0.066

(0.108)
(0.099)
(0.106)
(0.115)
(0.124)

Notes: See Table 2a. Estimated marginal tax effects are calculated at various points in the taxation-corruption distribution. In Panel B,
coefficients to the left and above the indicated line are statistically significant at a 10% level.

Table 3a: Panel relationship of taxation, corruption and state growth
Log growth in
state GDP

Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in prior period

Interaction of taxes and
corruption in prior period

State and period effects
Observations

Log growth in
state establishments

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.082
(0.059)

0.082
(0.059)

0.030*
(0.018)

0.029
(0.019)

0.029
(0.035)

0.032
(0.037)

0.019
(0.038)

0.019
(0.023)

-0.032***
(0.011)

-0.011
(0.008)

-0.010
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.007)

-0.011
(0.012)

-0.009
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.008)

-0.007
(0.011)

-0.001
(0.009)

0.000
(0.012)

-0.004
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.010)

-0.040***
(0.013)

-0.048*
(0.029)

-0.016**
(0.008)

-0.022
(0.016)

-0.016**
(0.007)

-0.019
(0.018)

-0.014**
(0.005)

-0.016
(0.014)

Interaction of taxes and
corruption in prior period SQ
Lagged log state level
in the prior period

Log growth in
state employment

(1)

Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in prior period SQ
Log corruption per
gov. exp. in prior period

Log growth in
state GDP per worker

-0.017
(0.020)

-0.009
(0.011)

-0.006
(0.013)

-0.003
(0.011)

-0.533***
(0.123)

-0.537***
(0.118)

-0.656***
(0.062)

-0.639***
(0.063)

-0.410***
(0.060)

-0.423***
(0.065)

-0.371***
(0.088)

-0.372***
(0.091)

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Notes: Estimations consider the panel relationship among taxation, corruption, and economic activity. The panel consists of 47 states with four time periods of five years
each (1988-1992 to 2003-2007), using lagged values from prior periods. The dependent variables are log state growth rates indicated in column headers. The explanatory
variable of interest is the interaction of lagged state income tax receipts and corruption (i.e., criminal convictions of public officials). Both metrics are normalized by initial
state public expenditures and demeaned prior to interaction. Estimations weight by initial state employment, cluster standard errors by state, and include state and period
fixed effects. There is less acceleration in economic growth following periods of high tax revenues when corruption is high. Marginal effects for Columns 1-4 are presented
in Tables 3b-3c.

Table 3b: Est. marginal taxation effects for growth in state GDP
Taxation
percentile

10th

25th

(1)

(2)

Corruption percentile
50th
(3)

75th
(4)

90th
(5)

A. Estimated marginal tax effects from linear estimation in Column 1 of Table 3a
Overall

0.113 (0.061)

0.098 (0.060)

0.081 (0.059)

0.066 (0.058)

0.049 (0.058)

B. Estimated marginal tax effects from squared estimation in Column 2 of Table 3a
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

0.151
0.126
0.115
0.107
0.101

(0.062)
(0.061)
(0.063)
(0.064)
(0.066)

0.143
0.109
0.094
0.083
0.074

(0.062)
(0.060)
(0.059)
(0.059)
(0.060)

0.136
0.092
0.072
0.058
0.046

(0.062)
(0.059)
(0.059)
(0.059)
(0.060)

0.129
0.076
0.052
0.035
0.020

(0.063)
(0.060)
(0.061)
(0.064)
(0.066)

0.121
0.057
0.029
0.008
-0.010

(0.064)
(0.062)
(0.067)
(0.073)
(0.079)

Notes: See Table 3a. Estimated marginal tax effects are calculated at various points in the taxation-corruption distribution.

Table 3c: Est. marginal taxation effects for growth in state GDP per worker
Taxation
percentile

10th

25th

(1)

(2)

Corruption percentile
50th
(3)

75th
(4)

90th
(5)

A. Estimated marginal tax effects from linear estimation in Column 3 of Table 3a
Overall

0.043 (0.019)

0.036 (0.018)

0.030 (0.018)

0.024 (0.018)

0.017 (0.018)

B. Estimated marginal tax effects from squared estimation in Column 4 of Table 3a
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

0.054
0.048
0.045
0.043
0.041

(0.018)
(0.022)
(0.025)
(0.028)
(0.031)

0.051
0.040
0.035
0.032
0.029

(0.018)
(0.019)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.025)

0.048
0.033
0.025
0.020
0.016

(0.019)
(0.018)
(0.020)
(0.022)
(0.024)

0.046
0.025
0.016
0.009
0.004

(0.020)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.024)
(0.027)

0.042
0.017
0.006
-0.003
-0.010

Notes: See Table 3a. Estimated marginal tax effects are calculated at various points in the taxation-corruption distribution.

(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.025)
(0.030)
(0.035)

Table 4: Growth estimations with covariates modelled
Log state GDP growth

Log state GDP per worker growth

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in prior period

-0.011
(0.008)

-0.007
(0.009)

-0.002
(0.007)

0.009*
(0.005)

0.012***
(0.004)

0.012*
(0.007)

Log corruption per
gov. exp. in prior period

-0.016**
(0.008)

-0.015*
(0.008)

-0.010
(0.007)

0.005
(0.006)

0.006
(0.006)

0.004
(0.007)

Interaction of taxes and
corruption in prior period

-0.021***
(0.007)

-0.022***
(0.007)

-0.013
(0.008)

-0.016**
(0.007)

-0.013*
(0.007)

-0.013*
(0.007)

-0.008*
(0.004)

-0.007
(0.008)

-0.085**
(0.040)

-0.241***
(0.045)

0.044***
(0.012)

0.053***
(0.014)

0.045***
(0.013)

0.023***
(0.006)

0.033***
(0.008)

0.045***
(0.008)

0.057*
(0.028)

0.060**
(0.028)

0.037
(0.043)

0.100***
(0.020)

0.138***
(0.027)

0.149***
(0.033)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

180

180

Yes
Yes
180

180

180

Yes
Yes
180

Lagged log state level
in the prior period
Log January temperature
Log bachelor's education share
Period fixed effects
Additional controls
Observations

Notes: See Table 3a. Estimations exclude state fixed effects and instead model growth covariates. Additional covariates control for housing
prices, population density, Bartik-style growth projections for employment using the initial industry distribution interacted with national
growth by industry, and the housing supply elasticity of cities measured by Saiz (2010) through geographic features of cities.

Table 5: Panel relationship of taxation, corruption and economic activity
Log total
Log total
employment
employment
in young
in old
establishments establishments
in period
in period

Log total
Log average
employment
size of
in entry/exit
continuing
establishments establishments
in period
in period

Log patenting
of individuals
and firms that
are younger
than five years

Log patenting
of incumbent
firms that are
five years old
or more

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in prior period

0.088
(0.110)

0.160
(0.120)

0.092
(0.130)

0.049
(0.032)

0.085
(0.137)

0.115
(0.280)

Log corruption per
gov. exp. in prior period

0.005
(0.015)

-0.008
(0.015)

0.007
(0.018)

0.004
(0.006)

0.003
(0.038)

-0.086
(0.085)

-0.043***
(0.015)

-0.055**
(0.025)

-0.045**
(0.018)

-0.014
(0.010)

-0.092**
(0.037)

-0.075
(0.076)

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Yes
188

Interaction of taxes and
corruption in prior period
State and period effects
Observations

Notes: See Table 2a. Column 1 of Table 2a is repeated for various economic outcomes.

Table 6: Lead/lag test of panel relationship
Log state
GDP
in prior period

Log state
employment
in prior period

Log state
GDP growth
in prior period

Log state
employment
growth
in prior period

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in current period

0.058
(0.113)

0.091
(0.155)

-0.051
(0.196)

-0.061
(0.148)

Log corruption per
gov. exp. in current period

0.006
(0.029)

0.008
(0.032)

0.026
(0.033)

0.024
(0.029)

Interaction of taxes and
corruption in current period

-0.001
(0.044)

0.003
(0.055)

0.013
(0.050)

0.039
(0.029)

Yes
141

Yes
141

Yes
94

Yes
94

State and period effects
Observations

Notes: See Tables 2a and 3a. Columns 1 and 2 consider lagged state GDP and employment on current tax revenues
and corruption akin to a Granger causality test. Columns 3 and 4 consider lagged state GDP and employment growth
and control for the lagged level two periods before.

Table 7a: Panel relationship of taxation, corruption and growth in county employment
Base estimation
using 100 mile
spatial ring
around county
(1)

Disaggregating the county sample around state borders
Counties with
Counties with
Counties that
Counties that
>50% of local
<50% of local
border other
do not border
employment
employment
states
other states
in other states
in other states
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Narrowing
spatial range
from 100 miles
to 50 miles
around county

Widening
spatial range
from 100 miles
to 200 miles
around county

(6)

(7)

Dependent variable is log growth in county employment
Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in prior period

0.046
(0.047)

0.074
(0.053)

0.046
(0.053)

0.028
(0.098)

0.050
(0.046)

0.034
(0.037)

0.014
(0.051)

Log corruption per
gov. exp. in prior period

0.009
(0.014)

0.021
(0.016)

0.006
(0.015)

0.038*
(0.021)

0.005
(0.013)

0.005
(0.011)

0.007
(0.019)

Interaction of taxes and
corruption in prior period

-0.032**
(0.013)

-0.036
(0.024)

-0.035**
(0.014)

-0.056**
(0.026)

-0.035***
(0.013)

-0.022**
(0.009)

-0.047**
(0.021)

Lagged log county level
in the prior period

-0.394***
(0.023)

-0.347***
(0.033)

-0.428***
(0.028)

-0.353***
(0.038)

-0.403***
(0.027)

-0.395***
(0.024)

-0.392***
(0.024)

Yes
11,180

Yes
4,216

Yes
6,964

Yes
2,853

Yes
8,327

Yes
11,180

Yes
11,180

County and period effects
Observations

Notes: See Table 3a. Estimations consider the panel relationships among taxation, corruption, and economic activity at the county level. The panel consists of 2795 counties from 47
states and four time periods of five years each (1988-1992 to 2003-2007), using lagged values from prior periods. The dependent variable is log county employment growth. The spatial
explanatory metrics are defined using weighted averages of state activity in 100 mile rings around each county, adjusted in Columns 6 and 7 to 50 and 200 miles, respectively. The
variable of interest is the interaction of lagged spatial income tax receipts and corruption (i.e., criminal convictions of public officials). Estimations weight by initial county employment,
cluster standard errors by state, and include county and period fixed effects. Similar to the state estimations, there is less future economic expansion and growth following periods of high
tax revenues when corruption is high. Columns 2-5 repeat this basic pattern in border versus non-border counties and when splitting the sample based upon whether a majority of local
activity occurs in other neighboring states or not. In border estimations, taxation and corruption are mostly determined in states other than the county's home state.

Table 7b: Panel relationship of taxation, corruption and growth in county establishments
Base estimation
using 100 mile
spatial ring
around county
(1)

Disaggregating the county sample around state borders
Counties with
Counties with
Counties that
Counties that
>50% of local
<50% of local
border other
do not border
employment
employment
states
other states
in other states
in other states
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Narrowing
spatial range
from 100 miles
to 50 miles
around county

Widening
spatial range
from 100 miles
to 200 miles
around county

(6)

(7)

Dependent variable is log growth in county establishments
Log tax revenues per
gov. exp. in prior period

0.073**
(0.031)

0.084**
(0.037)

0.068**
(0.033)

0.084*
(0.047)

0.066**
(0.030)

0.043*
(0.025)

0.038
(0.038)

Log corruption per
gov. exp. in prior period

0.002
(0.010)

0.007
(0.010)

0.001
(0.011)

0.026
(0.018)

-0.003
(0.010)

0.000
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.013)

Interaction of taxes and
corruption in prior period

-0.025***
(0.008)

-0.042***
(0.014)

-0.021**
(0.008)

-0.048
(0.033)

-0.023***
(0.008)

-0.015***
(0.006)

-0.033**
(0.015)

Lagged log county level
in the prior period

-0.316***
(0.036)

-0.325***
(0.037)

-0.309***
(0.042)

-0.337***
(0.038)

-0.297***
(0.045)

-0.315***
(0.038)

-0.312***
(0.037)

Yes
11,180

Yes
4,216

Yes
6,964

Yes
2,853

Yes
8,327

Yes
11,180

Yes
11,180

County and period effects
Observations

Notes: See Table 7a. The dependent variable is adjusted in these specifications to be log growth in county establishments.

