                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HOW SUCCESSFUL WAS THE NEW DEAL? ¸˛THE MICROECONOMIC IMPACT
        OF NEW DEAL SPENDING AND LENDING POLICIES IN THE 1930S

                                          Price V. Fishback

                                        Working Paper 21925
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21925


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




I owe special thanks to Shawn Kantor who got me involved with the New Deal and co-authored many
of the New Deal papers with me cited here. John Wallis gave me numerous insights based on his own
research on the New Deal and has worked with me on several projects. The reference list is truly an
acknowledgment list because nearly everybody on the list who published material after 1980 has shared
insights on the New Deal with me directly. Claudia Goldin, James Poterba, and Bill Collins aided
me greatly in setting up and running conferences on the New Deal that helped shape my writing. Funding
for the research has come from National Science Foundation grants SES-135744, SES-1061927, SES-
0921732, SES 0617972, SES 0214483, SES-0080324, and SBR-9708098, from the Earhart Foundation,
the Koch Foundation, the Bradley Foundation, the National Bureau of Economic Research and from
University of Arizona’s Economics Department, Eller College, Frank and Clara Kramer Professorship,
and Thomas R. Brown Professorship. None of the opinions expressed here should be seen as representing
the opinions of the groups funding the research. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Price V. Fishback. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
How Successful Was the New Deal? ¸˛The Microeconomic Impact of New Deal Spending
and Lending Policies in the 1930s
Price V. Fishback
NBER Working Paper No. 21925
January 2016
JEL No. H5,N42

                                                ABSTRACT

The New Deal during the 1930s was arguably the largest peace-time expansion in federal government
activity in American history. Until recently there had been very little quantitative testing of the microeconomic
impact of the wide variety of New Deal programs. Over the past decade scholars have developed new
panel databases for counties, cities, and states and then used panel data methods on them to examine
the examine the impact of New Deal spending and lending policies for the major New Deal programs.
In most cases the identification of the effect comes from changes across time within the same geographic
location after controlling for national shocks to the economy. Many of the studies also use instrumental
variable methods to control for endogeneity. The studies find that public works and relief spending
had state income multipliers of around one, increased consumption activity, attracted internal migration,
reduced crime rates, and lowered several types of mortality. The farm programs typically aided large
farm owners but eliminated opportunities for share croppers, tenants, and farm workers. The Home
Owners’ Loan Corporation’s purchases and refinancing of troubled mortgages staved off drops in
housing prices and home ownership rates at relatively low ex post cost to taxpayers. The Reconstruction
Finance Corporation’s loans to banks and railroads appear to have had little positive impact,although
the banks were aided when the RFC took ownership stakes.


Price V. Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu
                                                                                                            3


    1.   Introduction


    In response to the worst Depression in American history Franklin Roosevelt and a largely Democratic

Congress established a broad range of spending and lending programs and new regulations that became

known collectively as the New Deal. Many of these programs are either still in place today or have been

cited as precedents for federal government action during the Great Recession. Dozens of New Deal

spending and lending policies were put in place and the amounts spent per capita varied widely across the

country. Each policy was designed to address a specific set of problems in the economy and could impact

a wide range of socioeconomic variables. Much of the focus of the expanded spending was on building

public works proposed by state and local governments and providing funds to temporarily sustain the

unemployed. A significant share of spending also went to creating the farm subsidies that remain a

permanent policy today.


    The Depression also led to the creation of a series of government corporations that made loans and

injected capital into industry. For example, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation took ownership

stakes in banks and made a wide range of loans to banks, industry, and to railroads. The mortgage and

housing problems of the Great Depression led to the creation of The Home Owners’ Loan Corporation

(HOLC), which bought and refinanced troubled mortgages and had substantial impact on housing prices

and home ownership rates (Fishback and Wallis 2013). These programs not only had the potential to

stimulate incomes or retard incomes, but also had impact on other factors, including migration, mortality

rates, employment, crime rates, housing values, home ownership rates, and productivity.


    Over the past two decades scholars have developed new panel databases for counties, cities, and

states and used the substantial variation in New Deal spending and loans in each program across place

and time to examine the impact of the programs. Using microeconomic panel data methods, in most

cases the identification of the effect comes from changes across time within the same geographic location
                                                                                                            4


after controlling for national shocks to the economy. Many of the studies also use instrumental variable

methods to control for endogeneity. I summarize that literature here.


     To establish the context of the New Deal programs, the article starts by comparing and contrasting

the extent of the federal government entering the Great Depression and Great Recession and the

changes in federal outlays, revenues, and deficits relative to the prior peak GDP that followed.

Following a brief discussion of the macroeconomic literature on spending in the 1930s, I then

describe the general empirical methods used for the recent studies and use descriptions of the

estimation of the state income multiplier for federal spending to illustrate the process and several

findings that often recur. The New Deal should not be seen as one program because the goals of

the spending and loan programs were diverse and often had specific targets; therefore, I then

summarize the results for particular spending programs and outcomes while providing a series of

tables that summarize the methods of identification and means for dealing with endogeneity for

each study. The last part of the paper deals with the lending programs in the farm sector and the

lending by government corporations, like the RFC’s loans to banks and railroads, the RFC’s

ownership stakes in banks, and the HOLC’s purchase and refinance of troubled mortgages. The

final summary shows that there was substantial variation in the successes, failures, and

unintended consequences of the New Deal policies.


    The studies find that there is no one story that be told about the New Deal programs. The extent to

which the programs met their goals varied across programs, and there were a number of additional

consequences stemming from each program, some positive and some negative. Public works and relief

spending had state income multipliers of around one, led to increased consumption activity, attracted

internal migration, reduced crime rates, and lowered several types of mortality. However, they had little

positive impact on private employment. The farm programs typically aided large farm owners but

eliminated opportunities for share croppers, tenants, and farm workers. The Home Owners’ Loan
                                                                                                        5


Corporation’s purchases and refinancing of troubled mortgages bailed out lenders as much or more than

they did borrowers. The program helped stave off drops in housing prices and home ownership rates at

relatively low ex post cost to taxpayers. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation’s loans to banks and

railroads appear to have had little positive impact, although the banks were aided when the RFC took

ownership stakes in the banks.


    2.   The Relative Size of the Great Depression and the New Deal Response

         The Great Depression is usually considered to be the worst downturn in American history

and the New Deal is described as the largest peacetime expansion of the federal government.

One way to give a sense of the magnitudes of the changes in economic and government activity

in the 1930s is to compare them to the changes during the Great Recession and its aftermath in

the 2000s. The Great Recession received its nickname because many considered it to be the

worst recession since the 1930s. Federal government outlays as a share of pre-downturn GDP

rose by more than 4 percent in both periods, but the scale of the economic downturn in the 1930s

was much larger.

         To contemporaries in the 1930s the rise in federal government spending seemed

extremely large because the size and scope of federal government activity when the Great

Depression began in 1929 was much smaller (at around 3-4 percent of GDP) than when the

economy entered the Great Recession in 2008 (around 19 percent). Most of the New Deal

spending and loan policies broke new ground in the federal government’s role in the economy,

particularly in the areas of seeking to stimulate economic growth through spending, providing

aid to the poor, building state and local public works, subsidizing farmers, influencing housing

markets, and taking ownership stakes in banks. By 2008 the federal government’s role in these

areas had expanded markedly. This difference in context helps determine differences in the

types of policies chosen in the two periods, as well as differences in the impact of those policies.
                                                                                                      6


       To make comparisons of the aggregate figures between the two periods in Figures 1 and

2, I calculate the differences in real GDP and real federal outlays, receipts, and deficits between

year t and the pre-downturn peak year, 1929 for the Great Depression and 2007 for the Great

Recession and then normalize the differences to become percentages of real GDP in the peak

year by dividing by peak year real GDP in 1929 and 2007, respectively. Treating the pre-

downturn peak as a baseline, the percentages in the two figures show how government activity

changed in response to changes in real GDP within each time period, while also providing a

common basis for comparisons between the 1930s and the 2000s. An alternative would have

been to calculate the government activity each year as a percentage of GDP in that year. The

alternative is problematic because it combines both changes in government activity and GDP in

the same measure and therefore cannot show the distinct differences in the evolution of real GDP

and federal activity.

       2.1 The Great Depression

         Before the Great Depression the federal government had little capacity to offset

economic downturns with spending and taxation. The only times the government revenue or

spending shares exceeded 3 percent of GDP were during war or the periods when war debts

were repaid afterward. On the eve of the Great Depression, the federal government had been

running surpluses for a decade to repay its World War I debts. The federal government

collected revenue equal to 3.7 percent relative to GDP in 1929.1     In 1929 federal outlays were 3

percent relative to GDP. The outlays were largely devoted to national defense (22%), help for

veterans (25%), and interest on debt (22%). The remaining outlays (28%) included national



1 It collected personal income taxes from fewer than 10 percent of households, and the revenues
accounted for 28 percent of the total. The remaining revenue came largely from corporate taxes
(31%), excise taxes (14%), and customs (16%).
                                                                                                   7


highway grants to the states, projects to prevent flooding and improve navigation of waterways,

the post office, and the administration of the government (Wallis 2006). Poverty relief,

temporary and long term, was the responsibility of local governments with alms houses and

some payments for “outdoor” relief to allow the poor to remain in their own homes. The states

provided some aid for widows with children, compensation of families of injured workers, and

aid to the blind.

        The Great Depression led to a dramatic change in attitudes toward federal government

spending and tax policies. Between 1929 and 1932 Real GDP in Figure 1 lurched downward to a

level 25.6 percent below its 1929 peak level and then hit a trough 26.7 percent below in 1933.

The Hoover administration and Republican Congress took the unusual step of increasing federal

outlays by 88 percent in real terms between 1929 and 1932. Nearly all of these outlays occurred

within existing programs. This increase from 1929 was 2.9 percent relative to 1929 peak GDP.

By 1932 federal tax revenues had fallen below the 1929 level by -1.3 percent of 1929 GDP, so

that the change in the deficit was -4.2 percent of 1929 GDP. Few people focus on the original

expansion from 1929 to 1932 because Hoover and Congress constantly argued for balanced

budgets, and they then raised tax rates in June 1932 and held spending constant in real terms in

fiscal year 1933. That year was largely a Hoover year because the fiscal year began July 1 and

ended on June 30, 1933, and Roosevelt was not sworn in as President until early March of 1933.

        The rise in personal income tax rates in June 1932 was followed by a sharp decline in

revenues from that source. As a result, the key tax rate increases that kept total tax revenues

from falling were excise taxes imposed on oil transfers in pipelines, electricity, bank checks,

communications and the manufacturing of gasoline, oil, tires, and automobiles. By 1934 excise

taxes accounted for 48 percent of federal tax revenues, up from 14 percent in 1929.
                                                                                                                     8


         Macroeconomists have assigned a sizeable share of the blame for the drop in output,

ranging from 30 to 70 percent, to the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy between 1929 and

1933.2 The money supply declined sharply, contributing to the output decline and a 30 percent

decline in the price level. Following a “real bills” doctrine and seeking to maintain the gold

standard, the Fed responded tepidly to the waves of bank failures with ineffectual discount rate

policy until purchasing 1 billion in bonds in the first half of 1932. Another wave of bank failures

in the first quarter of 1933 led the states and eventually the federal government to declare bank

holidays. The Roosevelt administration led the U.S. off of the Gold Standard and the Fed

maintained a looser monetary policy that drove short term interest rates near the zero bound for

the rest of the decade with one exception, a three-step increase in reserve requirements between

August 1936 and May 1937 ((Eichengreen 1992; Temin 1989; Meltzer 2003).

         During their First Hundred Days in office, Roosevelt and the Democratic Congress set in

motion a set of spending policies that raised real federal outlays by an additional 2 percent of

peak GDP between 1933 and 1934. The Veterans’ Bonus, passed over Roosevelt’s veto in 1936,

raised outlays by an additional 1.8 percent of peak GDP. By 1937 real GDP had risen 5.3

percent above its 1929 level. The rise led Roosevelt and Congress to believe that they had

leeway to balance the budget. They reduced federal outlays, while tax revenues increased as a

result of tax rate increases and increases in the flow of revenues from the new alcohol taxes that

followed Prohibition. The reduction in the deficit combined with the Federal Reserve’s

doubling of reserve requirements helped cause real GDP to fall back to within 2 percent of its

1929 level.     Roosevelt and Congress then raised federal outlays again. By 1939 the increase in

federal outlays relative to 1929 was roughly 8 percent of peak GDP.


2 The 30 to 70 percent figure is a rough guess based on a survey of the large literature on monetary policy during
the 1930s in Fishback (2010), Smiley (2002), and Atack and Passell (1994, 583-624).
                                                                                                    9


       2.2 The Great Recession

       The federal government played a much larger role in the economy when the Great

Recession hit in 2008. In the peak year of 2007, federal outlays were 18.8 percent of GDP and

revenues were 17.7 with a slight deficit of approximately -1.1 percent of GDP. Approximately

60 percent of American households were paying personal income taxes and all workers and self-

employed were required to pay federal payroll taxes. Between October 2007 and December

2008, a major financial crisis developed, as the S&P 500 more than halved in value, the major

investment banks failed or converted to commercial banks, and the federal government took

ownership stakes in insurance giant AIG and Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae.3 By the end of

fiscal year 2008 on September 30th, the federal government had raised real outlays between 2007

and 2008 by 1.36 percent of 2007 peak GDP, as seen in Figure 2.

       The decline in real GDP in Figure 2 was much smaller and the recovery much sooner

than in the Great Depression. Real GDP fell slightly in 2008 and then declined to -3 percent

below the 2007 peak in 2009 before recovering to 5.6 percent above the prior peak in 2013. In

response, real federal outlays were increased by 4.8 percent of peak GDP relative to 2007 (1.6

percent from TARP payouts during 2008) and a series of tax credits and the bad economy

contributed to a decline in revenue between 2007 and 2009 of -3.6 percent of peak 2007 GDP. 4

The combination led to an increase in the size of the deficit from 1.1 percent of peak GDP in



3 Former  Federal Reserve Chairman Benjamin Bernanke recently described the financial crisis in
2008 as the most severe financial crisis in American economic history. He says this because in
a very short span of one to two months the entire financial structure was rocked by problems at
several financial institutions that were considered too big to fail. In contrast the financial crises
during the Great Depression were much more slow moving and did not involve nearly as many
large banks.
4 The TARP was created in October and the use of the funds included posting collateral for
AIG’s credit default swaps, taking ownership stakes in major banks, and providing capital and
loans to auto manufacturers Chrysler and General Motors.
                                                                                                  10


2007 to 9.5 percent of peak GDP in 2009. Federal outlays remained over 4 percent of peak GDP

higher than in 2007 in both 2010 and 2011 before tailing off. Federal revenues were around 3

percent of peak GDP lower than in 2007 in both 2010 and 2011 as the workers’ share of Social

Security tax payments was cut by 2 percentage points and the Bush era tax rules were continued.

       Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve led by Depression scholar Benjamin Bernanke (2000)

responded rapidly to the financial crisis with accommodative monetary policy. During 2008 the

Fed drove the federal funds rate down near the zero interest bound with open market operations.

Over the next few years the Fed embarked on a series of “quantitative easing” measures,

including large-scale purchases of mortgage-backed securities, with a goal of keeping short-term

and long-term interest rates close to the zero bound.

       In comparing the two eras, modern fiscal policy makers responded much sooner and

more aggressively relative to the size of the downturn than did the policy makers of the 1930s.

Between 1930 and 1935 the federal government responded to annual shortfalls in real GDP that

ranged from -9 to -27 percent of peak GDP with an increase in federal outlays of 2 to 6 percent

of peak GDP and sharp tax rate increases, particularly for excise taxes. After a severe second dip

recession in 1937-1938 while cutting outlays and raising receipts to achieve a balanced budget,

they returned to a level of outlays that was 8 percent higher than it had been in 1929. In contrast,

the during the Great Recession, the federal government responded to a 3 percent shortfall in real

GDP with an increase in real outlays of 4.8 percent of peak GDP, roughly 1.6 times the size of

the shortfall. Real outlays remained around four percent higher than 2007 peak GDP and tax

revenues more than 2 percent below peak GDP through 2012, well after the economy passed the

2007 real GDP level in 2010.
                                                                                                               11


     Macroeconomic Studies of National Aggregates of Federal SpendingThe aggregate changes

in federal spending during the New Deal were dramatic. After the Hoover era nearly doubled

federal outlays, the New Deal nearly doubled them again. Even though aggregate federal

government outlays rose sharply during both the Hoover and Roosevelt years, the macroeconomic

literature, which has been the subject of several surveys, has focused mostly on the role of monetary

policy during the 1930s in a series of studies that responded to the seminal work of Milton Friedman and

Anna Schwartz (1963).5


    The spending and lending policies likely have received less attention in the macroeconomics literature

because tax collections rose at a similar rate to spending, leading to small deficits. In open letters to

newspapers in 1933 John Maynard Keynes lauded the Roosevelt administration’s spending increases, but

argued that the tax increases that led to small deficits were negating the positive effects of the spending

(Los Angeles Times, December 31, 1933). E. Cary Brown (1956) and Larry Peppers (1973) documented

the small deficits and used Keynesian models to show that the New Deal programs should not be

considered an example of a Keynesian stimulus. Christina Romer (1992) made some comparative

calculations from 1921 and 1938 and found a weak effect of fiscal policy, although that

conclusion has recently been challenged by Nathan Perry and Matthis Vernango (2013).


    Using structural models, Eggertsson (2008) and Eggertsson and Pugsley (2006) examined the

impact of federal spending as one piece of a package of policies including monetary policy, the

National Recovery Administration, the retreat from the gold standard and jawboning for higher

prices that influenced deflationary expectations when interest rates were near the zero bound.

.Eggertsson (2008) built his model based on the insights of Peter Temin and Barry Wigmore




5A survey of the macroeconomic literature on monetary policy easily filled a book by Smiley (2002). Other useful
surveys of the large literature include Atack and Passell (1994, 583-624), Fishback (2010), and two books of
interviews conducted by Randall Parker (2002, 2007) with economists who studied the Great Depression.
                                                                                                                  12


(1990). They found substantial impact of the policy package, but it is difficult to sort out how

much each was contributed by monetary policy and fiscal policy separately.6


    3. Empirical Methods for the Microeconomic Studies

         Microeconomists have taken a different tack by emphasizing the different types of spending and

lending and focusing on more disaggregated panel data at the state, county, city, and individual level.

Some programs offered pure grants, while others offered loans to be repaid. The Agricultural

Adjustment Act farm grants required farmers to take land out of production. This section

provides an intuitive discussion of the panel data methods that have been commonly used to

examine the New Deal programs in the past decade. The panel data methods are designed to

reduce problems with endogeneity bias, which is a significant issue because it is clear that the

New Deal spending policies were generally designed to offset problems in the economy. Studies

of the geographic distribution of New Deal spending show that many of the New Deal programs

paid attention to those issues when distributing the monies.

         The studies have used specifications that involve some subset of the following equation.

The dependent variable in the equation is the outcome measure (yit) in location i and year t and

the New Deal funds are measured as git, and the coefficient β1 shows the relationship between the

two.    The outcome measures include per capita income, birth rates, death rates, crime rates,

migration, employment, wages, home ownership rates, housing values, and rents. Depending on

the study, the locations include states, cities, counties, and individuals, and the New Deal funds

sometimes are split into multiple categories.



           yit = β0 + β1 git + β2 xit + S +Y + S* t + εit.                                         1)

6 There is substantial disagreement between Eggertsson (2012) and Harold Cole and Lee Ohanian (2004) about the
impact of the National Recovery Administration based on conflicting structural models that are discussed later in the
article.
                                                                                                  13




The equation includes several vectors to control for exogenous variables that might have

influenced both the New Deal funds and the outcomes in the locations. The xit vector includes

variables like weather shocks and the socioeconomic features of the economy that vary across

time and place. A vector of location fixed effects (S) controls for factors like geography, local

laws, and the basic economic, cultural, and demographic structure of each location that did not

change over time but varied across states. When the location fixed effects are added to the

model, the variation that identifies the impact of the New Deal (β1) is changes across time within

the same location. A vector of year fixed effects (Y) controls for national changes in the

economy that affected all locations in each year, including monetary policy changes, changes in

federal tax rates, and changes in national regulation. The addition of the year fixed effects to the

location fixed effects specifications causes the effect of the New Deal to be identified by

variations within the same state over time after controlling for national shocks to the economy.

The addition of a vector of location-specific time trends (S*t) controls for differences in the trend

paths of economic activity in each location.          Under the complete model specification the

identification of the New Deal effect comes from deviations from trend across time within the

locations after controlling for nation-wide shocks.

       As an alternative way to control for location fixed effects, the model can also be

estimated in year-to-year first differences. The year effects in the first difference model still

serve the same purpose of controlling for nationwide shocks in each year. In the difference

model location time trends are controlled with the addition of state fixed effects. Both the

methods, levels with fixed effects and first-differences lead to unbiased and consistent estimates
                                                                                                                 14


of the multiplier in large samples, but the standard errors are more efficiently estimated by the

difference estimation if there is serial correlation (Wooldridge 2006, pp. 491-492).

        Even after incorporating all of the controls, endogeneity bias might still remain if policy

makers were explicitly taking into account the year to year fluctuations in that location’s

economy when deciding how much funding to provide to that area. The New Deal studies have

sought to deal with that issue in a variety of ways. One has been to tap the ample literature on

the political economy of the distribution of New Deal funds across locations. 7

        The range of New Deal spending per person across the states was striking, ranging from

highs for the decade of nearly $900 per person in the mountain west to lows of roughly $100 per

person in some southern regions (Arrington 1970; Reading 1973). The U.S. is an economically

diverse country and there was substantial variation in the extent of the downturn across areas, so

it seems natural that the amounts would vary. Among the patterns that have drawn the most

attention were the relatively small amounts received by southern states, even though southern per

capita incomes were the lowest in the nation and some southern states experienced among the

worst of the downturns.             Although many modern programs have explicit formulas that

determine the distribution of spending through matching grants and specific counts, the inner

workings of the emergency New Deal programs are more difficult to fathom. Explicit formulas

for matching funds written into legislation for the Federal Emergency Relief Administration and



7Arrington (1970) and Reading (1973) first identified the large variation in distributions. Wright (1974) developed
a median voter model and found that swing voting had a very strong impact. Wallis (1987, 1991, 1998, 2001)
emphasized the role of the states in determining the distribution because state governments often had to make
proposals to get the funds. Anderson and Tollison (1991) emphasized the role of Congress. Fleck (1999a, 1999c,
2001a, 2001b, 2008, and 2013) developed new models that showed the impact of voter turnout, emphasized the
importance of federal lands, discussed more complex interactions between political variables. He was the first to
use the political variables as instruments. Couch and Shughart (1998) wrote a book-length survey with additional
material. Stromberg (2004) emphasized the importance of the radio to electioneering. Fishback, Kantor, and
Wallace (2003), Kantor, Fishback, and Wallis (2013), and Fishback, and Kantor (2006) examined the distribution
across counties, showed that the factors influencing the distribution varied substantially by program, and describe
the extent to which the Roosevelt administration sought to control corruption by local governments.
                                                                                                                15


the Works Progress Administration were abandoned as unworkable, and Senate testimony by

relief administrators offered long lists of factors considered but with no weights attached

(Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis 2003). Scholars have attached weights to these factors using

econometric analysis.

        Studies spread across forty years suggest that the funds were distributed in response to a

complex mix of factors, although there is not full agreement on how much weight to give to each

factor. In a famous Fireside Chat in 1933 Franklin Roosevelt suggested that the New Deal funds

would be used to promote “Recovery, Relief, and Reform.” Many studies, but not all, find

evidence that the Roosevelt administration promoted recovery and relief by spending more in

areas with higher unemployment and in areas where the economic downturn from 1929 to 1933

was more pronounced. This was particularly true for specific programs targeted at poverty relief.

Most programs required that state and local governments develop and help fund projects to

obtain federal grants (Wallis 1987, 1998; Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis 2003). Some areas

received substantially less funding where leaders were leery of possible strings attached to New

Deal largesse or because they did not press as aggressively for funding. Areas with more

federally-owned land tended to receive more funds, as the administration sought to enhance the

value of the federal lands (Reading 1973, Fleck 2001a, 2008).

         Nearly every study finds that political considerations were important to the Roosevelt

administration. More funds per capita were distributed in areas that were more likely to swing

toward voting for Roosevelt and areas where high voter turnout suggested strong political

interest.8 Some studies find that the administration might also have been rewarding districts that



8 Wright (1973) developed a political model based on the median voter and developed a political productivity index
that he found influenced the distribution of the funds. He also decomposed it into the mean share voting Democrat
for president and a swing voting measure, the standard deviation of past voting for Democrats for president. That
swing voting measure is the one that most scholars have found to be a strong determinant of the distribution of
                                                                                                              16


had long voted for the Democratic presidential candidate.                 Since Congress holds the purse

strings, the distribution of New Deal funds was influenced by the congressional power structure,

and there is evidence that members of important committees and Congressional leaders were

effective at helping their constituents obtain more New Deal funds (Anderson and Tollison

1991).

         The studies of the impact of the New Deal have used a variety of the noneconomic

factors from the political economy literature as instruments.             Successful instruments have two

features:    1) a strong relationships with the New Deal spending measure in equations that

incorporate all of the controls in the final equations and 2) they are “valid” in that they are not

correlated with the error (εit) in the outcome equation.          The first requirement is testable but the

validity is not because the error term is unobservable; therefore, the validity is determined by the

logic of the argument for why it would not be correlated with the error. One thing to remember

in the logical discussion is that the instrument can be correlated with the outcome in raw

correlations and still not be correlated with the error in the outcome equation after all other

factors are controlled. In that case the raw correlation arises because the correlation from the

instrument comes through the New Deal spending itself or through some other control that is

included in the equation. For example, in studying death rates, the instrument might have a raw

correlation with the death rate. If the raw correlation arises purely because the death rate is

correlated with income and the New Deal variable, the instrument is not correlated with the error

if both income and the New Deal variable are included in the equation.

         Some examples help illustrate the logic of the instruments. As seen in Table 3, a

common variable used has been a past measure of swing voting in presidential elections,


funds. Fleck (1999a, 2001a, 1999c, 2001b, 2008) expanded the modelling and was the first to use swing voting and
mean presidential voting measures as an instrument (Fleck 1999b).
                                                                                                        17


typically the standard deviation of the percent voting for Democrats for President over a past

time period.    Nearly all of the political economy studies of New Deal spending find that the

swing voting measure is strongly related to the geographic distribution of funds, and the

instrument is typically found to be strong in tests on the first-stage equations. The argument for

the validity of the past swing measure rests on several factors.           In studies of death rates and

migration, the swing voting would be uncorrelated with the error when income and other

economic factors are included as a correlate and the swing voting has no separate relationship

with the outcome measure. Further, the area fixed effects control for long run leanings of the

location toward one party or the other. Finally, the swing voting measure is typically a lagged

measure, so there is no question of simultaneity, and the lag length is long enough that there is

unlikely to be serial correlation in the error term that would lead the swing measure to be

correlated with a lagged error term.

        Both studies of the New Deal and modern political economy studies have used

representation on key committees in Congress as an instrument.9 The argument for the lack of

correlation between key committee memberships and the error rests on the argument that

Congress is a national body. Even though congressmen from districts in trouble may seek spots

on the key committees, more members seek the memberships than there are slots available and

the tenure of congressmen and a wide range of rules determine who gets assigned to the

committees.     This process therefore leads to a weak relationship between the committee

assignments in any year and the error term in the outcome equation.

        Finding instruments can be difficult for annual panels because the instruments need to

vary across both time and space. One instrument used in New Deal and modern papers is a


9 For New Deal examples, see Haines, Fishback, and Kantor 2007 and Hungerman and Gruber 2007. In the modern
period see Feyderer and Sacerdote 2011.
                                                                                                        18


“shift-share” instrument that has been used by Wallis and Benjamin (1981), Bartik (1991), and

Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). In the New Deal context Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015),

for example, developed an instrument based on the idea that the federal government over the

1930s provided the same proportion (pij25-28) of federal spending to state i in category j as it did

for the period 1925 to 1928.              For each of eight spending categories j they multiplied the 1925-

1928 state proportions (pij25-28) by the national total in each category (Susjt) for each year t in the

1930s to get a prediction of each state I’s spending in category j in year t and then summed

across the categories to predict total state i spending in year t.

        Instit = Σj=1-8 pij25-28 Susjt.

The instrument is valid when the shares of federal spending in the 1920s are not correlated with

the error in state i and year t in the outcome equation for years in the 1930s and each state’s

spending is a small enough share of the national total that the national total is not correlated with

the error in the outcome equation. To avoid the problem that the state is part of the national

total, Fishback and Kachanovskaya took an additional step and replaced the national total Susj

with a total spending measure from states that were well outside the region where the state was

located. For Massachusetts, for example, the total used excluded all states in New England, the

Mid-Atlantic, the East North Central, and Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, or West Virginia. The

goal was to develop a spending total for states that were least likely to be consistently trading

with state i.

        As in all studies using instruments, there are some additional issues to consider. For

example, since no one can know the true error in the outcome equation, no one can know that the

instrument is completely uncorrelated with the error. A complete lack of correlation may be

difficult to achieve, so the logical discussion about this validity issue is often about where the
                                                                                                    19


correlation lies on a continuum in which the instrument is more effective as the probability of

correlation declines. Further, the instrumental variable method is focused only on the part of the

New Deal spending that is correlated with that instrument (or set of instruments). There may be

other components of the policy that are uncorrelated with the error term that have a different

relationship with the outcome measures. Thus, the results may differ with different sets of

instruments.

       In some settings scholars have found it difficult to develop effective instruments for the

New Deal programs. The problem arises most commonly when there were multiple New Deal

programs that would have influenced the outcome of interest.     For example, in farm settings

there were several types of farm programs plus public works and relief programs that were likely

to have differential effects on farmers’ decision making.   Even when scholars find several

instruments, the same instruments typically are strongly correlated with more than one of the

programs studied, which means that they cannot effectively be used to sort out the separate

effects of those programs. One alternative has been to turn to placebo analysis in which the

results of an analysis during the 1930s are compared to the results from a placebo regression for

the 1920s in which the program values are inserted as if they occurred in that decade. In many

cases the 1920s placebo regressions show that the 1930s program has no relationship with the

changes that occurred in the 1920s, which makes it more likely that the 1930s results provide

reasonable estimates of the effects in the 1930s (Kitchens and Fishback, 2015).

   4. The Multiplier for Federal Spending in the States

       To illustrate several common findings, I discuss estimates of the state income multiplier

for overall federal spending in some depth and then provide shorter surveys and a summary table

of the results and methods used for specific types of spending. The federal stimulus package of
                                                                                                               20


2009 has generated renewed interest in the fiscal multiplier. The multiplier is valued at one

when a dollar increase in government spending leads to a dollar increase in income. It is valued

at two when the dollar of government spending leads to enough activity to raise income by two

dollars, the original dollar plus additional effects that add another dollar to income. It is valued

at one-half when the government spending of a dollar crowds out 50 cents in economic activity.

In macroeconomics John Maynard Keynes (1935, republished 1964) is the economist most

associated with the multiplier, but there were other economists at the time also writing about

stimulus associated with injections of public works spending. The U.S Department of

Agriculture under the Hoover administration, for example, saw increased highway spending as a

way to stimulate the economy above and beyond the initial spending. The Bureau of

Agricultural Economics inside the U.S. Department of Agriculture (1935) developed a formal

input-output model visualized as a wheel of economic activity that implied multipliers above

2.5.10

         In a recent Journal of Economic Literature survey, Valerie Ramey (2011) surveyed the

modern multiplier literature, and many of the working papers she cites have now been published.

The majority of studies focus on national macroeconomic multipliers in which the spending and

taxation are generated within the same economy.            These multipliers are difficult to estimate

because of the endogeneity problems that arise because policy makers often set their spending

and taxation policies in response to what they see in the economy around them. To reduce the

endogeneity problem, scholars have tried a variety of methods, including using lagged values,

identifying periods of warfare and focusing on military spending that might not have been driven

by the ups and downs of the economy, using narratives to identify periods when policy makers

are not mentioning the economy in setting policy, and seeking out “surprises” when spending

10See Barber (1996, 83-89), U.S. Department of Agriculture (1932, 49–50), and Bureau of Public Roads (1935).
                                                                                                                     21


deviates from prior announcements. No consensus estimate has developed. After surveying the

literature, Ramey (2011) suggests that the multiplier lies between 0.8 and 1.5, although she cites

some studies with larger and smaller multiplier estimates.11 None of the methods lend

themselves to studies of the national multiplier for the New Deal because very little of the

spending in the 1930s was on the military and the spending was clearly designed to offset the

disastrous economy.12

         Using the model structure described in the methods section above, Fishback and

Kachanovskaya (2015) estimated the multiplier for federal injections of loans or spending into

state economies in the 1930s. The state multipliers cannot be easily translated into a national

multiplier because of spillover effects outside each state’s boundaries and because the same state

multiplier can lead to a broad range of estimates of the national multiplier under a reasonable

range of assumptions in a macroeconomic model that pays attention to regional variation in

spending.13 The state multiplier measures the impact of federal monies that were delivered to a

state after leakages in the spending from that state are taken into account. A state multiplier of

11 The lagged values require careful consideration of serial correlation. World War II was the only period of all-
out war when problems in the economy would plausibly have had no influence on spending. However, it looked
very little like a peace-time economy because there were few consumer durables produced, the military made a
major share of the resource allocation decisions, and there were extensive price controls. Military spending in
nearly all other periods has been subject to the same political economic wrangling as other spending.
12Romer (1992) estimated a multiplier of 0.23 using a difference-in-difference estimate during and after the
Veterans’ Bonus , arguing that the Bonus was not designed as a countercyclical measure.
13 Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) suggest that state multipliers for federal spending might be useful as estimates of
the multiplier in a small open economy in a currency union with free movement across borders. However, a national
multiplier for federal spending addresses a situation where all of the taxation and debt obligations are centered
within the economy where the money is spent (Barro 1981). In contrast, a state can receive federal funds but might
bear less than (or more than) its full share of the tax and debt obligation associated with funds. Further, distribution
of federal funds to one state will likely lead to spillovers for other states when the funds purchase inputs from other
states and workers consume goods and services from outside their state. Nakamura and Steinsson (2014, 777-787)
find that the relationship between state multipliers and the overall national multiplier can vary a great deal
depending on a variety of assumptions about monetary policy. They cannot fully address the spillover issue because
they do not estimate spatial spillovers. Suarez-Serrato and Wingender (2014) estimate spillover effects using county
data and find small spillovers and not much change in their multiplier estimates, but the instruments for their
spillover estimations are much weaker than for the direct estimation. This problem bedevils all analysts. It is
already a challenge to come up with valid and strong instruments for the spending within the state and the problem
is compounded when seeking multiple instruments that will allow the estimation to parse out the differential effects
of the spending in the state of interest and the spending in its spatial neighbors.
                                                                                                                 22


one implies that a state like Arizona could expect that an additional dollar of per capita federal

spending in Arizona would raise per capita income in Arizona by a dollar. Thus, it provides an

indication of the benefits that the Arizona governments could anticipate obtaining for its

residents by lobbying for an additional per capita dollar of federal spending. From the New Deal

onward, the decision about how much federal funding to seek has been a significant decision for

every state and local government. During the 1930s some governors and state legislatures

aggressively sought federal grants, while others were passive and some were even hostile. Even

with no lobbying the state was likely to gain from federal largesse. The President and Congress

had incentives to provide some grants to every jurisdiction to avoid charges of favoritism, while

states that did not actively lobby for grants still benefitted from any spillovers from federal

spending in other states (Wallis 1998; Fishback and Kachanovskaya 2015).

           There are a variety of theoretical models designed to capture the impact of federal

spending in the states. The models range from the early Keynesian regional models to input-

output models to economic base models to neo-classical models.14 Generally, in a reduced-

form model with state income as the dependent variable, the coefficient on federal spending will

be determined by a series of factors. Spending has positive effects if it puts to work

unemployed resources; if it is more productive than the private spending it replaces; and if it

produces social overhead capital (like roads, sanitation, public health programs) that make the

inputs in the state economy more productive. The logic of the Keynesian multiplier argues that

income recipients will purchases goods and services within the state from others, who, in turn,



14Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) develop a neo-Keynesian model for small open economies integrated into a
currency union. Among regional economists Richardson (1985) surveys all but the neoclassical models. See
Merrifield (1987 and 1990) and McGregor, McVittie, Swales, and Yin (2000) for examples of neoclassical
multipliers for the economic base. For a static model that lays out the groundwork of the intuition see the online
appendix by for Cullen and Fishback (2013). Kline and Moretti (2013) survey the work on modern periods based
on place-based regional models.
                                                                                                    23


spend their receipts on goods and services produced by others in the state. Alternatively, the

regional neoclassical multiplier arises because the spending increases labor demand along an

upward sloping labor supply curve and thus increases earnings. .

             The positive benefits of the multiplier are reduced by “leakages” when the money spent

in the process is spent on goods and services outside the state economy. During the New Deal

much of the federal spending on relief programs had small initial leakages because over 80

percent was spent on wages for people in the state. Public works grants had larger initial

leakages because more than 50 percent of the monies were spent on materials and equipment

imported from other states. After the first round of payments more leakages arose because

workers on federal projects spent some of their wages on goods and services produced outside

the state.

             The boost of federal spending locally was smaller to the extent that it crowded out local

production of goods and services. New federal spending could bid up local wages and other

input prices and thus raise the costs of production for private producers. This effect will be

attenuated in the longer run to the extent that the federal spending attracts new workers and/or

sellers. The most obvious crowding out effect came from the AAA payments to farmers to take

land out of production. The stated purpose of the act was to reduce output in hopes of raising

prices enough to see an increase in income. In other cases, the federal spending may have

replaced state and local resources in projects that would have been built without Washington’s

support. The impact of the reduction in state and local spending was likely to be small because

states were generally required to run balanced budgets.

             Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015) estimated state income multipliers for total federal

grants using all the various subsets of panel model specifications described in the model section
                                                                                                                   24


above, and the results are shown in Table 1.15 They also estimated effects for subsets of

spending and other outcomes that will be discussed in other sections of the paper. In the process,

they learned quite a bit about how much results can differ using these different specifications.

First, adding controls clearly led to changes in the multiplier estimate. The OLS estimates with

no controls led to multipliers of 1.25 and 1.52. Controls for time-invariant features of the states

led to multipliers ranging from 0.98 to 2.06. Adding year fixed effects to the other controls cut

the multiplier to 0.26 to 0.45 and adding state time trends cut the estimates to 0.16 to 0.27.

           Second, after adding the many controls, they anticipated negative endogeneity bias to

the extent that the Roosevelt administration sought to provide more funds to areas where the

economy was hit harder by negative shocks. Consistent with this expectation, performing IV

estimation with the same controls typically led to larger multipliers. Using the shift-share

instrument with national totals outside the state’s large region described in the model section, the

switch to IV estimation with state and year fixed effects increased the point estimates of the

multipliers from a range of 0.26 to 0.45 to a range of 0.67 to 0.96. Third, when the state-specific

time trends were added to the IV estimation, the instruments were much weaker as F-statistics

were cut dramatically. The multipliers ranged from -0.18 to 0.87 and the hypothesis of zero

could not be rejected.




15 The New Deal involved a wide variety of grants and loans. The range of estimates described in the text refers to
estimates of per capita income on grants in combinations where both income and grants include pure transfers and
where both income and grants exclude pure transfers to see the effect of grants that led to production of a good or
service. The grants required no repayment and were a pure subsidy, while the subsidy for the loans depended on the
difference between the interest rate charged by the federal government and the interest rate that would have been
charged privately. This private counterfactual interest rate varied a great deal across programs. For example, when
the HOLC refinanced loans for troubled home borrowers at 5 percent interest, private lenders were charging 6 to 8
percent for good loans, but it is not clear that the HOLC borrowers would have been able to get a private loan at any
interest rate. Therefore, Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015) estimated multipliers with grants and no loans, grants
and 10 percent of loans, and grants plus all loans. They also estimated the impact of grants net of federal taxes paid
by state taxpayers. The estimates for these various measures using year fixed effects and controls for time-invariant
features of the states ranged from 0.43 to 1.26.
                                                                                                                  25


           Fourth, Fishback and Kachanovskaya had a priori expectations that the results would

not change much when they switched from controlling for time-invariant features of the states in

a model of levels with state fixed effects to a model of first-differences. In an OLS model with

just controls for time-invariant features of the states, the coefficients differed by roughly 50

percent (1.54 versus 0.98 when transfers were included and 2.06 and 1.37 when transfers were

excluded). The differences in coefficients were typically smaller in the IV model with state and

year fixed effects. However, the same instruments were much weaker in the first-differenced

model than in the level model with fixed-effects model with F-statistics that were roughly one-

fourth to one-sixth as large. Consequently, the standard errors for the multiplier estimates were

substantially larger.16

         The differences in the estimates of the standard errors were not that surprising given that

the assumptions about the error term in the levels with fixed effects and the first-differenced

model are different. However, there were also substantial differences in the OLS coefficients

using the two methods. Small sample size was likely the reason with only 48 states and 11 years

in the panel. The panel is likely not large enough for us to expect the various multiplier

estimates to converge to the same consistent value using the different methods.



4.1 Comparisons with Modern State Multipliers

         The economic context for the New Deal state multiplier is similar to the context to the

Great Recession in two major ways. In both periods Federal Reserve policies drove short term


          16To get an idea of how much leakages influenced the estimates of the state multiplier, Fishback and
Kachanovskaya (2010) estimated multipliers for grants net of federal taxes in each state using first differences and
adding a measure of the difference in the national money supply and a dummy for the NRA period. They expected
larger states and more diverse economies to have larger multipliers due to smaller leakages. They found no
discernible pattern in the estimates, as both large and small state economies were among the states with the largest
multipliers.
                                                                                                               26


nominal interest rates near zero and there was significant slack in the economy.17 During the

Great Recession the unemployment rate rose above 9 percent for nearly two years, while the

slack was much greater in the Depression when real GDP dropped by 30 percent between 1929

and 1933 and unemployment rates ranged from 14 to 25 percent for most of the decade. There

are also significant differences in context. The federal government played a substantially smaller

role in the economy in 1929 than in 2007 and had not been running deficits for several decades.

          Several studies of the modern economy measure the impact of federal spending on state

economies. Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) estimate state level multipliers based on variations

in military procurement spending during periods of military buildups between 1966 and 2006.

To control for endogeneity, they estimate state shares of military spending in a baseline period

and construct their instrument as the product of the baseline shares and national military

spending in each year. Their results suggest multipliers of 1.5 to 1.9, which are much larger than

the ones Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015) find for the New Deal. The New Deal estimates

are somewhat larger than multiplier estimates of around 0.5 found by Art Kraay (2010) who used

earlier project approvals of World Bank loans as his instrument for public works spending in low

income countries.

          One potential reason for the difference in results might be that Nakamura and Steinsson

focus on military spending, which tends to go to large military contractors who are hiring a large

share of highly skilled workers on a relatively permanent basis. On the other hand a large share

of the New Deal spending went toward relief payments of half to two-thirds of normal wages

that were designed to increase the recipients’ income to a minimum standard of living. As a

result, the New Deal relief workers likely spent a higher share of their earnings than did modern

         17Although it seems reasonable that the multiplier would be larger during periods of higher unemployment,
Owyang, Ramey, and Zubairy (2013) and Barro and Redlick (2011) do not find variation in the size of national
multipliers during periods of high unemployment.
                                                                                                                 27


workers but they only had enough funds to pay for the basic necessities for food, clothing, and

shelter. Unlike the modern full-wage workers, the relief workers were not purchasing the types

of durable goods and non-necessities that would have stimulated a broad range of industries and

services that were hit hard by the Depression. My sense is that the impact on the multiplier of

differences in the composition of spending more than outweighed potential differences in the

marginal propensity to consume.18



    5. Effects of Different Types of Grants

        The New Deal enacted a broad range of grant and loan programs, which are described

with thumbnail sketches and acronyms in Table 2, along with their shares of total grant and loan

funds distributed between fiscal years 1934 and 1940. The relief grants, the farm grants, and the

public works grants focused on local projects, and many of the loan programs introduced new

roles for the federal government. Grants for veterans, highways, Bureau of Reclamation dams,

and Army Corps of Engineers’ (ACE) river and harbor projects continued existing programs.

Some of the new public works and relief grant were used to fund parts of the ACE projects

without flowing through the ACE.

        It is likely that the different types of grants and loans had differential effects on economic

activity because they were targeted for different purposes. Roughly half of the New Deal grants

went to relief programs for the poor and unemployed. This was a major change in federal policy.

Except for benefits for federal employees, including military veterans, poverty relief had been

the responsibility of local governments from the colonial period onward. In the 1910s, many

state governments began supplementing these activities with new laws for workers’

18One sign of the differential effects comes from Xing Liu’s (2015) finding that private hourly, weekly, and annual
earnings for individuals in 1939 were positively and statistically significantly related to New Deal Public Works
spending in the 1930s, which paid full wages, and not with New Deal relief programs.
                                                                                                   28


compensation, aid to mothers without spouses, and aid to the blind. In the late 1920s and early

1930s roughly half started providing means-tested old age assistance. Most of the federal relief

funds were distributed as work relief payments with a goal of helping households reach an

emergency budget level with hopes of moving up to a basic maintenance level (Stecker 1937).

Faced with large numbers of unemployed and limited funds, the FERA and WPA limited work

hours and paid out earnings per hour that were roughly half to two-thirds of earnings on the

public works and highway projects that were not focused on relief workers. The ratios varied

across states and time (Federal Works Agency 1940, 1941; Wallis and Benjamin 1981). Work

relief stints were meant to be short, but a significant percentage of emergency workers in the

1939 census reported continuous time on relief that carried well beyond 6 months and often to

multiple years. Even though WPA officials in many areas encouraged relief workers to accept

private employment with promises to allow them to return if the job did not work out, employers

in a number of areas found it difficult to offer high enough wages to attract people off of work

relief because private employment was considered more unstable (Margo 1991; Howard, 1943;

Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor 2010). Darby (1976) raised the issue as to whether relief

workers should be treated as employed or unemployed. In my view in comparisons with current

people on Unemployment Insurance (UI), the 1930s relief workers should be treated as

unemployed. In the modern era, UI provides benefits of up to two-thirds of the normal wage

without a work requirement to people who are unemployed and seeking work. People on New

Deal work relief received similar shares of earnings as benefit payments but were actually worse

off than modern UI recipients because they had to work for their benefits.

       Some of the federal relief money came in the form of direct transfers with no work

requirement. When the FERA was the primarily federal relief agency from July 1933 through
                                                                                                  29


July 1935, about one-third of the funds went to direct relief payments with no work requirement.

In the 1935 negotiations between Congress and the Roosevelt Administration over short term

emergency relief and the long run features of the Social Security Act, the federal government

increased its control over emergency relief for “employables” and returned responsibility for

direct relief to the nonworking poor to state and local governments. The federal government still

provided some aid to unemployables in the form of matching grants to the states for largely state-

run Public Assistance Programs created by the Social Security Act to aid women with dependent

children, the poor elderly, and the blind (Wallis 1981; Wallis, Fishback, and Kantor 2006).

       Roughly 20 percent of the grants went to veterans. Half of those went to long standing

Veterans’ Administration programs for pensions, disability, life insurance, housing, and medical

care (Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs, various years). The other half was paid out as a

Veterans’ Bonus in the summer of 1936 when Congress overrode President Roosevelt’s veto.

The bonus called for roughly $3 billion dollars in early cash payments on World War I adjusted

service certificates, which originally were meant to be cashed in the 1940s. Roughly half the

bonus was paid in cash, while the rest was used to repay loans on the certificates that a large

number of veterans had taken out with the Veterans’ Administration in the early 1930s

(Hausman 2014).

       Another 18 percent of the grants went to large-scale public works projects. The labor

requirements on these projects differed from the relief projects because they were not required to

hire from the relief rolls and paid regular wages. The Public Works Administration (PWA) built

federal projects and for the first time helped build local and state government projects with a

mixture of grants and loans. The Public Roads Administration took over the federal/state

highway building program from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, while increased funding
                                                                                                    30


was given to the Bureau of Reclamation and the Army Corps of Engineers. To build a system of

dams along the Tennessee River, the federal government created the TVA corporation, which

spent about 1 percent of the total grant funds on the projects. Farmers received about 11 percent

of the grants in return for taking land out of production through the AAA program.



6.1 The Impact of Public Works and Relief Spending

         A substantial majority of New Deal grant spending went to public works and relief

spending. Over the past decade there have been a number of studies that use panel and cross-

sectional methods to examine the impact of New Deal public works and relief spending on a

variety of measures of activity in local economies. The studies are summarized in Tables 3 and 4

with information on the outcome variable, the nature of the data used, the types of panel methods

used, and the types of instruments used.

         Counties with more public works and relief spending between 1933 and 1939 had

increased growth in retail sales per capita. An additional dollar per capita over that period was

associated with roughly a 40 to 50 cent increase in retail sales per capita in 1939, which was

consistent with a rise in income per capita of about 80 cents. Even though many local areas

limited access to relief for new in-migrants, increased public works and relief spending was

associated with net inflows of migrants from other parts of the country (Fishback, Horrace, and

Kantor 2005, 2006). The inflows of new migrants had mixed effects on the welfare of the

existing population because the inflow was associated with shorter workweeks, more difficulties

in obtaining relief when unemployed, and some out-migration (Boustan, Fishback, and Kantor

2010).
                                                                                                                 31


        Relief spending had a number of positive effects on other socio-economic variables in a

series of panel studies with annual data for 80 to 114 large cities for the years 1929 to 1940.

Hausmann (2014) finds that the Veterans’ Bonus stimulated automobile sales and increased

home building activity. A 10 percent increase in work relief spending per capita was associated

with a 1.5 percent reduction in property crime. In a number of specifications work relief

spending did more to reduce crime than direct relief spending because the time spent working

reduced the time available for crime for the relief recipients. An increase in private employment

was even better because a 10 percent rise in private employment was associated with a 10

percent reduction in property crime (Johnson, Fishback, and Kantor 2010). During the early

1930s birth rates declined below trend, in part because marriage rates declined sharply with the

Depression. The distribution of New Deal relief spending helped stabilize incomes in poor

households and contributed to a rise in marriage rates and a return of the birth rate to its long

term trend (Fishback, Haines, and Kantor 2007).19

        Relief spending had its most positive effects in reducing mortality. Estimation using a

panel of 114 cities found that an additional $2 million of relief spending, measured in year 2000

prices was associated with one fewer infant death, one less suicide, 2.4 fewer deaths from

infectious disease, and one less death from diarrhea in that city. On this basis alone the relief

spending would pass cost-benefit tests because the dollars spent per life saved were much lower

than estimates of the statistical value of life. General relief spending had little effect on a variety

of other death rates (Fishback, Haines, and Kantor 2007). The relief measure in these city panel

studies incorporates all types of relief from all levels of government and private aid. For people

who lived in Dust Bowl areas during the 1930s the New Deal relief spending and several types

19 Hill (2015) finds a negative relationship between WPA work relief spending per capita in the late 1930s and the
probability of marriage in 1940 but he did not try to control for endogeneity and suggests that this may not be a
causal effect
                                                                                                   32


of loans helped to reduce the negative effects of the Dust Bowl on the health and education later

in life (Vellore 2014).20

       During the early 1930s state governments were involved in specific public assistance

programs for mothers, the elderly, and the blind, which were expanded on and replaced by new

programs under the Social Security Act of 1935 that added federal matching grants to the mix.

The lion’s share of the public assistance spending went to old-age assistance (OAA) for the

elderly poor, which was designed to allow the elderly to live independently and not in

almshouses. This independence can be seen in studies using individual census data from 1940,

and 1950. Higher OAA benefits allowed a higher share of women to live on their own (Costa

1999) and more elderly to exit the labor force (Friedberg 1999). A panel study with state data

for 1930 through 1950 found that increased OAA benefits explained roughly half of the drop in

the number of elderly in the labor force during that period (Parsons 1991).

       On the other hand, panel studies by Balan-Cohen (2009) and Stoian and Fishback (2010)

found that old-age assistance had little impact on the death rates of the elderly in the 1930s. One

reason might have been that the move from the general relief program to the specific old-age

assistance program did not change the access to poverty relief much. Another reason might have

been changing access to health care. The alms houses and living with relatives may not have

been pleasant but these situations did involve day to day access to some palliative care for the

elderly, while living alone may have led to more isolation from other people, which itself can

have deleterious effects. Balaan-Cohen (2009) found positive effects of old-age assistance after

the middle of World War II when penicillin became more widely available.



20Thomasson   and Fishback (2014) find that the sharp drops in state income, including relief
payments, during the Depression had negative effects later in life for people born during the
early 1930s in the low income birth states but not the high income ones.
                                                                                                  33


       Throughout the 1930s, total relief payments at all levels of government divided by the

population rose, even though the ratio of employment (excluding relief workers) to population

rose from 30 to 34 percent after 1932. This rise suggests that the government safety net was

expanding over the decade. Hungerman and Gruber (2007) use a panel of data from church

charities and find that increased New Deal spending reduced church charitable spending by

roughly one-third of the maximum possible. In general, the loss in private charitable spending

was overwhelmed by a flood of government spending that was several times larger than the per

capita level of charitable spending in 1933 before the federal program began (Baird 1942, 12-

13).

       Nearly all of the studies of New Deal relief and public works spending find at best small

positive effects and sometimes negative effects on private employment. Wallis and Benjamin

(1981) found little effect of relief spending on employment when they used Two-Stage Least

Squares (2SLS) to estimate a three-equation model to examine the impact of higher relief

benefits on private employment for a cross-section of cities in 1935. Using a similar procedure

on panel data for the states, Benjamin and Mathews (1992) estimated the New Deal spending

reduced private employment by one-third of a job prior to 1935 and by 0.9 jobs after 1935,

although they did not control for state and year fixed effects. Fleck (1999b) used IV estimation

on county cross-sections from 1937 and 1940 and found that the creation of an additional relief

job was associated with an additional person listed as unemployed. He argued that an additional

relief job pulled a discouraged worker back into the labor force and into the relief job, which

counted as another unemployed worker at the time.

       Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor (2010) estimated a panel VAR model on a panel of

monthly data from 1932 through 1939 using first differences, city-specific time trends, and
                                                                                                                   34


adjustments for serial correlation. The measured impact can be seen as causal if there is a one-

month delay in all of the reactions of relief spending, private wages, private employment to each

other. They found that an additional eight relief jobs were associated with one additional private

job prior to 1935. After 1935 an additional relief job was associated with the loss of two-thirds

of a private job. When estimating multipliers with their state panel from 1930 to 1940, Fishback

and Kachanovskaya (2015) found no evidence of a positive impact on private employment and

some specifications yielded statistically significant negative elasticities of around -0.04. That

elasticity is about two-thirds as large in absolute value as the elasticity of per capita income with

respect to public works and relief spending that generated a dollar-for-dollar multiplier of one.

         These results seem more pessimistic about the impact of federal spending on employment

than a recent set of modern studies. Most of the recent studies find positive effects of federal

spending on overall employment. The range in point estimates of dollars spent per job created is

quite large from a low of $25,000 in Medicaid reimbursement to a high around $400,000 for

general ARRA funds with a number of estimates in between. 21

         Why are we seeing this difference? Most of the modern studies look at total

employment, while the New Deal results above are focusing on private employment. The two

modern studies that focus on private job creation find small positive or even negative effects on

private employment.22 The lack of the effect of the New Deal public works and relief spending



21 Chodorow-Reich, et. al. (2011) estimated the 1 job for $25,000 effect for Medicaid spending under the 2009
ARRA in a state cross-section using prior Medicaid spending as an instrument. Feyderer and Sacerdote estimated
about $100,000 per job for overall ARRA aid in a state cross-section using the rank of the seniority of congressmen
on the appropriations committee, while their time series estimates suggested an effect of $400,000 per job. Wilson
(2012) found a similar figure of about $125,000 per job in his cross-section state study of ARRA spending using
various mechanical rules for federal fund distribution as an instrument. Nakamura and Steinsson find strong
positive effects of military spending in their state panel studies using the methods described in the text for their
multipliers. Suarez Serrato and Wingender (2014) in their study of a county panel of federal spending using the
changes in allocation influenced by new Census population estimates find spending of $30,000 per job created.
22 Conley and Duper (2013) found positive effects on state and local government employment in their cross-
sectional state study of ARRA aid using highway fund distribution rules, the portion of state revenues that tend to be
                                                                                                                  35


on private jobs helps explain why the state income multiplier was no larger than one because the

result suggests that there was little or possibly negative spillover into the private sector.

        A significant part of the ARRA stimulus in 2009 was targeted at state governments to

help them maintain key programs and served to maintain jobs that already existed. The New

Deal was also creating government jobs with their emergency programs. The best jobs were the

ones with full pay under the PWA, PRA, and PBA public works programs. The number of

workers on these projects reached a high around 1 million in June 1934 but had roughly halved

by the next year and fell to around 300 thousand between 1938 and 1940. After a short burst

when the Civil Works Administration hired up to 4 million relief workers between December

1933 through early March 1934, the numbers of relief workers fell off. The FERA and later the

WPA had between 1.5 and 3.3 million people working on projects for roughly half to two-thirds

the hourly earnings on the public works programs (Federal Works Agency 1941, pp. 244, 259,

302, 427; Works Progress Administration 1943, 154). All knew that the jobs were designed to

provide an emergency standard of living for the relief workers’ households. Despite the

temporary nature of the work relief jobs, workers’ remained on work relief for extended periods

of time, some for up to multiple years (Margo 1991).

        What was most troubling for the economy was that many workers considered the work

relief jobs to be more stable than private employment. Federal government relief was a new

phenomenon in the 1930s. It was substituting for much more ad hoc and temporary forms of

relief offered by local governments in earlier times of stress, and the federal work relief project

lasted much longer than the past local projects did. WPA officials urged many workers to accept



relatively rigid, and Democratic governors as instruments. They find weaker and sometimes negative effects on
private employment. Meanwhile, Cohen, Coval, and Malloy (2011) use changes in federal spending related to
changes in key Congressional committee assignments as an instrument and find that increases in federal spending
are associated with reductions in private investment and employment in the states.
                                                                                                   36


private employment and made promises to accept the workers back on work relief if the job

ended. Meanwhile, private employers in many areas were complaining that they could not hire

enough workers. This disconnect was driven partly by the instability of the economy during the

1930s and partly by the impact of the public works and relief programs on private wages. The

economy was unstable enough that workers felt there was a high probability that private jobs

would end and did not trust the officials’ promises that they could return to work relief (Margo

1991; Howard 1943; Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor 2010).

5.2 Wages and Hours Policies

       Meanwhile, a variety of factors, many still not well understood, were holding wages

above the market clearing equilibrium. Scholars have examined several policies that may have

contributed to high wages, including work relief policies, jawboning for high wages, the push to

maintain hourly wages by the President’s Reemployment Agreements and National Recovery

Administration, the National Labor Relations Act and the minimum wage.

       One possible contributor was the widespread presence of work relief forced employers to

offer higher wages to attract workers, and the higher wages limited the number of people they

were willing to hire. Increases in relief spending were associated with increases in private hourly

earnings in the 43 cities studied by Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor (2010) and were also

associated with higher hourly earnings for farm wage workers (Fishback, Haines, and Rhode

2012). More work needs to be done, however, to study the mechanism that contributed to the

finding that relief and public works spending contributed to high wages with little or even

negative stimulus for private employment. The economy continued to have record high levels of

unemployment throughout the 1930s and as yet we still do not have good descriptions of the

mechanisms that led to such high unemployment.
                                                                                                 37


       One possible mechanism that macroeconomists have been exploring is attempts by public

policy makers to “jawbone” industry leaders into maintaining high wages. Ohanian (2009)

argues that Herbert Hoover’s jawboning of industry leaders to maintain high wages contributed

greatly to the rising unemployment rates between 1929 and 1933. He argues that industry

leaders followed along because they feared a rise in unionism. Cole and Ohanian (2004) argue

that the recovery from the trough of the Great Depression was slowed by the creation of the

National Recovery Administration (NRA) and the accompanying agreement not to enforce

antitrust laws. The NRA allowed firms, workers, and consumers to set up industry codes that

would set prices, quality levels, wages, hours, and employment. The codes appeared to have

been written largely by trade associations and the Roosevelt administration largely left them

alone as long as the firms agreed to maintain wages up and work to increase the number

employed (Bellush 1975). The Supreme Court declared the NRA unconstitutional in 1935.

Only the protections for union workers in the NRA were reinstituted and strengthened in the

National Labor Relations Act of 1935.

        Cole and Ohanian (2004) build a Dynamic Structural General Equilibrium (DSGE)

model of the macro-economy with no uncertainty in which the NRA and later pro-union policies

allowed firms with 25 percent of workers to become cartelized and pay higher wages. They find

the high wage policies help explain about half of the slow growth in the economy between 1935

and 1939. In contrast, Eggertsson (2008, 2012) offers an alternative new-Keynesian DSGE

model with sticky prices that emphasizes the fact that interest rates were bumping against the

zero-interest bound and that deflationary expectations had been driving the downturn.

Eggertsson’s model shows that the NRA in conjunction with the move off of the gold standard

and fiscal stimulus (Eggertsson 2008) and then the NRA combined with a monetary policy that
                                                                                                38


keeps interest rates at the zero bound (Eggertsson 2012) contributed to higher growth rates

during the emergency.

       The different conclusions stem from wildly different counterfactual outcomes in the

absence of the NRA that are developed in the models. Cole and Ohanian’s model implies that

the economy would have returned very close to its long term trend GDP by 1936 without the

NRA, which would have been a very rapid recovery. Including the NRA in the model causes

real GDP to fall short of the long term trend GDP by 13 to 14 percent between 1936 and 1939,

while the actual economy remained 25 to 30 percent below long run trend GDP over the period.

Thus, their analysis shows that the NRA was half of the reason why the economy failed to

recover quickly.

       In the Eggertsson (2012) model the counterfactual with no NRA is for real GDP to fall

further from 30 percent below 1929 GDP in 1933 to 40 percent below in 1937. When added to

the model, the NRA has powerful effects in reversing deflationary expectations and the modal

estimate of real GDP rises to a point 18 percent below 1929 GDP by 1937. Thus, the NRA

explains 55 percent of the difference between the actual GDP and a very low counterfactual

GDP.

       Rather than go into a long discourse about conflicting assumptions in the models, I want

to refocus the question on whether they have fully captured the features of the NRA policies.

The NRA labor policies involved more than just a focus on maintaining or raising earnings.

They explicitly included provisions for maximums for weekly hours in an attempt to promote

increases in the numbers employed. They might better be treated as job-sharing programs where

hourly earnings were not allowed to fall because workers were already losing large amounts of
                                                                                                               39


weekly pay from the decline in weekly hours. None of the DSGE models take into account these

hours maximums or the pressures from the government to increase the number employed.23

        While the NRA codes were being negotiated, a process that took several months, the

Roosevelt administration created an alternative arrangement, the President’s Reemployment

Agreements, in August 1933. In return for the use of the NRA’s Blue Eagle symbol, the large

number of firms who signed these agreements agreed to a job sharing plan that capped the

workweek at 35 hours, paid hourly wage rates of at least 40 cents per hour and allow collective

bargaining. There was also strong pressure on the firms to increase employment. The firms

were given strong incentives to sign because the Roosevelt administration embarked on a huge

Blue Eagle advertising campaign in July and August 1933 that involved large parades in most

cities, door-to-door campaigning by 1.5 million people who received the pledges of 20 million

households to support the Blue Eagle, and listings of the firms on Honor Rolls at the post office

and in newspapers (Taylor 2011).

        The PRAs appear to have had sizeable effects on hours worked and hourly earnings in the

studies summarized in Table 5. In panel VAR estimation for 11 major industries from 1923 to

1939, while controlling for macroeconomic policy changes, Taylor and Neumann (2013) find

that relative to the period 1923 through February 1933 weekly hours were 15 percent lower and

real hourly earnings 12 percent higher in low wage industries. In high wage industries weekly

hours were 4 percent lower and hourly earnings 3 percent higher. The NRA codes that followed

were associated with a 2 percent drop in employment. In low wage industries weekly hours were

6.6 percent higher and real hourly earnings were -8.4 percent lower, while in high wage


23This same issue arises in discussions of Herbert Hoover’s jawboning for high wages. In his memoirs Herbert
Hoover describes the policies as job-sharing arrangements in which employers agreed to cut weekly hours sharply to
maintain employment and then did not cut hourly wages much because workers’ weekly wages had already been cut
almost 20 percent. A number of large firms in 1932 actively publicized that they had maintained employment by
cutting weekly hours (Taylor, Neumann, and Fishback 2013).
                                                                                                40


industries weekly hours were -1.6 percent lower and real hourly earnings were -0.8 percent

higher (see also Taylor 2011; Neumann, Taylor, and Fishback 2013). A great deal more work

needs to be done in examining the PRAs and the NRA codes to determine precisely what was

negotiated and what happened after the NRA was declared unconstitutional in 1935. There has

been discussion that the passage of the National Labor Relations Act in 1935 reestablished a high

wage policy by protecting collective bargaining. But any enforcement of the NLRA provisions

was weakened greatly because there was enormous uncertainty as to whether the Act was

constitutional, and this was not eliminated until the spring of 1937. Taylor and Neumann (2013)

find that wages and earnings in high and low wage industries in the period after the NRA was

declared unconstitutional and before the NLRA was found constitutional were roughly similar to

the pre-New Deal period, as they were after the NLRA was declared constitutional.

       There are other claims that there were implicit bargains between antitrust authorities and

firms that they would be left alone as long as they continued to keep wages high. Checks of the

sources of the claims are thinly documented. Hawkins (2014) is in the process of compiling

information on the extent of antitrust enforcement by the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the

Federal Trade Commission (FTC) from 1925 through 1940. The preliminary findings suggest

that the DOJ was less active between 1935 and 1938 than in the 1920s, but the FTC was more

active after 1935 than in the late 1920s (see also Bittlingmayer 1995). A fruitful area for

additional research would be deeper analysis of the specific features of labor market and antitrust

institutions across industries and sectors.



5.3 The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
                                                                                                  41


       Among the largest public works projects built during the Depression were the dams of the

Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), which were designed to control floods and improve

navigation along the Tennessee River, as well as produce electricity. In response to the severe

flooding in the late 1920s, the Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) had designed the dams and the

order in which they should be built to supplement the Wilson Dam built in the 1920s. To build

the dams, the Roosevelt administration followed a new path by setting up the TVA as a

government-sponsored corporation. The TVA’s first chairman Arthur Morgan placed the

emphasis on flood control and improved navigation. The TVA was also charged with

distributing surplus electric power from the Wilson Dam, which had been transferred from the

ACE. As was the case with other federal dams before and since, electric power from the Wilson

Dam was sold wholesale to private utilities who then distributed it to final users. After a power

struggle within the TVA, the corporation sought to become a full-scale wholesale public utility

that marketed its power directly to municipalities, cooperatives, and final consumers. Between

1933 and 1940 the TVA expanded its public power service area to cover most of Tennessee and

large swaths of Alabama, Mississippi, and Georgia through a combination of increased power

production with the newly built dams and the takeover of the transmission and distribution of

assets of several large private utilities. Even as the New Deal wound down, the TVA continued

to expand until the federal government established a fixed boundary in 1959. Federal subsidies

gave the TVA the capacity to build more dams, roads, canals, and coal-fired electric plants, as

well as to purchase additional transmission and distribution facilities from private utilities.

       The key change wrought by the TVA was the creation of a wholesale public electric

utility that directly contracted with local distributers. Much of the TVA activities resembled

prior programs that involved the building of dams, roads, and canals. In the absence of the TVA,
                                                                                                      42


the tasks would have been performed by the Army Corps of Engineers, and federal/state highway

programs. Had the ACE built and operated the dams, it likely would have disposed of electricity

that was incidental to flood control and navigation improvements, in the same way it did at

Wilson Dam throughout the 1920s, or as the Bureau of Reclamation did at Hoover Dam.

        Most discussions of the TVA suggest that the major benefit of having the TVA act as a

public utility was to offer lower electric rates and to expand access to electricity for new

consumers. In its annual reports the TVA emphasized that it charged lower marginal rates on

each unit of electricity. The situation was actually more complex than this. Kitchens (2014)

examined the records of the Federal Power Commission and archives for local power producers

and shows that for a large number of household consumers of electricity the monthly bill for

TVA power was similar to the monthly bills for consumers in nearby districts served by private

utilities. The TVA marginal rates were lower than at the nearby private utilities but the fixed

charges for cooperative membership fees and amortization of capital associated with buyouts of

private utilities raised the total monthly bills to the same level as for private utilities over a large

range of electricity usage. It might be argued that the private utilities lowered their rates as a

way to prevent the TVA from being created, but many of the private utilities had aggressively

lowered their rates throughout the 1920s and early 1930s and many of the rate schedules had

been set in 1930 and 1931 before the TVA was actively being considered. If they were trying to

lower rates as a way to delay the ACE’s plans, that was likely a “fool’s errands” because the

ACE already had strong reasons to build the dams for navigation and flood control. Further, the

private companies would have likely benefitted from buying and selling the excess power

disposed of by the ACE. Finally, it should be noted that the TVA also expanded its service area
                                                                                                                 43


by taking over the assets of private utilities in many areas, often through hostile negotiations that

leveraged other New Deal agencies, such as the PWA to weaken private bargaining positions.24

        The small differences in electric rates help explain why Kitchens (2014) finds little effect

of the expansion of TVA electrification on retail sales per capita, farm production, and

manufacturing activity between 1933 and 1960 in a panel of southeastern counties. In the

analysis the identification comes from variation across time within the same county as the area

serviced by TVA hydro-electric power expands from a few counties to multiple states. The

instrument is driven by a schedule of dam locations created for flood control and navigation

purposes by the ACE in the late 1920s and does not pick up expansions in service areas when the

TVA purchased assets in private utilities.

        When the view of the TVA is expanded from just electricity to focus on the long range

impact of the federal subsidies distributed after 1940 to the TVA for road, dam, and canal

building, the answer is somewhat different. Kline and Moretti (2014) compare growth rates in

economic activity in counties in the final TVA service area circa 1959 to different groups of

control counties selected because their pre-TVA characteristics were similar to the TVA counties

in 1930.25 They find that the overall federal subsidies in the TVA counties between 1940 and

1960 led to substantially faster growth rates in agricultural and manufacturing employment

between 1940 and 1960. From 1960 to 2000 the higher growth in manufacturing employment

continued at slower pace, while agricultural employment growth dropped sharply. Using




24For instance, in Chattanooga, TN the city had voted for a private municipal utility when the TVA suggested that
they apply for PWA grants to build a duplicate system to devalue the private company’s assets. A series of similar
TVA and PWA interactions led to the Ashwander vs. TVA Supreme Court case in which the Court ultimately chose
to uphold the TVA (McCraw 1971).
25 They also perform placebo testing for the period prior to 1940. There may be a problem with the placebo test
because it includes the decade of the 1930s when several major TVA dams were being built.
                                                                                                  44


manufacturing employment growth lagged two decades as an instrument, they find that the TVA

subsidies were associated with increases in manufacturing productivity.

       In addition to positive effects, large dams can also have unintended negative

consequences by flooding environmentally sensitive areas, moving large numbers of people, and

in creating more problematic environments.     One of the negative features of the creation of

large reservoirs when the TVA dams were built was that the large reservoirs created an

environment that aided the breeding of mosquitoes and consequent problems with malaria.

Kitchens (2013a) performed an analysis of the impact of the TVA on malaria death and

morbidity rates using a panel data set that he compiled for Tennessee and Alabama from 1926 to

1951   Because the dams had to be located in precise locations for their many purposes they

were not located in response to previous malaria problems. The dams had to be located in areas

with substantial rushing waters, which were the exact locations where mosquitoes found it

difficult to breed. During the period prior to the introduction of the TVA, the areas where the

TVA was eventually located had lower rates of malaria than other areas in the region. After the

TVA reservoirs were built, the malaria mortality rates jumped by 30 percent, while malaria

morbidity rates increased 70 percent. In their annual reports the TVA officials do not mention

problems with malaria until they were in the middle of constructing Wheeler Dam. Once they

recognized the issue, they developed an extensive eradication program that took multiple forms:

fluctuating water levels in the dams and the reservoirs to make it more difficult for mosquitoes to

breed, oiling the waters of the reservoirs, public education about malaria, ditching and cleanups

on the borders, etc. They were joined by the Works Progress Administration in several southern

states and their efforts met with success and were widely praised (Kitchens 2013b). The true

eradication then occurred when DDT was distributed.
                                                                                                   45


5.4 Farm Grants

       Among the New Deal grant programs, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration

(AAA) grants were unusual because they were designed to crowd out production. The AAA

offered rental and benefit payments to farmers to take land out of production for specific crops

and accounted for roughly 10 percent of all grants awarded (Table 2). The original program was

originally financed mostly through a tax on the processing of the agricultural product supported.

In 1935 the program, particularly the processing tax, was declared unconstitutional. Strong

support from the agricultural lobby led to the passage of a new Soil and Domestic Allotment Act

that continued the AAA payments out of the general fund while the rhetoric emphasized soil

conservation and improvements to the land (Alexander and Libecap 2000).

       The studies summarized in Table 6 show that the AAA tended to benefit large farmers at

the expense of farm workers. The two factors that had the most explanatory power in

determining the distribution of AAA grants and farm loans were the average size of farms and

representation on the House Agricultural Committee (Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis 2003). In the

Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015) study of state multipliers, an additional dollar of AAA

payments was associated with an increase in personal income of at most 15 cents in one

specification, and the effect was negative in other specifications. In county level studies AAA

grants had slight negative effects on retail sales per capita and on net migration (Fishback,

Horrace, and Kantor 2005, 2006).

       One sign of the losses to farm workers was a sharp decline in the overall farm population,

and the number of white and black share croppers and black tenants in the cotton-producing

counties when the AAA was introduced (Fishback, Haines, and Rhode 2012; Depew, Fishback,

and Rhode 2013; Whatley 1983). This push of the croppers and tenants down the tenure ladder
                                                                                                    46


and out of farming had a variety of effects, some positive and some mixed. A number migrated

out of areas where malaria was a problem with a consequent reduction in the overall malaria rate

in the South (Barreca, Fishback, and Kantor 2012). The average wages of hired workers rose

about 9 percent with the introduction of the AAA, but this may have been because the average

quality of the hired workers increased as the tenants and croppers were pushed down the tenure

ladder into wage jobs (Fishback, Haines and Rhode 2012). Even though the former tenants and

croppers may have been paid more as a wage laborer than the former wage workers pushed out

of farming, the former tenants and croppers were earning less than what they had in their former

positions.

        Both the AAA grants and loan programs (described below) had strong effects on the

structure of farming. They contributed to an increase in the use of farm machinery, particularly

tractors, by providing both additional income to farm owners and also providing cash in a rural

economy where it was difficult to come by.26 When the AAA shifted its emphasis toward soil

conservation after 1935, it also contributed to an increase in farm size and the use of anti-erosion

methods that helped eliminate another Dust Bowl problem in the 1970s. The 1970s and 1930s

shared the same weather patterns that had created the Dust Bowl in the 1930s but the use of the

anti-erosion methods prevented large dust storms from forming (Hansen and Libecap 2004).



    6. The Impact of Loan Programs

        Roughly one-fourth of all funds distributed across the country by the New Deal came in

the form of loans. The size of the subsidy from the federal loans is more difficult to determine

than for grants because the size is determined by the difference between the interest rate on the

government loan and an interest rate on an alternative loan. In many cases it is hard to determine

26 See Sorensen, Fishback, Kantor, and Rhode (2008), Clarke (1994), and Whatley (1983, 1985).
                                                                                                                          47


the alternative interest rate, which can then be used to calculate a dollar equivalent of the grant

then using the present value of the anticipated stream of loan payments at the alternative interest

rate.27 For example, the HOLC offered mortgage refinances for borrowers in troubled loans at 5

percent when market rates on low risk loans ranged from 6 to 8 percent. Yet, nearly all the

HOLC loans had been near foreclosure and private firms might not have offered refinances at all.

For a $1000 loan at 5 percent the grant equivalent of the subsidy would have been $131 with a

counterfactual interest rate of 8 percent, but if there was no possibility of an alternative loan the

grant equivalent would have been $1000. Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015) use a variety of

assumptions about the grant equivalent when they measured the state income multiplier for

combined loans and grants. Most studies to date, however, have used the loan principal as a

measure of the loan because they were treating loans separately. The results of the lending

studies are summarized in Table 7.

         Nearly 45 percent of all New Deal loans were distributed to farmers, as the Farm Credit

Administration expanded earlier programs to provide funds for long-term farm mortgages at low

interest rates and created new permanent programs for production loans and emergency loans.

The Rural Electrification Administration was created to make loans, mostly to farm cooperatives,

to expand access to electricity. The remaining loans were distributed by the Reconstruction

Finance Corporation (RFC) and the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC). The RFC started

in February 1932 under the Hoover Administration but was in operation through World War II.

The Hoover loans included loans to banks to stave off closure and to local governments for

poverty relief under the Hoover Administration. It later took ownership stakes in a number of



27The grant equivalent measure is designed to get a measure of the loan subsidy in dollars by measuring the
difference between the principal of the loan and the present value of the stream of loan payments at the
counterfactual interest rate. It is essentially the difference in the market price of the loan when the market interest
rate moves away from the loan interest rate.
                                                                                                   48


banks and made a series of industrial loans, as well as startup loans to other federal agencies.

Meanwhile, the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation accounted for roughly a fourth of the loan

funds when they purchased troubled nonfarm mortgages from lenders and then refinanced the

mortgages for the borrowers.

6.1 Farm Loans

       The New Deal reorganized earlier lending programs and expanded into new areas. The

Federal Farm Loan Board had been created in 1916 to provide seed money for 12 regional farm

land banks. The banks made loans to associations of farmers who set up the equivalent of a

mutual society in which the farmers financed mortgages at time horizons of up to 40 years with

interest rates at 5 percent. The government also provided seed money for federal joint-stock

banks that followed a profit-making process of making loans. By 1930 approximately one-

seventh of farm mortgages were financed under these programs. At various times, on an ad hoc

basis, Congress also authorized emergency crop and feed loans in the 1920s (Federal Farm Loan

Board, various years; Halcrow 1953; Glock).

       As the Depression worsened in the 1930s a sharp rise in farm foreclosure rates

contributed to the demise of the joint-stock banks (Glock 2014). The foreclosures were slowed

by the adoption by more than half of the states of mortgage moratoria laws that made it more

difficult to foreclose on delinquent borrowers. This came at a future cost, however, as private

lenders anticipated the risk of future moratoria and increased mortgage interest rates and made

fewer loans in the years that followed (Alston 1984 and Rucker and Alston 1987).

       The New Deal reorganized and expanded the farm loan programs. The Farm Credit

Administration was created to take over the land bank loans and to expand mortgage lending.

The expansion in New Deal mortgage lending helped reduce the foreclosure rate with an
                                                                                                    49


elasticity of -0.49 (Rucker and Alston 1987). It also created new programs for production loans

and emergency crop and feed loans and ultimately accounted for about 30 percent of all New

Deal era loans (Table 2). The Commodity Credit Corporation distributed 12 percent of the loans

in a price support program in which the farmer took out a nonrecourse loan with a base output

price. If the market price fell below the base price, the farmer repaid the loan with the crop in

kind; otherwise, he sold the crop and repaid the loan in cash. The Farm Security Administration

targeted a relatively small share of the New Deal loans at low income farmers.

       The Rural Electrification Administration handed out about one percent of the New Deal

loans to rural electricity cooperatives to provide access to electricity for rural farms and

households that previously had not had access to the grid. Fishback and Kitchens (2015)

developed a panel from 1920 through 1940 for Midwestern and southeastern rural counties

estimated fixed effects regressions and then performed placebo tests to see if the effects could be

considered causal. Rural Electrification Administration (REA) loans to rural cooperatives had

much stronger impacts on the farm sector than TVA electrification did. The REA loans were

associated with increases in farm output per acre, increases in the use of machinery, reductions in

the amount of time the farmer worked off of his farm, and decreases in infant mortality rates.



6.2 Reconstruction Finance Corporation Loans and Ownership Stakes in Banks

       During the Great Recession two of the most controversial policies set up in November

and December of 2008 were the moves by the Treasury to take ownership stakes in banks and to

provide loans to and restructure the ownership of General Motors and Chrysler. Both were based

on precedents set during the New Deal. As the Federal Reserve System allowed the money

supply to decline in the early 1930s, the Hoover Administration sought other ways to inject
                                                                                                                 50


liquidity into the economy by forming the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) in

February 1932. Modeled after the War Finance Corporation of World War I, the RFC’s first

moves included making loans to 4,000 banks, railroads, credit unions and mortgage loan

companies to provide assets that would jumpstart commercial lending. Among the most

important programs was the provision of loans to troubled banks to seek to provide them with

enough liquidity to survive bank runs. Recent studies suggest that these initial loans were not

successful because the RFC loans were given first priority over depositors and other lenders in

situations where the bank failed. As a result, banks had to hold the assets that they could sell

most easily to insure repayment of the RFC loans. These assets could not then be used to repay

depositors when the bank failed. When the RFC began to accept more risk by purchasing

preferred stock in the troubled banks, it was more successful at staving off bank failures (Mason

2001a).28 At the height of its activity the RFC owned one-third of the capital of U.S. Banks

(Mason 2001b). In a panel study of Michigan banks, Calomiris, et. al. (2013) suggest that the

preferred stock program was successful because

        “(1) It did not burden the bank with increased debt, increased liquidity risk, or

        collateral requirements that subordinated the claims of depositors (2) the RFC was

        selective, and apparently chose viable cases, not basket cases, when granting

        assistance, and (3) the RFC implemented effective measures to ensure that

        government assistance was not abused by banks receiving assistance.”

        The RFC gave the Roosevelt administration enormous flexibility. It retained control of a

large supply of funds that could be loaned out and had the authority to borrow still more funds

without having to constantly return to Congress for new appropriations. As the loans were


28 Vossmeyer (2014) finds positive effects of the RFC program in a multivariate selection model but does not try to
isolate the separate effects of the loan and capital injection programs.
                                                                                                              51


repaid, the RFC continually had new funds to loan out again. “By the mid-1930s, the RFC was

making loans to banks, savings banks, building and loan associations, credit unions, railroads,

industrial banks, farmers, commercial businesses, federal land banks, production credit

associations, farm cooperative, mortgage loan companies, insurance companies, school districts,

and livestock credit corporations.” Perhaps even more importantly, the RFC became the banker

to many of the New Deal programs, providing loans and/or startup working capital to the FERA,

PWA, Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC), FCA, the Federal Housing Administration

(FHA), REA, and the WPA.29

        The RFC also contributed to precedents for making substantial loans for major transport

entities considered too big to fail. Large railroads were the GM and Chrysler of the 1930s. For

example, RFC loans to railroads and industries helped delay bankruptcies for businesses and

railroads with conflicting effects. The delays gave financial institutions more time to dump their

railroad bonds. However, the railroads that went through bankruptcy proceedings, which had

evolved over time to handle the specific features of the railroads, hired 2-3 percent more

employees, and spent 8 to 10 percent more on maintenance of way and equipment maintainance

than the railroads receiving RFC loans (Mason and Schiffman 2003). The RFC provided loans

in a large number of settings and the existing studies have just begun to scratch the surface.



6.3 Housing Policy




         29The descriptions in this section on the RFC are based on Olson (1988) and Jones (1939, 1951), who was
the director of the RFC. The quote is from Olson (1988, 43-4).
                                                                                                                 52


        The Great Depression is similar to the Great Recession in the sense that both followed

housing and mortgage booms that eventually became housing busts. The consensus cause of the

Great Recession appears to have been the housing and mortgage crisis that began in 2006.30

Even though there was a similar boom and bust in nonfarm residential homes and mortgages in

the 1920s and 1930s, most economists over the past half century have not assigned much of the

blame for the Great Depression to the bust in residential housing. This was a shift in emphasis

from the period before the Great Depression when the housing cycle was seen as a key driver of

the business cycle by many of the leading economists at the National Bureau of Economic

Research (Snowden 2014). Re-examinations of the Depression by Gjerstad and Smith (2014a,

2014b), Field (1992, 2014), and White (2014) are beginning to bring housing back into the

picture.

        The argument for housing not being a prime cause of the Depression comes from the data

that has been used to describe the timing of the bust. The traditional data used showed that the

peaks in building permits and nominal housing prices occurred in the mid-1920s, and real

housing prices did not show much of a decline. The peak in building permit units was 937


30 Housing values and mortgage lending had boomed through the early 2000s as the number of sub-prime loans
expanded rapidly. The government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac with the support of their
regulator purchased a significant share of the sub-primes along with their usual purchases of conventional loans. A
large majority of mortgages were packaged up and sold in mortgage-backed securities (MBSs), bundled again into
collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), and then insured with credit default swaps (CDSs). All of the indexes of
nominal housing prices roughly doubled with real prices rising 25 to 67 percent; (Fishback and Kollmann 2014,
Tables 8 and 9).
As housing prices began to fall after the peak, there were sharp increases in the numbers of foreclosures and
delinquencies that put many of the investments in jeopardy. Asymmetric information problems contributed to fears
of severe adverse selection by potential buyers of the CDOs and holders of the CDSs. Mark-to-market accounting
showed that several major financial institutions held a large number of toxic assets on their balance sheets, and
several holders of CDOs demanded that the CDS insurers post collateral to show that they could cover their losses.
As the stock values of several troubled financial giants fell, credit markets seized up throughout the economy, and
the Federal Reserve and Treasury Department in September 2008 took control of insurance giant AIG, and Fannie
and Freddie, while letting Lehman Brothers go bankrupt. They then demanded that the leading commercial banks
allow the government to take ownership stakes in the banks. The federal government loaned new funds and
restructured the ownership of auto giants GM and Chrysler in last 2008 and then embarked on a large-scale stimulus
package that raised the deficit to roughly 10 percent of GDP, roughly double the highest deficit share without major
warfare in American history (Gorton 2010; Blinder 2013).
                                                                                                  53


thousand in 1925 before declining to 503 thousand in1929 and bottoming out at 93 thousand in

1933. If the boom years of the 1920s were the new norm, this timing of the peak is correct.

However, the rise in new housing units in the 1920s was an unusual boom that partly offset the

lack of production of housing units during World War I and was matched by a rise in urban

population of only 15 million in the 1920s after urban populations had risen by roughly 12

million in both the 1900s and 1910s decades. The 1929 figure of 503,000 was higher than all but

one year between 1900 and 1922 and the annual units permitted in 1931 through 1935 were

below the lowest peace-time figures back to 1903 (Snowden 2006, 4-481).

       The traditional housing price data are based on estimates developed by Grebler, Blank,

and Winnick (GBW) (1956) from Civil Works Administration surveys in which home owners

were asked the value of their homes in 1934 and at the time of purchase in 22 cities. The GBW

housing price index that most scholars have used assumes that the quality of the homes had not

changed between the purchase date and 1934. However, GBW expressed reservations about this

assumption and created an alternative adjusted index that they thought better took into account

the depreciation in housing quality over time. Fishback and Kollmann (2014) have updated the

GBW indices to include information on 31 more cities from the CWA survey that GBW did not

have and then created alternative home value indices that appear to fit better other potential

measures of home values.

       The updated GBW home value index shows that nominal housing values rose by 8.1

percent from 1920 to a peak in 1925 and then declined back to the same level in 1929 before

falling by nearly 23 percent by 1933. The alternative index developed by Fishback and

Kollmann based on Census and CWA information rises by 21 percent from 1920 to a peak in
                                                                                                   54


1928. Since it is based on roughly the same data as the updated GBW index between 1929 and

1934, the index falls by roughly 23 percent to 1934.

       The nominal housing values declined rapidly after 1929 but so did other prices. As a

result, real housing values barely moved, which makes it look like home owners did not suffer a

loss in real housing value wealth. This overall deflation cut two ways. The equity in the house

stayed constant in real terms, which was good news for full owners but only partially good news

for borrowers who typically had 40-60 percent equity in the home. Those with mortgages faced

a 25 percent increase in the real value of the amounts owed on their mortgages between 1929 and

1933. This situation was worse for the borrowers who had reduced their equity by taking out

second mortgages at penalty interest rates that were more than double the interest rates on the

first mortgage.

       The sharp rise in the real amount owed was a problem for every type of borrower. Those

with the “standard” loan from commercial banks and insurers at the time were making monthly

payments of interest only until the end of the loan when they had to repay the full principal.

Thus, someone who had taken out the loan in 1928 saw their real principal owed rise by 25

percent when it was due in 1933. Most mortgages from financial institutions were made by

Building and Loans, which created Share Accumulation Contracts (SACs) that combined the

standard interest-only loan with a contract to purchase shares in the building and loans, which

were held in a sinking fund that paid dividends on the B&L shares. The loan contract did not

end until the sinking fund amount reached the principal owed, and not before. Thus, the

deflation meant that the B&L borrowers had a larger real target to hit before they could end the

loan. The length of time until the end of the loan often rose when the B&L ran into trouble and

reduced the dividends paid or the value of the shares in the sinking fund.
                                                                                                   55


       This increased difficulty in paying off the loan led to a sharp rise in delinquencies on

payments and a near doubling in the foreclosure rate from 7.1 in 1929 to 13.3 homes per 1000

mortgages in 1933 (Snowden 2006, 4-569). But the rise in foreclosures disguises a much more

serious set of problems in the 1930s than in the 2000s. The Depression borrowers had

dramatically higher equity rates than their modern counterparts and so lost a great deal more in

real assets when they lost their home. The economy was much worse in the 1930s and few

houses were selling, and borrowers succeeded in pressuring more than half of the states to enact

mortgage moratoria laws that slowed foreclosures (Ghent 2012). When the Home Owners’

Loan Corporation ended up refinancing roughly 20 percent of all nonfarm mortgages in 1934 and

1935, the typical HOLC borrower refinanced was more than 2 years behind on principal and

interest on the loan and real estate taxes on the property. Even as their loan assets deteriorated in

value, lenders also experienced a sharp drop of 25 percent or more in new funds available to

lend. To survive the downturn, large numbers of people withdrew savings from commercial

banks, cashed in insurance policies, and cashed out their shares in B&Ls (Fishback, Rose, and

Snowden 2013, 30).

       The mortgage crisis moved glacially compared to the crises in commercial banks (Rose

2014). Most of the Depression literature focuses on the three waves of failures of the

commercial banks between 1930 and 1932. The banks failed more quickly because they were

deposit institutions and bank regulators would shut down bank operations to protect the deposits.

The dominant commercial lenders in real estate were the Building and Loans, which were mutual

societies that did not hold deposits. Except in cases of fraud or the demise of the board of

directors, the B&Ls would not close until two-thirds of the shareholders voted to close the

institution. Fleitas, Fishback, and Snowden (2015) find that the probability that a B&L would
                                                                                                   56


liquidate in New Jersey rose 38 percent when the borrowers’ ownership share fell below one-

third in a hazard model that controls for the contemporaneous changes in the firm’s balance

sheet, the structure of the firm before the crisis, economic conditions in the counties, and HOLC

activity.   As a result, a substantial majority of all B&L closures took place after 1935, which

likely contributed to the extended time frame for the Great Depression.

        In response to the developing mortgage crisis, the Hoover administration and Republican

Congress in 1932 established the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) to provide liquidity

to mortgage lenders to stave off short run balance sheet problems. The FHLBB did not have

much impact because it did not provide much in the way of advances relative to the size of the

problem. The FHLBB focused almost exclusively on B&Ls and tended to only provide funds

when the advances could be supported by loans in good standing.

        The Roosevelt administration and Democratic Congress offered an emergency solution to

the mortgage crisis in 1933 by creating the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC), a

government-sponsored entity that could issue its own bonds. Within a year the full value of the

bonds were guaranteed by the federal government, allowing the HOLC to issue debt at a risk-free

interest rate. The corporation used the bonds to purchase from lenders over a million nonfarm

mortgages in which the borrowers were in trouble through “no fault of their own.” They then

refinanced the mortgages for the borrowers. At its peak, the HOLC held mortgages on roughly

10 percent of all nonfarm homes in America (Hairris 1951). The HOLC came close to fully

replacing toxic mortgages on lenders’ books because it often paid prices for loans that covered

the principal owed, interest owed, and taxes paid by the lender (Rose 2011). When the loan was

refinanced, the HOLC used the amount paid to the lender as the basis of the refinanced loan;

therefore, the borrowers did not get a break on the amount owed. Borrowers benefitted because
                                                                                                    57


the HOLC refinanced at a low interest rate, lengthened the period of the loan, and used a modern,

direct-reduction loan contract where each loan payment immediately retired part of the principal

owed. Borrowers also benefitted because the HOLC was very slow to foreclose, often waiting

through more than 1.5 to 2 years of delinquency to allow borrowers more time to get back on

their feet in the terrible economy of the 1930s. Even so, the agency ended up foreclosing on 20

percent of its loans (Fishback, Rose, and Snowden 2013).

       The key to the HOLC’s success was the federal guarantee on its bonds, which allowed it

to issue bonds at low interest rates and to practice its patient foreclosure policy. The ex ante risk

for the HOLC was considered very high. Such an intervention had never been tried before and

the quality of the loans was terrible. Fishback, Rose and Snowden (2013) offer a rough estimate

of the ex ante risk that implied a federal subsidy of 20 to 30 percent of the value of the loans.

In the first seven years of its existence, the predictions of high risk seemed to have been borne

out, as the HOLC foreclosed on roughly 20 percent of the loans and over 20 percent of borrowers

were still delinquent on the loans in 1940. After the HOLC closed down its operations in 1951,

however, its losses added up to only about 2 percent of the value of the loans because it was

often able to sell foreclosed homes when housing prices recovered during World War II.

       The HOLC also had positive effects on housing markets. To estimate the impact of the

HOLC’s lending on housing markets, Courtemanche and Snowden (2011) and Fishback, et. al.

(2011) independently and simultaneously compiled panel data for county housing markets across

the country for 1930 and 1940. Both performed analyses of the impact of the HOLC that

combined a rich set of correlates with controls for time-invariant features of the counties and

instrumental variables. Courtemanche and Snowden also devoted substantial effort to analyzing

the political economy of the distribution of funds. For instruments, both groups focused on the
                                                                                                   58


distance from the county to the nearest HOLC office established. Both argued that greater

distance from HOLC offices raised the administrative and negotiations costs of purchasing and

refinancing the loan. Refinances involved in-person evaluation of property values and the

borrower’s ability to repay that were made more difficult to administer when the property was

more distant from the HOLC office. Courtemanche and Snowden used the inverse distance to

the actual office locations as their instrument. Although Courtemanche and Snowden performed

a variety of robustness checks of the validity of the instruments, Fishback, et. al. worried that the

office locations chosen might have been correlated with unobserved features of the housing

markets in the counties. They took an additional step by creating a simulated set of locations for

offices for any federal administrator trying to reach the most people in the state by placing an

office in the state capital and in the four most populous counties in the state. They then used the

distance from these simulated offices as the instrument for the office locations.

       Both groups found that the HOLC had substantial impact on the number of home owners

and on home values in the more the nearly 2500 counties with fewer than 50,000 people. The

full scale of the effects were not understood until Fishback, Rose, and Snowden (2013, 107-111,

133-145) re-examined the econometric results. With no HOLC, they found that real median

housing values would have fallen by 22.9 percent between 1934 and 1940, while a county with

the mean per capita HOLC lending would have seen housing values fall by only 7.6 percent;

therefore, the HOLC staved off two-thirds of the decline in housing values that likely would have

occurred by the end of the decade. Without the HOLC the number of nonfarm home owners

would have likely risen by 5.1 percent between 1934 and 1940, while counties where the typical

HOLC loans per capita were handed out would have experienced an 18.4 percent rise in the

number of home owners. Neither group found statistically significant effects of the HOLC in
                                                                                                  59


larger counties. This may have been because the instruments had more strength in the smaller

counties where offices were in counties some distance away. Many of the more populous

counties had offices and so the distance from the office was essentially zero and could not

adequately parse out differences in office access across those counties. Another possibility was

economic in nature. Larger counties had better developed lending markets with larger and more

diversified lenders and thus the HOLC was not as effective in those markets.

       The New Deal created two housing institutions, the Federal Housing Administration and

Fannie Mae, that have had significant long run effects on housing markets but had relatively

small effects in the 1930s. The FHA started insuring home repair and rehabilitation mortgages in

1934 and new full-scale mortgage loans in 1935. They started and have continued to be

relatively conservative in their mortgage lending with low foreclosure rates. Their largest share

of new loan value in the 1930s was 9.3 percent in 1936. Fannie Mae was a government backed

corporation created in 1938 to create a secondary market for mortgages and add liquidity to the

system. Their annual purchases did not exceed 3.3 percent of new loan value in 1938 through

1940 (Snowden 2006, 4-540, 4-550, 4-556).

       By the 2000s the federal government’s involvement in housing markets had risen sharply.

The Veterans’ Administration joined the FHA in insuring mortgages in the wake of World War

II. Fannie Mae was officially removed from government sponsorship in the late 1960s and

Freddie Mac was created as a competitor in the secondary market in 1971. Although officially

not backed by the federal government, private investors and markets have treated Fannie and

Freddie as if they had government guarantees and their bonds have had interest rates at close to

T-bill rates for decades. Many households have also benefitted from reduced taxes associated

with the deduction of mortgage interest on tax returns. The FHA and Freddie and Fannie have
                                                                                                    60


come under constant pressure for the past 30 years to expand their aid to low income and

minority households with more subsidies offered for expansion by both the Clinton and Bush

administrations. As a result, the federal government has moved from playing virtually no role in

housing markets prior to the Great Depression to playing a large role in the 2000s.

       When the housing/mortgage crisis hit, the federal government experimented with a

variety of programs. The largest and one most similar to the HOLC is the Homes Affordable

Modification Program (HAMP), which eventually became involved in about 3 percent of

mortgages, compared with 10 percent for the HOLC. The HAMP and HOLC are similar in that

most of the gains they offered in refinancing came from lowering the interest rate and extending

the length of the loan. The HAMP differs in three ways. They have offered principal reductions

on about 30 percent of their modifications. They do not purchase the mortgages and instead

offer subsidies to help offset the haircut the lender was taking on the refinancing. Finally, the

HAMP also contracted out the servicing of the loan and disqualifies borrowers from the program

if they fall behind by more than three payments. Approximately, 28 percent of the 1.4 million

HAMP modifications have been disqualified and referred to additional programs to try to help

lenders move out of delinquency. Of that group 24 percent have gone into foreclosure and 13

percent have had short sales (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 2014).

       One possible reason why the HAMP has not purchased mortgages is that other federal

agencies were making purchases. When the crisis hit its peak in the fall of 2008, there was

substantial discussion of using monies from the TARP to develop auctions to purchase the toxic

assets from the lenders. Instead, the government took ownership stakes in the large banks, as the

RFC did in 1933, and has performed multiple stress tests on various banks, as the New Dealers

did with the National Bank Holiday of 1933. The Federal Reserve in 2009 began purchasing
                                                                                                   61


substantial amounts of mortgage-backed securities and as part of its various quantitative easing

programs continues to hold large amounts of MBSs. Reports from bankers suggest that the Fed

and other bank regulators have also required banks to be careful in making new loans. This

might be read as a de facto way of replacing the toxic assets on the bank balance sheets and

insuring that another crisis does not develop. Finally, the government continues to control

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which were in terrible shape in 2008 2009, but have been involved

in a large share of all new mortgage lending since that time. According to the Congressional

Budget Office (2010, viii and ix), the two owned or guaranteed roughly half of all outstanding

mortgages in 2009 and they financed three-fourths of new mortgages originated that year. As

housing markets have recovered, the two have begun earning profits that now are revenues in the

federal government budget.



   7. Summary

       The New Deal led to a dramatic increase in the federal government’s role in the economy

on a wide range of dimensions. Many of these policies created programs that are still in place

today and set precedents that policy makers have cited in suggesting their own solutions to the

Great Recession in the 2000s. During the 1930s the federal government for the first time took

responsibility for solving general problems with unemployment and poverty, established the

modern farm grant and loan programs, subsidized the housing market, banks, railroads, and other

industries with low-interest and/or guaranteed loans, and took ownership stakes in banks. The

government developed the policies while running relatively small deficits.


       The federal government responded to the Great Recession with much larger deficits and a

range of programs in the same policy areas. The modern policies look somewhat different
                                                                                                   62


because the federal government influences a much larger share of the economy than it did when

the Great Depression began at the end of 1929. Their impact might also differ because the Great

Depression was several magnitudes worse and often of a different kind than in the Great

Recession. Even so, careful study of the impact of the federal spending and lending policies in

the 1930s remains valuable because so many people invoke what they consider to be the

successes and failures of the New Deal when considering modern policies. Until recently, they

have been making such claims with a limited information base.


       Over the past two decades scholars have compiled a wide range of data bases and used

the rich variation in the distribution of New Deal funds across place and time to examine their

impact on a wide variety of outcomes. Seeking a pithy statement about the New Deal, people

commonly ask: Was the New Deal a Success? The answer depends on a variety of factors:

what policies are included, which outcomes are being measured, how large must the effect be to

be considered a success. It is a treacherous effort to try to define a unified theme for the New

Deal because there were so many objectives, often conflicting, that were being addressed. The

New Deal is best seen as a bundle of policies designed to tackle a broad range of specific

problems that arose in a severely depressed economy.


       Scholars have only been using the microeconomic methods described here to study the

New Deal for about a decade, and there is plenty of opportunity for new research. Thus far, we

can say that the distribution of New Deal public works and relief funding stimulated income in

the states with a multiplier of around one, and stimulated durable good consumption in the form

of car sales. Public works and relief helped lower a variety of mortality and crime rates and

stimulated birth rates. However, they were generally not associated with stimulating private

employment, which might account for why the income multiplier was not larger. The relief
                                                                                                                 63


funds are associated with higher wage rates, but a great deal more work needs to be done to

understand fully the changing implicit and explicit labor market institutions during the period

and how the spending and loan programs interacted with them.


        The AAA payments to farmers to take land out of production likely aided the farmers

receiving the payments but contributed to significant losses in the number of tenants and share

croppers. The net effects on per capita incomes at the county and state level appear to have been

small or even negative. The TVA electrification had small effects in the 1930s on economic

activity, likely because monthly electric bills did not drop much for most electricity users in the

area, while the REA electrification loans had larger impact on agricultural productivity.


        The HOLC mortgage purchase and refinance program appears to have kept a large share

of people in their homes while also bailing out many mortgage lenders. The ex ante

uncertainties surrounding the program suggest a relatively sizeable subsidy to the housing sector,

but the ex post costs of the program were generally small. Meanwhile, the HOLC appears to

have kept housing values and home ownership rates from declining further after 1934. The early

work on the RFC suggests that it helped stimulate banking activity when it took ownership

stakes in banks, but the loans in the railroad industry may have retarded the maintenance and

rebuilding of capital in that industry.


        While the focus here has been on the spending and loan programs, the New Deal also

expanded government activity and authority in other ways not addressed here.31 Many of these

have affected the economy ever since. A broad range of new financial regulations were

established, some of which were eliminated in financial deregulation after 1978. Social Security


31 For surveys by economic historians that capture the full breadth of the New Deal see the conference volumes
edited by Bordo, Goldin, and White (1998) and Crafts and Fearon (2013).
                                                                                                              64


old-age pensions were introduced along with Unemployment Insurance and the matching grant

public assistance programs in 1935, but they were not fully implemented until near the end of the

decade. The government allowed firms within industries to bargain with each other on prices,

wages, output, hours, and employment under the NRA without antitrust interference between

1933 and 1935, and a literature has developed to examine how effectively the firms were able to

cartelize.32 When the NRA was struck down by the Supreme Court, the National Labor

Relations Act of 1935 was introduced to enhance the strength of unions, and the Fair Labor

Standards Act of 1938 established a national minimum wage and maximum hours law.33 The

modern farm policies got their start under the New Deal and continue on after revisions driven

by a Supreme Court decision to strike down the first version. I anticipate that scholars will be

able to use the data already compiled and uncover additional information that can be used to

continue the trend toward rigorous quantitative examinations of the New Deal programs.




32 For examples, see Alexander (1997), Alexander and Libecap (2000), Klein and Taylor (2008), Taylor (2007,
2010), Vickers and Ziebarth (2014), and Chicu, Vickers, and Ziebarth (2013).
33 See Seltzer (1995, 1997) and Fleck (2002) for studies of the political economy and impact of the laws.
                                                                                                65


References

Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs. Various years. Annual Report. Washington, D.C.:
      Government Printing Office.

Alexander, Barbara. 1997. “Failed Cooperation in Heterogeneous Industries under the National
      Recovery Administration.” Journal of Economic History , 57 (June): 322-44

Alexander, Barbara. and Libecap, Gary. 2000 ’The Effect of Cost Heterogeneity in the Success
      and Failure of the New Deal's Agricultural and Industrial Programs’, Explorations in
      Economic History, 37 (October): 370-400.

Alston, Lee. 1984. “Farm Foreclosure Moratorium Legislation: A Lesson from the Past.”
       American Economic Review 74(3) (June): 445-457.

Anderson, G. M., and Tollison, R. D. 1991. ’Congressional Influence and Patterns of New Deal
      Spending, 1933-1939’, Journal of Law and Economics, 34 (April): 161-75.

Arrington, L. J. 1970. ’Western Agriculture and the New Deal’, Agricultural History 49
       (October): 337-316.

Atack Jeremy and Peter Passell. 1994. A New Economic View of American History from
       Colonial Times to 1940. 2nd edition. Norton and Company, New York.

Baird, Enid. 1942. Public and Private Aid in 116 Urban Areas, 1929-38, with Supplement for
        1939 and 1940. U.S. Federal Security Agency, Social Security Board, Public Assistance
        Report No. 3. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

Balan-Cohen, A. 2009. “The Effect on Elderly Mortality: Evidence from the Old Age
       Assistance Programs in the United States’, Unpublished working paper. Tufts
       University.

Barber, William J. 1996. Designs within Disorder: Franklin D. Roosevelt, the Economists, and
       the Shaping of American Economic Policy, 1933-1945. New York: Cambridge
       University Press.

Barreca, Alan, Fishback, Price, and Kantor, Shawn. 2012. “Agricultural Policy, Migration, and
       Malaria in the 1930s United States.” Explorations in Economic History 49: 381-398.

Barro, Robert. 1981. “Output Effects of Government Purchases.” The Journal of Political
       Economy 89(6): 1086–121.

Barro, Robert, and Charles Redlick. 2011. “Macroeconomic Effects from Government
       Purchases and Taxes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 51–102.

Bartik, Timothy. 1993. “Who Benefits from Local Job Growth: Migrants or the Original
                                                                                                      66


       Residents?” Regional Studies 27: 297-311.

Bellush, Bernard. 1975 The Failure of the NRA. New York: Norton.

Benjamin, Daniel and Mathews, Kent. 1992 U.S. and U.K. Unemployment Between the Wars: A
      Doleful Story. Institute for Economic Affairs, London.

Bernanke, Benjamin. 2000. Essays on the Great Depression. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
      University Press.

Bittlingmayer, George. 1995. “Output and Stock Prices When Antitrust is Suspended: The
        Effects of the NIRA.” In The Causes and Consequences of Antitrust: A Public Choice
        Perspective, edited by Fred McChesney and William Shughart. Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press, 297-318.

Blinder, Alan. 2013. After the Music Stopped: The Financial Crisis, the Response, and the
       Work Ahead. New York: Penguin Press.

Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond. 1998. “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
      Dynamic Panel Data Models.” Journal of Economics 87(1): 115-143.

Bordo, Michael, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White (eds.) 1998. The Defining Moment: The
       Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century. National Bureau
       of Economic Research Conference Volume. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
       265-296.

Boustan, Leah, Fishback, Price, and Kantor, Shawn. 2010. “The Effect of Internal Migration on
      Local Labor Markets: American Cities During the Great Depression.” Journal of Labor
      Economics 28 (October): 719-746

Brown, E. Cary. 1956. “Fiscal policy in the ’Thirties: a Reappraisal.” American Economic
      Review 46: 857-79.

Bureau of Public Roads. 1935. An Economic and Statistical Analysis of Highway-Construction
      Expenditures. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Calomiris, Charles, Joseph Mason, Marc Weidenmier, and Katherine Bobroff. 2013. “The
      Effects of Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance on Michigan’s Banks’
      Survival in the 1930s.” Explorations in Economic History 50 :526-547.

Carter, Susan, et. al. Millennial Edition of the Historical Statistics of the United States, edited
        by Susan Carter, et. al., New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Gui Woolston. 2012.
      “Does Fiscal State Relief During Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the
                                                                                             67


       American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” American Economic Journal: Economic
       Policy 4(3): 118-145.

Chicu, Mark, Chris Vickers, and Nicolas Ziebarth. 2013. “Cementing the Case for Collusion
       under the National Recovery Administration.” Explorations in Economic History 50
       (October): 487-507.

Clarke, Sally. 1994. Regulation and the Revolution in United States Farm Productivity.
       Cambridge University Press, New York.

Cohen, Lauren, Joshua Coval, and Christopher Malloy. 2011. “Do Politicians Cause Corporate
       Downsizing?” Journal of Political Economy 119 (6): 1015-60.

Cole, Harold and Lee Ohanian. 2004. “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great
       Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy 112
       (August): 779-816.

Commissioner of Internal Revenue. 1937. Annual Report of the Commissioner of Internal
     Revenue for the Fiscal Year ended June 30, 1937. Washington: D.C.: Government
     Printing Office.

Congressional Budget Office. 2010. Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Role in the
      Secondary Mortgage Market. December 2010. Washington, D.C.: The Congress of the
      United States.

Conley, Timothy and Bill Dupor. 2013. “The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act:
       Solely a Government Jobs Program?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 60(5):
       535-49.
Cullen, Joseph, and Price Fishback. 2013. “Second World War Spending and Local Economic
       Activity in US Counties, 1939–58.” The Economic History Review 66(4) (November):
       975–92.

Costa, Dora. 1999. “A house of her own: old age assistance and the living arrangements of older
       nonmarried women.” Journal of Public Economics 72: 39-59.

Couch, James and William Shughart II. 1998. The Political Economy of the New Deal. New
       York: Edward Elgar.

Courtemanche, Charles and Kenneth Snowden. 2011. “Repairing a Mortgage Crisis: HOLC
      Lending and Its Impact on Local Housing Markets.” Journal of Economic History 71
      (June): 307-337.

Crafts, Nicholas and Peter Fearon (eds.) 2013. The Great Depression of the 1930s: Lessons for
        Today. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                                                                                            68


Depew, Briggs, Price Fishback, and Paul Rhode. 2013. “New Deal or No Deal in the Cotton
      South: The Effect of the AAA on the Labor Structure in Agriculture.” 50 (October
      2013): 466-486.

Darby, Michael R. 1976. “Three and a half million U.S. Employees have been mislaid: or, an
       Explanation of Unemployment, 1934-1941.” Journal of Political Economy 84, no. 1: 1-
       16.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1992 Golden Fetters: the Gold Standard and the Depression 1919-1939.
      Oxford University Press, New York.

Eggertsson, Gauti. 2008. “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression.” American
       Economic Review 98 (4): 1476-1516.

Eggertsson, Gauti. 2012. “Was the New Deal Contractionary.” American Economic Review
       102 (February): 524-555.

Eggertsson, Gauti and Benjamin Pugsley. 2006 “The mistake of 1937: A General Equilibrium
       Analysis.” Monetary and Economic Studies 24: 1-41.

Federal Farm Loan Board. Various years. Annual Report of the Federal Farm Loan Board. .
       Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Federal Works Agency. Various Years. Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: Government
       Printing Office.

Feyderer, James and Bruce Sacerdote. 2011. “Did the Stimulus Stimulate? Real Time
       Estimates of the Effects of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” National
       Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16759.

Field, Alexander. 1992. “Uncontrolled Land Development and the Duration of the Depression
        in the United States.” Journal of Economic History 52 (December): 785-805.

Field, Alexander. 2014. “The Interwar Housing Cycle in the Light of 2001-2012: A
        Comparative Historical Perspective.” in Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical
        Perspective, edited by Eugene White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback. A National
        Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press.

Fishback, Price. 2010. “Monetary and Fiscal Policy During the Great Depression.” Oxford
       Review of Economic Policy. 26 (Autumn): 385-413.

Price Fishback. “New Deal Funding: Estimates of Federal Grants and Loans across States by
        Year, 1930–1940,” Research in Economic History 31: 41 – 109.

Fishback, Price, Alfonso Flores-Lagunes, William Horrace, Shawn Kantor, and Jaret Treber.
                                                                                                69


       2011. “The Influence of the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation on Housing Markets
       During the 1930s.“ Review of Financial Studies, 24 (July): 1782-1813.

Fishback, Price, Michael Haines, and Shawn Kantor. 2007. “Births, Deaths, and New Deal
       Relief During the Great Depression.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (February):
       1-14 .

Fishback, Price, Michael Haines, Paul Rhode. 2012. “The Impact of the AAA on Farm Wages.”
       Unpublished Working Paper presented at the NBER Summer Institute, July.

Fishback, Price, William Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. 2005. “Did New Deal grant programs
       stimulate local economies? A study of Federal grants and retail sales during the Great
       Depression,” The Journal of Economic History 65 (March): 36-71.

________. 2006. “The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on Mobility During the Great
      Depression,” Explorations in Economic History,” 43 (April): 179-222

Fishback, Price and Valentina Kachanovskaya. 2010. “In Search of the Multiplier for Federal
       Spending in the States During the Great Depression.” National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper No. 16561. Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Fishback, Price and Valentina Kachanovskaya. 2015. “The Multiplier for the States in the Great
       Depression.’ With Valentina Kachanovskaya. Journal of Economic History 75 (March):
       125-162.

Fishback, Price, Shawn Kantor, and John Wallis. 2003. “Can the New Deal’s Three R’s Be
       Rehabilitated? A Program-by-Program, County-by-County Analysis.” Explorations in
       Economic History (October): 278-307.

Fishback, Price and Trevor Kollmann. 2014. “New Multi-City Estimates of the Changes in
       Home Values, 1920-1940.” Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective.
       Edited by White, Eugene, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback. National Bureau of
       Economic Research Conference Volume. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 203-244.

Fishback, Price, Jonathan Rose, and Kenneth Snowden. 2013. Well Worth Saving: How the New
       Deal Safeguarded Home Ownership, with Jonathan Rose and Kenneth Snowden. NBER
       Series on the Development of the American Economy. Chicago, IL: University of
       Chicago Press.

Fishback, Price and John Wallis. 2013. “What Was New About the New Deal? The Great
       Depression of the 1930s: Lessons for Today, edited by Nicolas Crafts and Peter Fearon.
       Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, pp. 290-327.

Fleck, Robert. 1999a. “Electoral Incentives, Public Policy, and the New Deal Realignment.”
       Southern Economic Journal 63 (January): 377-404.
                                                                                              70


_____. 1999b. “The Marginal Effect of New Deal Relief Work on County-Level
       Unemployment Statistics.” Journal of Economic History 59 (September): 659-87.

_____. 1999c. “The Value of the Vote: A Model and Test of the Effects of Turnout on
       Distributive Policy,” Economic Inquiry 37 (October): 609-23.

_____. 2001a. “Inter-party competition, intra-party competition, and distributive Policy: A
       Model and Test using New Deal Data.” Public Choice 108 (July): 77-100.

_____. 2001b. “Population, Land, Economic Conditions, and the Allocation of New Deal
       Spending.” Explorations in Economic History 38 (April): 296-304.

_____. 2002. “Democratic Opposition to the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938,” Journal of
       Economic History 62 (March): 25-54.

______. 2008. “Voter Influence and Big Policy Change: The Positive Political Economy of the
      New Deal.” Journal of Political Economy : 1-37.

______. 2013. “Why Did the Electorate Swing Between Parties During the Great Depression?
      Explorations in Economic History 50 (October): 599-619.

Fleitas, Sebastian, Price Fishback, and Kenneth Snowden. 2015. “Forbearance by Contract: How
         Building and Loans Mitigated the Housing Crisis of the 1930s.” National Bureau of
         Economic Research Working Paper No. 21786.

Friedberg, Leora. 1999. “The Effect of Old Age Assistance on retirement. Journal of Public
       Economics 71: 213-232.
Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz, 1963. A Monetary history of the United States 1867-
       1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Ghent, Andrea. 2012. The Historical Origins of Mortgage Law. Working Paper. Arizona State
       University and Research Institute for Housing America Research Paper No. 12-02.

Gjerstad, Steven and Vernon Smith. 2014a. “Consumption and Investment Booms in the 1920s
       and the Collapse in the 1930s.” in Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical
       Perspective, edited by Eugene White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback. A National
       Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press.

Gjerstad, Steven and Vernon Smith. 2014b. Rethinking Housing Bubbles: The Role of
       Household and Bank Balance Sheets in Modelling Economic Cycles. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.

Glock, Judge. 2014. “The End of the First Government-Sponsored Enterprise: Explaining the
       Collapse and Bailout of the Federal Land Banks, 1916-1932.” Working Paper.
       University of Virginia History Department.
                                                                                              71


Gorton, Gary. 2010. Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007. New York: Oxford
       University Press.

Grebler, Leo, David M. Blank, and Louis Winnick. 1956. Capital formation in residential real
       estate: Trends and prospects. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gruber, John and Daniel Hungerman. 2007. “Faith-Based Charity and Crowd Out During the
       Great Depression.” Journal of Public Economics 91: 1043-1069.

Halcrow, Harold G. 1953. Agricultural Policy of the United States. New York: Prentice-Hall
      Inc..

Hansen, Zeynep and Gary Libecap. 2004. “Small Farms, Externalities, and the Dust Bowl of
      the 1930s.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (June): 665-694.

Harriss, C. Lowell. 1951. History and Policies of the Home Owners' Loan Corporation. New
       York, NY: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hausman, Joshua. 2014. “Fiscal Policy and Economic Recovery: The Case of the 1936
     Veterans’ Bonus.” Working Paper University of Michigan.

Hawkins, Jennifer. 2014. “Preliminary Work on Antitrust Enforcement During the Great
      Depression.” Working Paper. Case Western Reserve

Hill, Matt. 2015. “Love in the Time of the Depression: The Effect of Economic Condition on
       Marriage in the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic History 75 (March): 125-162.

Howard, Donald S. 1943. The WPA and Federal Relief Policy. New York: Russell Sage
      Foundation.

Johnson, Ryan, Price Fishback, and Shawn Kantor. 2010. "Striking at the Roots of Crime: The
        Impact of Social Welfare Spending on Crime During the Great Depression," Journal of
        Law and Economics 53 (November): 715-740.
Jones, Jesse H. with Edward Angly. 1951. Fifty Billion Dollars: My Thirteen Years with the
        RFC (1932-1945). New York: The MacMillan Company.

Jones, Jesse H. 1939. Reconstruction Finance Corporation Seven-Year Report to the President
        and the Congress of the United States, February 2, 1932 to February 2, 1939,
        Reconstruction Finance Corporation pamphlet.

Kantor, Shawn, Price Fishback, and John Wallis. 2013 “Did the New Deal Solidify the 1932
       Democratic Realignment?” Explorations in Economic History 50 (October): 620-633.
       Earlier Version is NBER Working Paper No. 18500.

Keynes, John M. 1935, republished 1964. The General Theory of Money, Interest, and Prices.
      New York: A Harbinger Book, Harcourt, Brace and World Inc..
                                                                                             72


Kitchens, Carl. 2013a. “A Dam Problem: TVA’s Fight Against Malaria 1926-1951.” Journal of
       Economic History 73(3) (September): 694-724.

Kitchens, Carl. 2013b. “The Effects of the Works Progress Administration’s Anti-malaria
       Programs in Georgia, 1932,-1947.” Explorations in Economic History 50 (October):
       567-581.

Kitchens, Carl. 2014. “The Role of Publicly Provided Electricity in Economic Development:
       The Experience of the Tennessee Valley Authority, 1929-1955.” Journal of Economic
       History 74(2) (June): 389-419.

Kitchens, Carl and Price Fishback. 2015. “Flip the Switch: The Spatial Impact of the Rural
       Electrification Administration, 1935-1940.” Journal of Economic History 75
       (December): 1161-1195.

Klein, Peter. and Jason Taylor. 2008. “Anatomy of a Cartel: The National Industrial Recovery
        Act of 1933 and the Compliance Crisis of 1934.” Research in Economic History 26: 235-
       271.

Kline, Patrick and Enrico Moretti. 2013. “People, Places and Public Policy: Some Simple
        Welfare Economics of Local Economic Development Programs.” National Bureau of
        Economic Research Working Paper No. 19959.

Kline, Patrick and Moretti, Enrico. 2014. “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
        Economies and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley
        Authority.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1), 275-331.

Kollman, Trevor and Price Fishback. 2014. “Hedonic Housing Indexes During the Great
      Depression.” Unpublished Working Paper, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology,
      June.


Kraay, Aart. 2012. “How Large is the Government Spending Multiplier? Evidence from World
       Bank Lending.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(2): 829–87.

Liu, Xing. 2015. “Three Essays on Labor Economics.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
       University of Arizona.

Margo, Robert. 1991. “The Microeconomics of Depression Unemployment.” Journal of
      Economic History 51 (June): 333-341.

Mason, Joseph. 2001a. “Do Lenders of Last Resort Policies Matter? The Effects of the
      Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Banks During the Great Depression.”
      Journal of Financial Services Research 20 (September): 77-95.

Mason, Joseph. 2001b. “Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Financial
      Intermediaries and Commercial and Industrial Entreprises in the United States, 1932-
                                                                                          73


       1937.” In Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, Ahsoka Mody (Eds.) Resolution of
       Financial Distress: An International Perspective on the Design of Bankruptcy Laws.
       Washington, D. C.: The World Bank Group.

Mason, Joseph and Daniel Schiffman. 2003. “Too-Big-to-Fail, Government Bailouts, and
      Managerial Incentives: The Case of Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to
      the Railroad Industry During the Great Depression.” In Too-Big-Too-Fail: Policies and
      Practices in Government Bailouts, edited by Benton E. Gup. Westport, CT: Greenwood
      Press, 49-75.

McCraw, Thomas K. 1971. TVA and the Power Fight, 1933–1939. New York, J. B.
     Lippincott Company.


McGregor, Peter, Eric McVittie, J. Kim Swales, and Ya Ping Yin. 2000. “The Neoclassical
     Economic Base Multiplier.” Journal of Regional Science 40(1): 1–31.

Meltzer Alan. 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve Volume I: 1913-1951. University of
       Chicago Press. Chicago.


Merrifield, John. 1987. “A Neoclassical Anatomy of the Economic Base Multipier.” Journal of
       Regional Science 27(2): 283–94.

Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
     U.S. Regions.” American Economic Review 104 (March): 753-792.

Neumann, Todd, Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor. 2010. “The Dynamics of Relief Spending
     and the Private Urban Labor Market During the New Deal.” Journal of Economic History
     70 (March): 195-220.

Neumann, Todd, Jason Taylor, and Price Fishback. 2013. “Comparisons of Weekly Hours Over
     the Past Century and the Importance of Work Sharing Policies in the 1930s,” American
     Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102 (May): 105-110.

Ohanian, Lee. 2009. “What—or Who—Started the Great Depression? Journal of Economic
      Theory 144: 2310-2335.

Olson, James S. 1998. Saving Capitalism: The Reconstruction Finance Corporation and the
       New Deal. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Owyang, Michael, Valerie Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy. “Are Government Spending Multipliers
     Greater During Periods of Slack? Evidence from 20th Century Historical Data.” National
     Bureau of Research Working Paper No. 18769, 2013.
Parker, Randall. 2002. Reflections on the Great Depression. Edward Elgar, Northampton, MA..
                                                                                               74



Parker, Randall. 2007. The Economics of the Great Depression: A Twenty-First Century Look
        Back at the Economics of the Interwar Era. Edward Elgar, Northampton MA.


Parsons, Donald O. 1991. “Male Retirement Behavior in the United States, 1930-1950. Journal
       of Economic History 51: 657-674.

Peppers, Larry. 1973. “Full Employment Surplus Analysis and Structural Change: the 1930s.
       Explorations in Economic History 10: 197-210.
Ramey, Valerie. 2011. “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy? Journal of
       Economic Literature 49(3): 673–85.
Reading, Donald C. 1973. “New Deal Activity and the States, 1933 to 1939,” Journal of
       Economic History 33 (December): 792-810.
Richardson, Harry. 1985. “Input-Output and Economic Base Multipliers: Looking Backward
       and Forward.” Journal of Regional Science 25(4): 607–61.
Romer, Christina. 1992. “What Ended the Great Depression?” The Journal of Economic History
      52, no. 4 (December): 757–84.

Rose, Jonathan. 2011. “The Incredible HOLC: Mortgage Relief During the Great Depression.”
       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 43 (September): 1073-1107.

Rose, Jonathan. 2014. “The Prolonged Resolution of Troubled Real Estate Lenders” in Housing
       and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective, edited by Eugene White, Kenneth
       Snowden, and Price Fishback. A National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
       Report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Rucker, Randal and Lee Alston. 1987. “Farm Failures and Government Intervention: A Case
      Study of the 1930s.” American Economic Review 77: 724-730.

Seltzer, Andrew J. 1997. “The Effects of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 on the Southern
        Seamless Hosiery and Lumber Industries.” Journal of Economic History 57 (June): 396-
        415.
Seltzer, Andrew J. 1995. “The Political Economy of the Fair Labor Standards Act.” Journal of
        Political Economy 103 (December): 1302-1342.
Smiley Gene. 2002. Rethinking the Great Depression: A New View of its Causes and
       Consequences. Ivan R. Dee, Chicago.

Snowden, Kenneth. 2006. “Construction, Housing, and Mortgages.” In Historical Statistics of
      the United States: Earliest Times to the Present, Millennial Edition, Volume Four, edited
      by Susan Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael Haines, Alan Olmstead, Richard Sutch,
      and Gavin Wright. New York, Cambridge University Press, pp. 4-395 to 4-572.

Snowden, Kenneth. 2014. “A Historiography of Early NBER Housing and Mortgage Research.”
                                                                                             75


       in Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective, edited by Eugene White,
       Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback. A National Bureau of Economic Research
       Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sorensen, Todd, Fishback, Price, Kantor, Shawn, and Rhode, Paul. 2011. “The New Deal and
       the Diffusion of Tractors in the 1930s.” Working paper, University of Arizona.

Stecker, M. L. 1937. “Intercity Differences in Cost of Living in March 1935, 59 Cities.” Works
       Progress Administration Research Monography XII. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
       Government Printing Office.

Stoian, Adrian and Fishback, Price. 2010. “Welfare spending and mortality rates for the elderly
        before the Social Security era.” Explorations in Economic History (January): 1-27.

Stromberg, David. 2004. “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending.” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 119 (February): 189-221.

Suarez-Serrato, Juan Carlos and Phillippe Wingender. 2014. “Estimating Local Multipliers.”
       Duke University Working Paper.

Sundstrom, William. 2001. “Discouraging Times: The Labor-Force Participation of Married
       Black Women, 1930-1940.” Explorations in Economic History 38 (March???): 123-146.

Sutch, Richard. 2006. “National Income and Product Accounts.” In Historical Statistics of the
       United States: Earliest Times to the Present, Millennial Edition, Volume Four, edited by
       Susan Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael Haines, Alan Olmstead, Richard Sutch,
       and Gavin Wright. New York, Cambridge University Press, pp. 3-3 to 3-70.

Taylor, Jason. 2007. “Cartel Codes Attributes and Cartel Performance: An Industry-Level
       Analysis of the National Industrial Recovery Act. Journal of Law and Economics 50
       (August): 597-624.

Taylor, Jason. 2010. "The Welfare Impact Of Collusion Under Various Industry Characteristics:
       A Panel Examination Of Efficient Cartel Theory" The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis
       & Policy: Vol. 10: Issue 1 Article 97.

Taylor, Jason. 2011. “Work-Sharing During the Great Depression: Did the ‘President’s
       Reemployment Agreement’ Promote Reemployment?” Economica 78: 133-158.

Taylor, Jason and Todd Neumann. 2013. “The Effect of Institutional Regime Change Within
       the New Deal on Industrial Output and Labor Markets.” Explorations in Economic
       History 50: 582-598.

Temin, Peter. 1989. Lessons from the Great Depression. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.

Temin, Peter and Barry Wigmore. 1990. “The End of One Big Deflations.” Explorations in
                                                                                             76


       Economic History 27: 483-502.

Thomasson, Melissa and Price Fishback. 2014. “Hard Times in the Land of Plenty: The Effect
     on Income Disability Later in Life for People Born During the Great Depression.”
     Explorations in Economic History 54 (October): 64-78.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1941. Changes in Cost of Living in Large Cities in the United
       States, 1913-1941. Bulletin No. 699. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

U.S. Census Bureau. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States: From Colonial Times to
       1970. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1932. Agriculture Yearbook 1932. Washington, D.C.:
       Government Printing Office, various years.

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Making Home Affordable: Program
       Performance Report Through the Second Quarter of 2014. Downloaded on September
       10, 2014 from
       http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=May2014MHAReportFinal.pdf

Vellore, Arthi. 2014. “The Dust Was Long in Settling”: Human Capital and the Lasting Impact
       of the American Dust Bowl.” Working Paper. Oxford University Department of History.

Vickers, Chris and Nicolas Ziebarth. 2014. “Did the National Industry Recovery Act Foster
       Collusion? Evidence from the Macaroni Industry.” Journal of Economic History 74
       (September): 831-862.

Vossmeyer, Angela. 2014. “Sample Selection and Treatment Effect Estimation of Lender of
     Last Resort Policies.” Working Paper. University of California, Irvine.

Wallis, John. J. 1981. Work Relief and Unemployment in the 1930s. Unpublished PhD.
        dissertation, University of Washington.


_____. 1987. “Employment, Politics, and Economic Recovery During the Great Depression,”
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 69 (August): 516-20.
_____. 1991. “The Political Economy of New Deal Fiscal Federalism.” Economic Inquiry 39
      (July): 510-524.

_____. 1998. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending Revisited, Again: With and
      Without Nevada.” Explorations in Economic History 35 (April), 140-70.

_____. 2001. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending, Yet Again: A Reply to Fleck.”
      Explorations in Economic History 38 (April): 305-14.
                                                                                              77


______. 2006. “Federal Government Finances.” In Historical Statistics of the United States:
      Earliest Times to the Present, Millennial Edition, Volume Four, edited by Susan Carter,
      Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael Haines, Alan Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin
      Wright. New York, Cambridge University Press, pp. 5-80 to 5-94.

Wallis, John J., and Benjamin, Daniel K. 1981. “Public Relief and Private Employment in the
        Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History 41 (March): 97-102.

Wallis, John .J., Fishback, Price V. and Kantor, Shawn E., 2006. “Politics, Relief, and Reform:
        Roosevelt’s Efforts to Control Corruption and Manipulation During the New Deal” in
        Corruption and Reform edited by Edward Glaeser and Claudia Goldin. NBER Volume.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Whatley, Warren. C. 1983. “Labor for the Picking: The New Deal in the South,” Journal of
      Economic History 43 (December): 905-29.

Whatley, Warren .C. 1985. “A History of Mechanization in the Cotton South: The Institutional
      Hypothesis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (November): 1191-1215.

White, Eugene Nelson. 1983. The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System:
       1900-1929. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

White, Eugene. 2014. Lessons from the Great American Real Estate Boom and Bust of the
       1920s.” in Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective, edited by Eugene
       White, Kenneth Snowden, and Price Fishback. A National Bureau of Economic
       Research Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey. 2006. Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition. New
       York: Thomson South-western.

Works Progress Administration. 1943. Final Report on the Progress of the WPA Program,
      1935-1943. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Wright, Gavin. 1974. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending: An Econometric
Analysis,” Review of Economics and Statistics 56 (February):
                                                                                                                                                        78


                                                      Figure 1
 Difference from 1929 in Real GDP, Federal Government Outlays, Revenues, and Surplus/Deficit As Percentage of 1929 Real
                                                   GDP, 1929-1939

           10.00


             5.00


             0.00
                 1929        1930        1931          1932      1933        1934          1935      1936            1937    1938         1939

            -5.00


           -10.00


           -15.00


           -20.00


           -25.00


           -30.00
                                                 GDP           Receipts          Outlays           Surplus/Deficit

Sources: All dollar values were converted to real values using a GDP deflator (1996=100) and then divided by 1929 real GDP to get a percentage. Calculated
from information on Gross Domestic Product and the GDP deflator in Sutch (2006 3-25) and on federal government revenues and outlays are from the Office of
Management and Budget and downloaded from http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget/Historicals on August 26, 2014.
                                                                                                                                                           79


                                                       Figure 2
 Differences from 2007 in Real GDP, Federal Government Outlays, Revenues, and Surplus/Deficit As Percentage of 2007 Real
                                                   GDP, 2007-2013

         8.00


         6.00


         4.00


         2.00


         0.00
             2007                  2008                  2009                 2010                  2011                  2012                  2013

        -2.00


        -4.00


        -6.00


        -8.00


       -10.00

                        Real GDP             Real Federal Revenues             Real Outlays Minus Revenues              Real Federal Outlays

Sources: All dollar values were converted to 2009 dollars and then calculated as a percentage of 2007 real GDP. GDP and GDP deflator were determined by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis and downloaded from the St. Louis Federal Reserve online database at http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/ on August 26, 2014.
Federal government outlays and receipts were downloaded from http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget/historicals on August 26, 2014.
                                                                                                                                  80


                                                               TABLE 1

     ESTIMATES OF DOLLAR-FOR-DOLLAR EFFECT OF PER CAPITA GRANTS ON STATE PER CAPITA INCOME, 1930–1940

                                                                    Level                                   Difference

                                                                                               Including            Excluding
                                              Including Transfers        Excluding Transfers
                                                                                               Transfers            Transfers

LEAST SQUARES
                         Coeff.                        1.25                     1.52                 —                    —
No controls
                         t-stat.                      (3.77)                   (3.95)                —                    —
                         Coeff.                        1.54                     2.06                0.98                  1.37
Controls state effects
                         t-stat.                      (7.54)                   (5.43)              (5.96)                (3.20)
Controls state effects   Coeff.                        1.63                     2.15                0.94                  1.39
and weather              t-stat.                      (7.17)                   (5.35)              (5.25)                (3.12)
Controls year effects,   Coeff.                        0.43                     0.45                0.26                 0.26
state effects, and
weather                  t-stat.                      (2.28)                   (1.95)              (2.20)                (1.6)
Controls state time
trends, year effects,    Coeff.                        0.21                     0.16                0.26                 0.27
state effects, and
weather                  t-stat.                      (1.15)                   (0.88)              (1.82)                (1.42)
TWO-STAGE LEAST SQUARES
Controls year effects,   Coeff.                        0.83                      0.96               0.81               0.67
state effects, and       t-stat.                      (3.10)                    (2.43)             (1.58)             (0.39)
weather                  Instrument F-stat.          [47.18]                   [63.89]            [12.25]            [10.92]
Controls state time      Coeff.                        0.26                     –0.18               0.87               0.84
trends, year effects,
state effects, and       t-stat.                      (1.19)                   (–0.25)             (1.63)                (0.35)
                                                                                                                                                  81


 weather
                           Instrument F-stat.                 [8.19]                   [4.59]               [9.33]             [4.58]
Notes: Including transfers means that both income and grants included transfers, excluding transfers means that neither included transfers. This is a
balanced panel with information for 48 states for each year from 1930 through 1940. For the calculations of t-statistics, standard errors are based
on White corrections using the robust command with standard errors clustered at the state level. The instrument F-statistic is the Kleibergen-Paap
rank Wald (KP) F statistic.
Source: Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015).
                                                                                                                             82


                                         TABLE 2
 THUMBNAIL SKETCHES OF MAJOR NEW DEAL PROGRAMS DISTRIBUTING LOANS AND GRANTS TO THE STATES
                                    AND THEIR CITIZENS

Program                                              Description                                                Percentage
                                                                                                                of Total
                                                                                                                Grants,
                                                                                                                Fiscal
                                                                                                                Years
                                                                                                                1934-1940
TOTAL GRANTS                                         $34.5 billion in nominal dollars; roughly $586.5 billion
                                                     in 2013 dollars
 RELIEF GRANTS                                                                                                        47.9
  Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA)     Provided direct and work relief payments based on gaps            8.9
                                                     between household income and an income maintenance
                                                     budget. Hourly work relief payments about half of
                                                     payments under PWA. July 1933 through June 1935
                                                     with a phase out period to March 1937.

  Civil Works Administration (CWA)                   Work relief that paid similar wages to Public Works               2.3
                                                     Administration from November 1933 through March
                                                     1934.
  Works Progress Administration (WPA)                Provided work relief with limits on monthly hours and            24.3
                                                     hourly wage payments of roughly half of Public Works
                                                     Administration payments. Started in July 1935.
  Social Security Administration Public Assistance   Matching grants to states to help fund public assistance          3.3
(SSAPA)                                              payments for aid to dependent children, old age
                                                     assistance, and aid to the blind. Timing of first
                                                     payments based on when states passed enabling
                                                     legislation after national law passed in 1935.
                                                                                                                             83


  Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)                        Work relief for young men, who were often moved to          6.8
                                                           other states to work on various projects. Paid $1 per
                                                           day with most of pay sent to parents. July 1933 through
                                                           the 1930s. About 1 percent went to small to CCC for
                                                           native-americans.

 VETERANS' GRANTS                                                                                                     20.9
  Veterans' Administration (VA)                            Provided a wide array of pensions, disability payments,    10.8
                                                           provision of housing and medical care, and life
                                                           insurance payments. Preceded New Deal.
  Veterans' Bonus Payments for Adjusted Service            Payments in cash or repayments of loans based on           10.1
Certificates (ASCG)                                        World War I Adjusted Service Certificates beginning in
                                                           June 1936.
 PUBLIC WORKS GRANTS                                                                                                  17.8
  Public Roads Administration (PRA)                        Provided grants for highway building and took over          4.7
                                                           control of prior highway matching grant programs.
                                                           Started in June 1933.
  Public Works Administration, Nonfederal (PWANF)          Provided grants to build public works to subnational        3.8
                                                           governments for projects specific to their area. Started
                                                           in June 1933.
  Public Works Administration, Federal (PWAF               Built national public works projects. Started in June       2.1
                                                           1933.
  Housing, Public Works Administration (PWAH)              Grants to build low-income housing projects, June 1933      0.4
                                                           through 1938 with phaseout afterward.
  Public Buildings Administration (PBA)                    Grants for building federal buildings. Formal agency        0.8
                                                           created in 1933.
  Bureau of Reclamation (BR)                               Provided long term no interest loans for irrigation         1.1
                                                           works. Repayments delayed enough many treat them as
                                                           grants rather than loans. Preceded New Deal.
  Rivers and Harbors under Army Corps of Engineers (ACE)   Built and maintained projects to control floods and to      4.0
                                                           aid navigation and use of rivers and harbors. Preceded
                                                           New Deal.
                                                                                                               84


 Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)     Corporation created to build and then operate dams for             0.7
                                      flood control and electricity. By late 1930s became a
                                      retailer of electricity to homes and businesses. Created
                                      in 1933 but given control of Wilson Dam, which had
                                      been built in 1920s.

 Miscellaneous                        Includes maintenance of forest, building forest roads,             0.3
                                      aid to hydroelectric power, and wildlife restoration
FARM GRANTS                                                                                            12.4
 Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA)    Payments to farmers to remove acreage from production            10.7
                                      and raise prices in 1933. Started in July 1933. After
                                      declared unconstitutional in 1935 was reenacted as
                                      means to conserve on soil and prevent erosion.


 Farm Security Administration (FSA)   Payments to help low income farmers and tenants.                   0.9
                                      Took over some of responsibilities of FERA. Began in
                                      fiscal 1935.
LOANS TOTAL                           $13.1 Billion in Nominal Dollars, Roughly 222.7 billion    Percentage
                                      in year 2013 dollars                                       of Total
                                                                                                 Loans,
                                                                                                 Fiscal
                                                                                                 Years
                                                                                                 1934-1939
 Farm Credit Administration (FCA)     Programs for loans for mortgages, production credit,              29.5
                                      emergency crop and seed loans, and farm disaster relief.
                                      Started in July 1933 and took over administration of
                                      earlier programs. The earlier programs included seed
                                      money for Federal Land Banks to offer mortgages
                                      through associations of farmers, emergency crop and
                                      feed loans provided on an ad hoc basis by Congress
                                                                                                                                    85


   Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC                      Purchase of nonfarm mortgages from lenders that were        26.1
                                                            in trouble through no fault of the borrower. The loans
                                                            were then refinanced at better terms. Loans made from
                                                            late 1933 through early 1935. The HOLC also made
                                                            loans and investments to Savings and Loans, which
                                                            accounted for 7.8 percent of its activity.

   Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC)                 Made loans to banks, industry, local governments for        21.4
                                                            relief, and to help many New Deal and later War
                                                            Programs in their early stages. Started in February
                                                            1932.

   Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC)                       Nonrecourse loans for farmers in which farmer repaid        12.6
                                                            the loan in cash when price exceeded a reserve level or
                                                            repaid the loan with the crop when the market price was
                                                            below. Started in 1933.

   Public Works Administration (PWA)                        Loans to held subnational governments build local            3.9
                                                            public works. Usually tied to PWA Nonfederal grants
                                                            as part of a package. Started in fiscal 1933.
   Farm Security Administration (FSAL)                      Loan programs for low-income farmers, started in fiscal      2.6
                                                            1936.
   Rural Electrification Administration (REA)               Loans to cooperatives to bring electric power lines to       0.9
                                                            farms, started in 1935.



Source and Notes. Fishback (2015). The Bureau of Reclamation funds were interest-free loans with long time horizons with
repayment. In most cases the repayments were delayed over extended periods and some were forgiven. As a result, the Office of
Government Reports treated them as grants rather than loans, and I follow their definition. Miscellaneous relief grants accounted for
2.1 percent of grants and included payments to state and local governments for soldier/sailor homes, grants to distribute surplus food
and commodities, the U.S. Employment Service, and Miscellaneous relief funds. Miscellaneous farm grants accounted for 0.8 percent
of grants and included grants for Soil Conservation Service, Land Utilization Programs, Agricultural Extension, Experiment Stations,
Agricultural and Mechanical Colleges, and purchases of submarginal land. Grants for vocational education and rehabilitation and
other small education grants accounted for 0.3 percent of total grant. Miscellaneous grants for the national guard, public health, and
                                                                                                                                 86


other items accounted for 0.8 percent. Nearly all of these programs were continuations of programs created before the New Deal.
Miscellaneous Loans accounting for 1.8 percent of loans included Federal Reserve Bank loans starting in 1935, U.S. Housing
Authority Loans beginning in 1939, farm tenant purchase loans starting in 1938 and Disaster Loan Corporation Loans starting in 1937.
                                                                                                                                             87


                                                             Table 3
                                  Summary of Studies of the Impact of New Deal Relief Spending

Program            Reference       Effect                            Data                  Method                      Instrument
New Deal           Fleck (1999)    Private Employment:               Separate Cross        Large number of             Voter turnout, and
Emergency Relief                   Increase of one emergency         Sections of County    correlates and instrument   series of measures of
Employment,                        relief job associated with an     Averages in 1937      for relief jobs.            loyalty to Democratic
1937, 1940                         increase in measured              and again in 1940                                 Presidential Candidates
                                   unemployed but little effect on                                                     based on vote shares
                                   private employment                                                                  from 1896 to 1928

New Deal Federal   Wallis and      Private Employment: Little        Cross Section of      In wage equation            Exclusion restrictions
Emergency Relief   Benjamin        or no effect of FERA cases per    52 cities in fiscal   correlates for aggregated   from system of
Administration     (1981)          capita spending on private        year, 1934-1935       demand and prior wages.     equations. Key
Employment, 1935                   monthly wages. Little effect                            In case equation            instruments are shift-
                                   of FERA average benefits on                             correlates and              share instruments for
                                   FERA caseloads.                                         instruments for FERA        manufacturing
                                                                                           benefit levels.             production and
                                                                                                                       fluctuations in
                                                                                                                       employment plus
                                                                                                                       specified benefit ratios


New Deal Relief    Hungerman       Private Charitable                Panel of annual       State and year fixed        Tenure of states'
Spending           and Gruber      Spending: An additional           state averages,       effects, region-specific    Congressional
                   (2008)          dollar of New Deal spending       1933 through          time trends, instruments    representative on
                                   reduced church charitable         1939.                                             Appropriations
                                   spending by about 29 percent                                                        committee and state
                                   of the maximum it could have                                                        constitutional
                                   reduced it.                                                                         restrictions on the
                                                                                                                       issuance of debt.
                                                                                                                                            88


New Deal Relief   Fishback,       Death and Birth Rates:            Panel: Annual         Controls for city           Standard Deviation of
Spending          Haines, and     About $2 million (in 2000$) in    averages for 114      characteristics, city and   Vote for President in
                  Kantor (2007)   additional relief spending        cities, 1929-1940     year fixed effects,         past presidential
                                  associated with reduction of                            instruments.                elections,
                                  one infant death, half a                                                            representation on key
                                  homicide, one suicide, 2.4                                                          House Committee in
                                  deaths from infectious disease,                                                     Congress, and
                                  one death from diarrhea. A                                                          Democratic Governor
                                  on+D8e-standard deviation
                                  increase in relief spending
                                  associated with 0.82 standard
                                  deviation rise in general
                                  fertility rate


New Deal Relief   Johnson,        Crime Rates: Ten percent          Panel: Annual         Controls for city           Extreme wetness from
Spending          Fishback, and   rise in work relief spending      averages for 81       characteristics, city and   rainfall and average
                  Kantor (2010)   associated with 1.5 percent       large cities, 1930-   year fixed effects, city-   percent vote for
                                  reduction in property crime       1940                  specific time trends, and   Democratic President
                                  rate. Smaller effect of direct                          instruments.                in county interacted
                                  relief spending.                                                                    with total federal relief
                                                                                                                      spending outside region
                                                                                                                      where city is located
                                                                                                                      and extreme wetness


New Deal Relief   Neumann,        Private Employment: Prior         Panel of monthly      Panel VAR with              N.A.
spending,         Fishback, and   to 1936 an additional private     averages from         differencing and controls
                  Kantor (2010)   job-month was created when        January 1933          for serial correlation.
                                  relief case-months rose by 8.9.   through December      No endogeneity if there
                                  After 1935 an additional WPA      1939 for 44 major     is a one-month or more
                                  job-month associated with         cities.               lag in effects of each
                                  0.66 fewer private job-months.                          variable on other
                                                                                          variables.
                                                                                                                                          89


New Deal Relief     Kitchens     Malaria Rates: WPA                 Annual panel of     Dynamic first-               Lagged value of
Spending: Works     (2013b)      programs reduced malaria           Georgia counties,   differenced panel with       correlates in manor of
Progress                         death rate by 9.1 deaths per       1932-1947.          state and year fixed         Blundell and Bond
Administration                   100,000, 44% of observed                               effects, lagged malaria      (1998)
                                 decline.                                               rate, rainfall,
                                                                                        temperature,
                                                                                        socioeconomic
                                                                                        correlates. Pre-trend
                                                                                        tests suggest no
                                                                                        endoneity bias.
New Deal Relief     Sundstrom    Labor Force Participation          Cross section of    Probit estimation of         N.A.
Spending: Works     (2001)       for Black and White                individual          probability of being in
Progress                         Women: Played a secondary          observations from   labor force as function of
Administration                   role in reducing women’s           1940 Census.        whether husband on
                                 labor force participation.                             public relief (relief
                                 Discouraged worker effect far                          effect), the area
                                 more important.                                        unemployment rate
                                                                                        (discourage worker) and
                                                                                        other correlates.
Old Age             Stoian and   Death Rates of Elderly: Old        Panel: Annual       Difference between           Workers' compensation
Assistance, 1930-   Fishback     Age Assistance did not reduce      averages for 75     eligible and non-eligible    benefit ratio from 20
1938                (2010)       elderly death rates                cities, 1930-1940   age groups with city and     years earlier
                                                                                        year fixed effects and
                                                                                        instrument for Old Age
                                                                                        Assistance variable

Old Age             Parsons      Labor Force Participation:         Panel of State      Pooled regressions with      Not used
Assistance, 1930-   (1991)       OAA benefits account for           Averages, 1930,     controls and with
1950                             about half of the decline in the   1940, and 1950      random effects.
                                 elderly work force between
                                 1930 and 1950
                                                                                                                                                90


Old Age             Balaan Cohen   Death Rates of Elderly: Old        Panel: Annual         State and year fixed         Instrument based on
Assistance, 1934-   (2009)         Age Assistance reduced             Averages for 48       effects and state specific   state rules and
1955                               several types of mortality after   states, 1934-1955;    time trends with             simulated income for
                                   1940 but not before.               1937-1955; 1940-      instrument for Old-Age       the elderly.
                                                                      1955                  Assistance variable, plus
                                                                                            regression to show no
                                                                                            effects for people not
                                                                                            eligible for program

Old Age             Costa (1999)   Family Structure: Elderly          Pooled Cross-         Controls for individual      Not used
Assistance, 1940                   women more likely to live on       Sections of           characteristics, state and
and 1950                           own.                               Different             region fixed or random
                                                                      Individuals from      effects, differencing
                                                                      Census, 1940 and      between eligible and
                                                                      1950                  noneligible populations.

Old Age             Friedberg      Labor Force Participation:         Pooled Cross-         Probit with controls for     Not used
Assistance, 1940    (1999)         Higher Old Age Assistance          Sections of           individual characteristics
and 1950                           Benefits lowered Labor Force       Different             and state economic
                                   Participation Among the            Individuals from      conditions with state and
                                   Elderly                            Census, 1940 and      year fixed effects.
                                                                      1950                  Additional regressions to
                                                                                            show no effect for
                                                                                            people not eligible for
                                                                                            program
Relief Spending     Hill (2015)    Marriage rates lower in areas      Individuals in 1940   Cross-sectional              Not used
                                   with more WPA spending per         Census Sample
                                   capita                             with WPA
                                                                      spending by 460
                                                                      State Economic
                                                                      Areas
                                                                                                                                             91


Relief Spending,   Benjamin and   Private Employment: An             Panel of annual        Pooled regressions with     Exclusion restrictions
1930s              Matthews       additional New Deal relief job     state averages,        controls and instruments    from system of
                   (1992)         crowded out about one-third of     1932 through 1939                                  equations. Key
                                  a private job in the First New                                                        instruments are shift-
                                  Deal through 1935 and about                                                           share output
                                  nine/tenths of a private job in                                                       instrument, federal tax
                                  the second new deal.                                                                  revenue.

Unemployment       Balkan         Wages: Introduction of             Unbalanced panel       Correlates and state and    Not used
Insurance, 1930s   (1998)         Unemployment Insurance in          of hourly earnings     year fixed effects.
                                  late 1930s had little impact on    for 72 industries in   Lagged measure of UI
                                  wages                              48 states for years    maximum paid for
                                                                     1933, 1935, 1937,      maximum duration.
                                                                     and 1939

Veterans' Bonus    Hausman        Purchases: Veterans' Bonus         Cross-Section of       Difference-in-Difference    Not used.
                   (2015)         increased probability of car       Households from        with multiple correlates.
                                  purchase by 22 percentage          1935-1936
                                  points for individuals, an extra   Consumer Survey;
                                  veteran associated with 0.3        cross-section of
                                  more car sales in 1936 and         cities and states.
                                  increase in $100 of the value
                                  of building permits.
                                                                                                                                         92


                                                           Table 4
                       Summary of Studies of the Impact of New Deal Public Works and Relief Spending

Program            Reference       Effect                           Data                  Method                    Instrument
Public Works and   Fishback and    Per Capita Income and            Panel for 48 States   State and Year Fixed      Shift-Share instrument
Relief Grants      Kachanovskaya   Automobiles: Grant dollar        from 1930 through     Effects and Extreme       using state shares from
                   (2015)          raises income by 0.25 to 1.1     1940                  Weather Correlates and    1920s for 8 programs
                                   dollars, value of car                                  instrumental variables;   and national totals well
                                   registrations by 14 cents.                             some estimates with       outside region
                                                                                          state time trends

Public Works and   Fishback and  Nonfarm Private                    Panel for 48 States   State and Year Fixed      Shift-Share instrument
Relief Grants      Kachanovskaya Employment: Elasticities           from 1930 through     Effects and Extreme       using state shares from
                   (2015)        ranging from -0.046 to 0.016.      1940                  Weather Correlates and    1920s for 8 programs
                                                                                          instrumental variables;   and national totals well
                                                                                          some estimates with       outside region
                                                                                          state time trends

Public Works and   Fishback,       Retail Sales: Dollar increase    Cross-section of      Large number of           Standard Deviation of
Relief Spending    Horrace, and    of public works and relief       Growth rates for      correlates and            Democratic Voting,
                   Kantor (2005)   spending per capita associated   U.S. Counties,        instrument for public     1896-1928; voter
                                   with rise in retail sales per    1929-1939, 1929-      works and relief.         turnout 1928, county
                                   capita of roughly 40 cents.      1935, 1933-1939                                 land area; latitude;
                                                                                                                    longitude; church
                                                                                                                    membership 1926
                                                                                                                                             93


Public Works and   Fishback,        Net Migration: A one-             Cross-section of      Large number of             Key Instruments for
Relief Spending    Horrace, and     standard deviation Increase in    county averages       correlates and              Public Works and
                   Kantor (2006)    public works and relief           during 1930s.         instrument for public       Relief were Standard
                                    spending leads to a 0.54                                works and relief and        Deviation of Vote for
                                    increase in net migration.                              AAA farm grants.            President in past
                                                                                                                        presidential elections;
                                                                                                                        presence of large
                                                                                                                        rivers; also instruments
                                                                                                                        for AAA grants


Public Works and   Vellore (2014)   Outcomes Later in Life.           Panel: Individual     State of birth and          Not used
Relief Spending                     Ameliorated negative effects      census data for       current state fixed
                                    of Dust Bowl later in life,       1980, 1990, and       effects, and census year
                                    including reducing the            2000 for people       fixed effects.
                                    probability that people born in   who were children
                                    Dust Bowl states had              in the 1930s.
                                    disabilities and raising
                                    likelihood of education
                                    completion.
Public Housing     Kollman          Property Values rose within       Real property         Hedonic pricing model       Not used.
Projects           (2013)           a mile radius of new public       inventories in 1934   with spatial interactions
                                    housing projects between          and census tract      with controls for
                                    1934 and 1940. Impact on          information in        numerous correlates.
                                    median rents is mixed.            1930 and 1940
                                                                      from Chicago,
                                                                      Washington,
                                                                      Philadelphia, New
                                                                      York, Boston and
                                                                      Louisville.
                                                                                                                                               94


TVA Dams           Kitchens         Malaria: TVA reservoirs are       County panel from     Count and Year fixed          Not used
                   (2012)           associated with increase in       Alabama and           effects, controls for anti-
                                    malaria rates of 40 to 50         Tennessee with        malaria efforts by WPA
                                    percent relative to the mean.     annual data for the   and county health
                                    TVA anti-malaria programs         1914 through 1950     boards. Placebo testing
                                    had some success reducing                               with measles rates.
                                    rate.

TVA Electric       Kitchens         Economic Activity: No             Panel of              County and Year fixed         Distance from Dam
Power              (2014)           positive and statistically        Southeastern          effects, state-year fixed     Locations and Timing
                                    significant effects of TVA        Counties from         effects, variety of           based on Army Corps
                                    Electrification on retail sales   1929 to 1955          correlates, pre-treatment     of Engineers' Plans in
                                    per capita, farm output, farm                           controls interacted with      1920s
                                    value, productivity,                                    year fixed effects; and
                                    manufacturing value added, or                           instrumental variables;
                                    number of manufacturing                                 also matching estimator
                                    employees.                                              as in Kline and Moretti


TVA Subsidies      Kline and        Manufacturing and                 Panel of TVA          Matching estimators           For productivity study,
Between 1940 and   Moretti (2013)   agricultural employment,          counties and          based on pre-TVA              two decade lags in
1960                                manufacturing productivity:       similar counties      county characteristics        manufacturing
                                    During subsidy period 1940-       from 1940 to 2000.    and potential inclusion       employment.
                                    1960 employment in                                      in other TVA-like
                                    manufacturing and                                       projects. Also IV when
                                    agricultural rose 10 percent                            measuring productivity
                                    more in TVA service region.                             effects.
                                    After 1960 agricultural
                                    employment down 16 percent,
                                    manufacturing employment
                                    up 3.6 percent. No effects on
                                    wages, small effects on land
                                    and housing value.
                                    Substantial increase in
                                    manufacturing productivity.
                                                                                                                                  95




                                                              Table 5
                    Summary of Studies of the Impact of President’s Reemployment Agreements and NRA Codes
Program             Reference       Effect                            Data                 Method                    Instrument
President's         Taylor (2011)   Labor Market. PRA                 Monthly panel for    Industry fixed effects,   Not used
Remployment                         associated with no change in      up to 66 industry,   controls for aggregate
Agreements                          total hours, 3.3 percent higher   1927 to 1937.        fiscal policy and
                                    employment, offsetting drop in                         monetary policy.
                                    weekly hours, 18 percent
                                    higher hourly earnings and -2
                                    percent fewer hours in low
                                    wage industries, 5 percent
                                    higher hourly earnings and -6
                                    percent fewer hours in
                                    medium wage industries, 2
                                    percent higher hourly earnings
                                    in high wage industries and -
                                    6.5 percent fewer weekly
                                    hours.


National Recovery   Taylor (2011)   Labor Market. NRA codes           Monthly panel for    Industry fixed effects,   Not used
Administration                      associated with -0.4 percent      up to 66 industry,   controls for aggregate
Codes                               less employment, -1.2 percent     1927 to 1937.        fiscal policy and
                                    less total hours, -1.4 percent                         monetary policy.
                                    less output, 1.5 percent higher
                                    hourly earnings and -2 percent
                                    fewer weekly hours in low
                                    wage industries; no change in
                                    weekly earnings and -2
                                    percent fewer weekly hours in
                                    both mid- and high-wage
                                    industries.
                                                                                                                                96


President's         Taylor and   Labor Market. PRA codes            Monthly panel for   Panel Vector                 Not used
Reemployment        Neumann      associated with 7 percent          11 industries,      autoregressive model
Agreements          (2013)       lower output; -15 percent          1923-1939           using differences or
                                 lower weekly hours and 12                              levels with fixed effects.
                                 percent higher real hourly
                                 earnings in low wage
                                 industries; -4 percent lower
                                 weekly hours and 3 percent
                                 higher hourly earnings in high
                                 wage industries.

National Recovery   Taylor and   Labor Market. NRA codes            Monthly panel for   Panel Vector                 Not used
Administration      Neumann      associated with 2 percent drop     11 industries,      autoregressive model
Codes               (2013)       in employment; 6.6 percent         1923-1939           using differences or
                                 rise in weekly hours and -8.4                          levels with fixed effects.
                                 percent drop in real hourly
                                 earnings in low wage
                                 industries; -1.6 percent drop in
                                 weekly hours and 0.08% rise
                                 in real hourly earnings in high
                                 wage industries.
                                                                                                                                           97


                                                           Table 6
                                        Summary of Studies of the Impact of Farm Grants

Program           Reference        Effect                            Data                 Method                       Instrument
AAA Farm Grants   Sorensen,        Tractors: Elasticity of tractor   County panel 1929    First-difference with        House Representation
                  Fishback,        usage with respect to AAA         to 1939 throughout   state fixed effects,         on Agriculture
                  Kantor (2008)    grants of statistically           the U.S.             multiple correlates, prior   Committee in 1933,
                                   insignificant 0.19 to                                  growth rate, and             longitude as measure of
                                   statistically significant 0.77.                        instrumental variables.      frontier; and the
                                                                                                                       presence of major
                                                                                                                       rivers.

AAA Farm Grants   Barreca,         Malaria: $20 increase in          Quasi-first          State fixed effects and      Not used
                  Fishback, and    AAA grants per capita             difference of        placebo tests.
                  Kantor (2012)    associated with 10 percent of     malaria rates for
                                   decline in malaria rates in the   1930 and 1940
                                   period. Part of the drop          counties in the
                                   association with out-migration    South

AAA Farm Grants   Depew,           Number of tenants and             Change between       Difference and state         Instrument based on
                  Fishback, and    croppers: Each 10 percent         1930 and 1935 for    fixed effects, multiple      AAA rules on output,
                  Rhode (2013)     increase in AAA grants per        cotton counties in   correlates, instrument       using lagged values
                                   capita displaced 1.4 to 1.9%      South                                             from 1924
                                   of black tenants and share
                                   croppers and white share
                                   croppers

AAA Farm Grants   Whatley (1983)   Number of tenants and             Totals for Cotton    Predictions from             N.A.
                                   croppers. Predicted to            South                Simulation
                                   displace 33 percent of tenants.
                                                                                                                                             98


AAA Farm Grants   Fishback and  Per Capita Income and                   Panel for 48 States   State and Year Fixed      Instrument based on
                  Kachanovskaya Automobiles: Grant dollar               from 1930 through     Effects and Extreme       AAA rules on output
                  (2015)        raises income by at most 14             1940                  Weather Correlates and    combined with shift-
                                cents, some negative effects                                  instrumental variables;   share estimates of
                                and reduces car registrations.                                some estimates with       output lagged multiple
                                                                                              state time trends         years

AAA Farm Grants   Fishback and  Nonfarm Private                         Panel for 48 States   State and Year Fixed      Instrument based on
                  Kachanovskaya Employment: Positive                    from 1930 through     Effects and Extreme       AAA rules on output
                  (2015)        elasticity of 0.004 to 0.01             1940                  Weather Correlates and    combined with shift-
                                                                                              instrumental variables;   share estimates of
                                                                                              some estimates with       output lagged multiple
                                                                                              state time trends         years

AAA Farm Grants   Fishback,        Retail Sales: Dollar increase        Cross-section of      Large number of           Standard Deviation of
                  Horrace, and     of AAA spending associated           Growth rates for      correlates and            Democratic Voting,
                  Kantor (2005)    with a statistically                 U.S. Counties,        instrument for public     1896-1928; voter
                                   insignificant fall in retail sales   1929-1939, 1929-      works and relief.         turnout 1928, county
                                   per capita of 4 cents.               1935, 1933-1939                                 land area; latitude;
                                                                                                                        longitude; church
                                                                                                                        membership 1926

AAA Farm Grants   Fishback,        Net Migration: A one-                Cross-section of      Large number of           Key Instruments for
                  Horrace, and     standard deviation increase in       county averages       correlates and            AAA grants were
                  Kantor (2006)    AAA farm payments to take            during 1930s.         instrument for public     average farm size;
                                   land out of production led to a                            works and relief and      quality of soil (average
                                   0.14 standard deviaiton                                    AAA farm grants.          water capacity); also
                                   reduction in net migration.                                                          instruments for public
                                                                                                                        works and relief
                                                                                                                                              99


AAA Farm Grants     Fishback,         Farm Wages and Farm              Panel of State       Multiple correlates, state   Based on AAA
                    Haines, and       Workers: Typical AAA             averages, 1923 to    and year fixed effects       distribution rules, used
                    Rhode (2012)      payments associated with         1939                 and instrumental             weighted average of
                                      decline in farm population of                         variables                    output from two to six
                                      14 percent and a rise in farm                                                      years earlier for all
                                      wage of 9 percent.                                                                 crops that eventually
                                                                                                                         became AAA crops.
                                                                                                                         Weights based on
                                                                                                                         national prices in 1910-
                                                                                                                         1914.


Farm Conservation   Hansen and        Future Dust Bowl:                County level         A variety of correlates      Not used
Policies            Libecap (2004)    Conservation programs helped     information in
                                      stop drought, high               Plains States in
                                      temperatures, and high winds     1930s and 1970s
                                      from created a 1970s version
                                      of the Dust Bowl.




                                                              Table 7
                                       Summary of Studies of the Impact of Lending Programs
Program             Reference        Effect                            Data                 Method                       Instrument
Farm Loan           Sorensen,        Tractors: Elasticity of tractor   County panel 1929    First-difference with        House Representation
Programs            Fishback, and    usage with respect to Farm        to 1939 throughout   state fixed effects,         on Agriculture
                    Kantor (2008)    Loans of 0.34 to 0.49.            the U.S.             multiple correlates, prior   Committee in 1933,
                                                                                            growth rate, and             longitude as measure of
                                                                                            instrumental variables.      frontier; and the
                                                                                                                         presence of major
                                                                                                                         rivers.
                                                                                                                                          100


Rural              Kitchens and    Rural Outcomes: More REA          First-differences    First differences and       Not used
Electrification    Fishback        loan funds associated with rise   for 1930 and 1940    large number of
Administration     (2015)          in farm output per acre and per   for rural counties   correlates. Placebo tests
Loans                              farm, increases in machinery      in nonwestern        show no relationship of
                                   per farm, less work off the       areas;               REA to changes in
                                   farm by farmers, and lower                             variables in the 1920s.
                                   infant mortality

Farm Credit        Alston and      Farm Failures: Elasticity of      Panel of States,     Pooled regression with      Exclusion restrictions
Administration     Rucker (1987)   farm failures with respect of     1929-1939            variety of correlates.      in system of equations.
Loans                              federal lending was -0.488.                            Two-stage least squares.    Key instruments
                                   State mortgage moratoria                                                           Dummy for Roosevelt
                                   reduced farm failure rates.                                                        in Office and
                                   AAA indirectly reduced farm                                                        interaction of dummy
                                   failure rates.                                                                     with failure rate

State Mortgage     Alston and      Farm Failures: State              Panel of States,     Pooled regression with      Exclusion restrictions
Moratoria          Rucker (1987)   Moratoria reduced farm            1929-1939            variety of correlates.      in system of equations.
                                   failures.C26                                           Two-stage least squares.    Key instruments
                                                                                                                      Dummy for Roosevelt
                                                                                                                      in Office and
                                                                                                                      interaction of dummy
                                                                                                                      with failure rate
State Mortgage     Alston (1984)   Loans and Interest Rates:         Panel of States,     First differences with      Not used
Moratoria                          Moratoria contributed to          1932 and 1934        range of corelates
                                   higher interest rates and
                                   reduction in number of private
                                   loans made.
RFC Bank Loans     Mason           Bank Failure Rate and             Panel of 357         Survival model with         Not used
and Purchases of   (2001a)         Growth of Loans: Preferred        Chicago area         numerous controls for
Preferred Stock                    Stock Assistance improved         banks.               features of balance
                                   survival rate of banks, RFC                            sheet, measures of local
                                   loans did not.                                         economy.
                                                                                                                                              101


RFC Bank Loans     Calomiris, e.t   Bank Failure Rate and              Data on Michigan       Numerous controls for       Instruments based on
and Purchases of   al. (2013)       Growth of Loans: One               Banks, 1930-1936       features of balance         bank correspondence
Preferred Stock                     percent earlier use of Preferred                          sheet, measures of local    networks
                                    Stock Assistance increased                                economy with
                                    time to failure by 2 percent.                             instrumental variables.
                                    One percent rise in assistance
                                    increased loan activity by 1
                                    percent.

RFC Bank Loans     Vossmeyer        Bank Loan Activity in 1935:        Cross-section of all   Numerous controls for       Uses Bayesian Methods
and Purchases of   (2014)           Combined effect of $100 in         banks from             features of balance         to determine exclusion
Preferred Stock                     RFC loans and stock                Alabama,               sheet, measures of local    restrictions in selection
                                    purchases increases loan           Arkansas,              economy.                    model.
                                    activity n 1935 by $57.            Michigan,
                                                                       Mississippi, and
                                                                       Tennessee present
                                                                       in 1932.
RFC Loans to       Mason and        Railroad Maintenance and           Panel of annual        Controls and firm and       Not used
Railroads          Schiffman        Investment: Railroads going        railroads, 1932-       year fixed effects.
                   (2004)           through bankruptcy increased       1937
                                    spending on maintenance-of-
                                    way 8% more than railroads
                                    receiving RFC loans, 10%
                                    more on equipment
                                    maintanences, and raised
                                    employment by 2 percent
                                    more.
Home Owners'       Courtemanche Home Ownership and                     County panel from      Controls and county first   Distance from actual
Loan Corporation   and Snowden Housing Values: One                     1930 and 1940          differences with state      locations of HOLC
                   (2011)       standard deviation increase in         with many              fixed effects and           Offices with robustness
                                HOLC loans raised home                 correlates, state      instrumental variables.     tests for different
                                value 19-22 percent and home           effects, and                                       combinations
                                ownership rate by 3.6-3.9              instrument
                                percent.
                                                                                                                                      102


Home Owners'       Fishback, et.    Home Ownership, Housing        County panel from   First Difference with      Distance from
Loan Corporation   al. (2011) and   Values, Rents: In counties     1930 and 1940.      controls for large         simulated locations for
                   Fishback,        with fewer than 50,000 people,                     numbers of correlates,     HOLC offices.
                   Rose, and        prevented 67 percent of                            state fixed effects, and
                   Snowden          decline in home values that                        instrumental variables.
                   (2013)           would have occurred without
                                    HOLC by end of decade;
                                    helped raise home ownership
                                    rate by 13 percent.
