                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            INTERMEDIARY ASSET PRICING:
                       NEW EVIDENCE FROM MANY ASSET CLASSES

                                               Zhiguo He
                                              Bryan Kelly
                                              Asaf Manela

                                         Working Paper 21920
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21920


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Ian Dew-Becker, Valentin Haddad, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Alan
Moreira, Tyler Muir, Lasse Pedersen, Alexi Savov, Rob Vishny, seminar participants at Stanford University,
Penn State University, University of Iowa, Emory University, London School of Economics, London
Business School, University of Houston, University of Washington, University of Oklahoma, Washington
University, Gerzensee Summer School 2015, CITE 2015, NBER AP 2015, and Chicago Booth Asset
Pricing Conference 2015 for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Zhiguo He, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence from Many Asset Classes
Zhiguo He, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela
NBER Working Paper No. 21920
January 2016
JEL No. G01,G12,G21,G24

                                             ABSTRACT

We find that shocks to the equity capital ratio of financial intermediaries—Primary Dealer counterparties
of the New York Federal Reserve—possess significant explanatory power for crosssectional variation
in expected returns. This is true not only for commonly studied equity and government bond market
portfolios, but also for other more sophisticated asset classes such as corporate and sovereign bonds,
derivatives, commodities, and currencies. Our intermediary capital risk factor is strongly pro-cyclical,
implying counter-cyclical intermediary leverage. The price of risk for intermediary capital shocks is
consistently positive and of similar magnitude when estimated separately for individual asset classes,
suggesting that financial intermediaries are marginal investors in many markets and hence key to
understanding asset prices.


Zhiguo He                                           Asaf Manela
University of Chicago                               Washington University in St. Louis,
Booth School of Business                            Olin Business School,
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue                             Campus Box 1133
Chicago, IL 60637                                   One Brookings Drive
and NBER                                            St. Louis, MO 63130
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu                          amanela@wustl.edu

Bryan Kelly
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bryan.kelly@chicagobooth.edu
1        Introduction

Intermediary asset pricing theories offer a new perspective for understanding risk premia. These

theories are predicated on the fact that financial intermediaries are in the advantageous position of

trading almost all asset classes, anytime and everywhere. For instance, Siriwardane (2015) shows

that in 2011 about 50% of total net Credit Derivative Swaps (CDS) protection in U.S. was sold

by the top five dealers.1 In the corporate bond market, more than 95% of bonds are traded in

over-the-counter markets, in which dealers are necessarily involved.2 It is likely that intermediaries

are marginal investors in many asset markets, and that their marginal value of wealth is a plausible

pricing kernel for a broad cross-section of securities.

        This view stands in contrast to standard consumption-based models in which the focal pricing

kernel is that of the household (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane (1999); Bansal and Yaron (2004)).

Households’ comparative lack of expertise in trading assets, especially sophisticated ones like deriva-

tives or commodities, casts doubt on the viability of household marginal utility as a unified model

for jointly pricing the wide array of traded assets in the economy.3 Our hypothesis, inspired by

intermediary asset pricing theory, is that the classic risk-return asset pricing trade-off is more

likely to hold once we replace the first-order condition of unsophisticated households with that of

sophisticated intermediaries.

        The central challenges facing this hypothesis are (i) how to identify a set of financial interme-

diaries that are marginal investors in many markets, and (ii) how to measure their marginal utility

of wealth in order to construct the pricing kernel. For the first choice, we focus on primary dealers

who serve as counterparties of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (“NY Fed” henceforth) in

its implementation of monetary policy. Primary dealers are large and sophisticated financial in-

stitutions that operate in virtually the entire universe of capital markets, and include the likes of

Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan, and Deutsche Bank.4

        Our second choice is guided by the recent intermediary asset pricing models of He and Kr-
    1
    The set of all dealers are responsible for 80% of the net CDS sales in 2011. On the buy side, all dealers comprise
55% of net CDS purchases, and the top five dealers account for 25% of CDS purchases.
  2
    These trades are reported in the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) database. According to
Edwards et al. (2007), fewer than 5% of bonds are listed on the NYSE, and trades occuring via NYSE’s Automated
Bond System (ABS) are almost all from small retail investors. In contrast, only 2% of corporate bonds trades in
TRACE are from retail investors.
  3
    Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) and Calvet et al. (2007) document limited stock market participation by households.
  4
    Primary dealers as of 2014 are listed in Table 1, and the list of all primary dealers since 1960 is in Table A.1.


                                                          1
ishnamurthy (2012, 2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014). In these models, which follow

the tradition of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), the intermediary

sector’s net worth (or, equivalently, its equity capital ratio) is the key determinant of its marginal

value of wealth. When the intermediary experiences a negative shock to its equity capital, say due

to an unexpected drop in the securitized mortgage market, its risk bearing capacity is impaired

and its utility from an extra dollar of equity capital rises.

   Prompted by these theories, in Section 2 we propose a model for the intermediary pricing

kernel that is composed of two-factors: the excess return on aggregate wealth, and the shock to

intermediaries’ (equity) capital ratio. The return on aggregate wealth captures the usual TFP-style

persistent technology shock that drives general economic growth. Innovations to the intermediary

capital ratio capture financial shocks that affect the soundness of the financial intermediary sector,

arising for example from shocks to agency/contracting frictions, changes in regulation, or large

abnormal gains/losses in parts of an intermediary’s portfolio. We show how this pricing kernel

arises in the theoretical framework of He and Krishnamurthy (2012).

   We construct the aggregate capital ratio for the intermediary sector by matching the New York

Fed’s primary dealer list with CRSP/Compustat and Datastream data on their publicly traded

holding companies (see Section 3). We define the intermediary capital ratio, denoted ηt , as the

aggregate value of market equity divided by aggregate market equity plus aggregate book debt of

primary dealers active in quarter t

                                           P
                                         i Market Equityi,t
                            ηt = P                                 .
                                  i Market Equityi,t + Book Debti,t


   Our main empirical result is that assets’ exposure to intermediary capital ratio shocks (in-

novations in ηt ) possess a strong and consistent ability to explain cross-sectional differences in

average returns for assets in seven different markets, including equities, US government and corpo-

rate bonds, foreign sovereign bonds, options, credit default swaps (CDS), commodities, and foreign

exchange (FX).

   We perform cross-sectional asset pricing tests both independently within each asset class, as

well as jointly using all asset classes. By comparing the risk price on intermediary capital shocks

estimated from different sets of test assets, we can evaluate the model assumptions that (i) inter-


                                                   2
mediaries are marginal pricers in many markets and (ii) their equity capital ratio is a sensible proxy

for their marginal value of wealth. In particular, if we find large disparities in intermediary capital

risk prices across markets, it suggests that (i) and/or (ii) are violated.

    To the contrary, we estimate significantly positive prices of risk on the intermediary capital

factor in all asset classes, and find that all estimates have similar magnitudes, consistent with the

view that primary dealers are marginal investors in all of these markets. Furthermore, we show

in placebo tests that equity capital ratios of other sectors do not exhibit this property. When we

replace primary dealers by non-primary dealers (who tend to be smaller, standalone broker-dealers

with little activity in derivatives markets) or non-financial firms, we find large discrepancies in risk

prices estimated from different asset classes that are largely insignificant and often have conflicting

signs.

    Our estimates for the price of risk on intermediary capital shocks carry two important economic

implications. First, positivity of the estimated risk price means that assets that pay more in states

of the world with low intermediary capital ratio (that is, assets with low betas on ηt shocks)

also have lower expected returns in equilibrium. This implies that low capital-risk-beta assets are

viewed as valuable hedges by marginal investors or, in other words, that primary dealers have

high marginal value of wealth when their capital ratio is low. This conclusion accords with ample

empirical evidence that institutional investors become distressed and place higher marginal value

on a dollar when their capital is impaired.5 Our risk price estimates also suggest that intermediary

(primary dealer) equity capital ratios are pro-cyclical, or equivalently, that intermediary leverage

is counter-cyclical.

    The second economic implication arises from the similarity in magnitudes of capital ratio risk

prices estimated from different asset classes. Our pricing kernel is a single aggregate capital ratio

(as opposed to heterogeneous ratios among intermediaries), and is based on the assumption that one

set of intermediaries is marginal in all classes.6 This assumption also predicts that the estimated
    5
      Examples include Froot and O’Connell (1999), Gabaix et al. (2007), Mitchell et al. (2007), Mitchell and Pulvino
(2009), and Siriwardane (2015), among others.
    6
      Our tests are also potentially informative about the assumption of homogeneity among intermediaries, which
is implicit in essentially all intermediary asset pricing models. If intermediaries with heterogeneous pricing kernels
specialize in specific asset classes, the risk prices identified in different markets may differ. We view this as a plausible
explanation for the small discrepancy of risk prices that we estimate from different markets, but our empirical
approach is not designed to test this hypothesis. Our tests cannot differentiate between the same intermediaries
being marginal in all asset classes, versus different intermediaries marginal in each asset class but all having highly
correlated capital ratios.


                                                             3
price of capital ratio risk should be the same in all asset classes. Our cross-asset empirical results

are not far from this theoretical prediction. The risk price estimated jointly from all asset classes

is 9% per quarter. When we instead estimate the risk price independently from each asset class,

we find that five of the seven estimates are between 7% and 11%. For options and FX portfolios,

the estimated risk prices are 22% and 19%, respectively. While we reject the null of 0% in all

seven markets,7 we cannot reject the null of 9% in any individual market. This fact is surprising

and quite striking. One might expect that trading in different asset classes involves substantially

different knowledge, expertise, and terminology; and yet all of these markets produce estimated

prices of intermediary capital risk that are statistically indistinguishable.

      An important precursor to our paper is Adrian et al. (2014a) (henceforth AEM), which is the

first paper to unite the intermediary-based paradigm with mainstream empirical asset pricing.

Our identification of a positive price for exposure to primary dealer capital ratio shocks contrasts

with AEM, who estimate a positive price for broker-dealer leverage shocks. These two results are

contradictory because leverage, defined as assets over equity, is just the reciprocal of the equity

capital ratio. That is, AEM find pro-cyclical broker-dealer leverage while our paper suggests that

the leverage of primary dealers is counter-cyclical.

      One key piece of evidence supports our choice of proxy for the intermediary pricing kernel

compared to AEM. The results of AEM are based on test portfolios comprised of stocks and

government bonds. We confirm their main findings that the AEM leverage factor is especially

powerful for describing the cross section of stock and bond returns. But when we perform our test

pooling all seven asset classes and replace our variable with the AEM factor, the implied price of

AEM leverage risk becomes insignificant. When estimated independently by asset class, the AEM

risk price changes sign for options, CDS, and FX markets, and for CDS the opposite-sign estimate

is statistically significant.

      In Section 4, we explore potential explanations for conflicting results in our analysis versus AEM.

Our papers differ in the definition of financial intermediaries and in data sources. AEM focus on

the definition of the security broker-dealer sector and associated book leverage ratios provided in

the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds. Our definition instead uses New York Fed primary dealers and
  7
    For foreign sovereign bonds, we find a GMM t-statistic of 1.66 on the intermediary capital factor, which is
significant at the 10% level. In all other markets, the estimate is significant at the 5% level or better.



                                                      4
data on their holding companies from CRSP/Compustat and Datastream to construct the market

equity capital ratio.

       We find little evidence that the accounting treatment of book versus market leverage drives

these differences.8 Rather, we argue that the discrepancy in our findings is most likely due to com-

positional differences in our data. Flow of Funds data only contains information about standalone

US broker-dealers and broker-dealer subsidiaries of conglomerates. Our equity capital ratio instead

relies on data at the holding company level. The distinction between these two approaches rests

on the role of internal capital markets within financial holding companies. Consider, for example,

our treatment of JP Morgan Securities LLC, which is one of the largest broker-dealers in the world

and a wholly-owned subsidiary of JP Morgan Chase & Co. Flow of Funds data would only reflect

the financial health of the subsidiary. If the subsidiary suffers a large trading loss relative to the

size of the subsidiary, it will be reflected as broker-dealer financial distress in the Flow of Funds.

However, if other businesses of the JP Morgan holding company are thriving, financial distress

in the broker-dealer subsidiary may be largely mitigated thanks to its access to internal capital

markets. On the other hand, a sufficiently bad shock in one of the holding company’s non-dealer

business (for example in its large mortgage lending activities) can potentially drive the holding

company into distress. If losses are severe enough to impair internal capital flow, it will reduce

risk bearing capacity in the broker-dealer arm even though the shock originated elsewhere and the

dealer’s balance-sheet does not reflect ill health.

       In short, if internal capital markets are important sources of funds for broker-dealer subsidiaries,

then financial soundness of the holding company may be a superior proxy for the intermediary sector

pricing kernel. While it is generally difficult to measure capital flows within financial conglomerates,

we provide anecdotal evidence from the bankruptcies of Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1990 and

Lehman Brothers in 2008. In these two cases, postmortem analysis by bank regulators revealed

large capital transfers between broker-dealer holding companies, in support of the idea that holding

company leverage is the economically important one.

       Section 5 provides additional results and a battery of robustness tests. In single factor models

without the market factor, our intermediary capital ratio continues to demonstrate large explana-
   8
    We discuss this possibility in Section 4. Because book assets of broker-dealers are marked-to-market, the wedge
between their book and market values is quite small. We reinforce this view empirically by showing that book leverage
and market leverage in our primary dealer sample have a strong positive correlation.


                                                         5
tory power for differences in average returns within sophisticated asset classes. We show that our

results are qualitatively similar in the pre-crisis sample period 1970Q1-2006Q4, in the more recent

1990Q1-2012Q4 sample period, and when we conduct our tests at the monthly rather than quar-

terly frequency. Lastly, we report time series evidence that the intermediary capital ratio predicts

future returns in five of the seven asset classes we study.


Related Literature

Until recently, the role of financial institutions in determining equilibrium asset prices has been

under-appreciated by the finance literature (early contributions include Shleifer and Vishny, 1992,

1997; Allen, 2001). Our paper belongs to a burgeoning literature on intermediary asset pricing,

which highlights the pricing kernel of financial intermediaries, rather than that of households, in

explaining the pricing behavior of sophisticated financial assets (He and Krishnamurthy, 2012,

2013; Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2014)). The list of theory contributions includes Allen and Gale

(1994), Basak and Cuoco (1998), Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Xiong (2001), Kyle and Xiong (2001),

Vayanos (2004), Pavlova and Rigobon (2007), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Duffie (2010),

Adrian and Shin (2010), Garleanu and Pederson (2011), Adrian and Boyarchenko (2012), Basak

and Pavlova (2013), Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), among others. Kondor and Vayanos (2015) study

equilibrium asset pricing with multiple assets when the arbitrage capital is scarce, which is more

in line with our cross-sectional asset pricing tests.

       AEM is the first paper to provide systematic empirical support for intermediary asset pricing

theory in equity and bond markets, using classic cross-sectional pricing tests. Adrian et al. (2014b)

extends the AEM evidence by demonstrating that broker-dealer leverage has significant time-series

forecasting power for returns on stocks and bonds. Haddad and Sraer (2015) argue that banks are

central in understanding interest rate risk and document that banks’ exposure to fluctuations in

interest rates forecasts excess Treasury bond returns.

       Equity and bond markets see greater direct participation by households. Participation of house-

holds in less sophisticated markets in no way precludes financial intermediaries from also being

marginal, so that the intermediary kernel may also price assets in these markets as well.9 In more
   9
    Conceptually, if households are marginal investors in equity and bond markets and households’ pricing kernel
is accurately measured, it should also succeed in pricing the cross section of equities and bonds, regardless of the
presence of intermediaries as additional marginal traders in the market. The daunting task facing the household view


                                                         6
specialized asset classes, on the other hand, trading is dominated by intermediaries. Past work has

shown direct evidence linking the behavior of intermediary capital to asset prices. Early work by

Froot and O’Connell (1999) studies the effects of slow-moving intermediary capital in the catas-

trophe insurance market. Gabaix et al. (2007) study the mortgage-backed securities market, and

present evidence that the marginal investor pricing these assets is a specialized intermediary rather

than a CAPM-type representative household. Bates (2003); Garleanu et al. (2009) present similar

evidence for index options. Mitchell et al. (2007) provide a range of pricing distortions in certain

asset markets—including convertible bond arbitrage and merger arbitrage—when arbitrageurs that

specialize in these assets suffer significant losses in capital. Mitchell and Pulvino (2009) offer further

evidence on the divergent behavior of the bond-CDS basis during the 2008 financial crisis. Siriwar-

dane (2015) demonstrates the effect of intermediary capital losses on CDS spreads. In exchange

rate literature, Adrian et al. (2009), Adrian et al. (2011), and Hong and Yogo (2012) show that

financier’s positions are useful in predicting expected currency returns, a fact that is consistent

with the broad view proposed by our paper. Perhaps the most important contribution of our paper

is to formally and simultaneously test the intermediary model in a wide range of asset classes where

we expect intermediaries to matter most and households to matter least.



2     Intermediary capital risk in a two-factor asset pricing model

We propose a two-factor model in which the intermediary’s equity capital ratio enters the pricing

kernel alongside aggregate wealth. Section 2.1 provides an argument for why this specification

captures the intermediary’s marginal value of wealth and thus why it prices all asset classes in which

the intermediary participates as a marginal investor. There are various economic mechanisms for

why and how the intermediary’s capital ratio affects its marginal value of wealth, and Section 2.2

lays out one such theory based on He and Krishnamurthy (2012).


2.1    Intermediary capital ratio and pricing kernel

Traditional consumption-based asset pricing models (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999; Bansal and

Yaron, 2004) are cast in a complete market where the marginal investor is a consumer household.
is constructing a pricing kernel from relatively poor quality household data.



                                                          7
These models implicitly view intermediation as a pure pass through, and asset markets are studied

as direct interactions among households. By contrast, intermediary asset pricing models emphasize

the unique role that sophisticated intermediaries play in many risky financial assets. These models

short circuit the aggregation arguments that lead to representative household models by limiting

the participation of households in certain markets and introducing frictions in the ability of “spe-

cialist/expert” intermediaries to raise financing from the household sector. As a result, households

are not marginal in at least some markets, and household marginal utility of consumption fails to

price assets in those markets. For these same markets, intermediaries take over the role of marginal

trader, raising the possibility that their marginal value of wealth is better suited as an empirical

pricing kernel.

   We propose the following intermediary pricing kernel, in which the equity capital ratio of the

intermediary sector determines its marginal value of wealth. We define the intermediary’s (equity)

capital ratio as the equity fraction of total assets in the aggregate balance sheet of the intermediary

sector:
                                                   Equityt
                                            ηt ≡           .                                       (1)
                                                   Assett

Denote aggregate wealth in the economy by Wt . We define the intermediary’s marginal value of

wealth at time t as

                                        Λt ∝ e−ρt · (ηt Wt )−γ ,                                   (2)

where ρ > 0 and γ > 0 are positive constants, which we later show correspond to the intermediary’s

time-discount rate and relative risk-aversion, respectively.

   The empirical study in this paper relies on the qualitative implications of (2), but not on the

specific functional form. The exact functional form in (2), which arises from existing theories

under appropriate assumptions, is intuitive. First, the aggregate wealth term Wt captures the asset

pricing role of persistent productivity shocks that affect the overall fundamentals of the economy. It

is the standard economic growth term consumption-based theories and has the same interpretation

here—all else equal, Wt is negatively related to the economic agent’s marginal value of wealth.

   The second and more novel aspect of intermediary asset pricing models is the role of ηt . Speci-

fication (2) implies that the intermediary’s marginal value of wealth rises when the intermediary’s

capital ratio ηt falls. It captures the intuition that an intermediary’s risk bearing capacity is in-

                                                    8
hibited when its equity capital is low. Risk aversion drives up the intermediary’s marginal value

of wealth in low equity states. This theoretical mechanism operates in the micro foundation of

Section 2.2 as long as a significant portion of the compensation received by managers/traders is

stock-based. Importantly, there are other potential mechanisms that lead intermediaries to value

a dollar more when their (equity) capital is impaired. For institutions that face regulatory capital

requirements, risk-tolerance shrinks as losses eat into their capital base, leading them to potentially

forgo otherwise profitable investment opportunities. An extra dollar of capital is especially valuable

to the institution in these states.10

       To summarize, the marginal value of wealth specification in (2) has a two-factor structure

that embeds the broad economic growth shocks of traditional models via Wt , along with shocks

that govern soundness of the financial intermediary sector via ηt . This second factor captures

agency/contracting frictions in the intermediation business, regulator considerations, or shocks to

non-dealer portions of the intermediary’s portfolio (e.g., the mortgage market collapse in 2007-09)

that affect the intermediary’s broader risk bearing capacity.11 This two-factor view is consistent

with Muir (2014) who shows that the asset pricing behavior is markedly different during “funda-

mental” disaster episodes (such as wars) and “financial disasters” (such as banking panics).

       Given (2), we use the asset pricing Euler equation to derive the two-factor asset pricing model

that is the basis of our cross-sectional tests. For any asset i with instantaneous return dRti , the

first-order condition of the intermediary who acts as the marginal investor implies

                                                                                       dΛt
                                                                                      
                                     Et       dRti       −   rtf dt   = −Et   dRti   ·     ,
                                                                                       Λt

where throughout Et (·) stands for conditional expectations and rtf is the risk-free rate. This further
  10
      Many of the largest primary dealers in our sample are constrained by Basel capital requirements (Kisin and
Manela, 2013), and potentially also by the SEC’s net capital rule. Capital constraints are particularly costly during
liquidity crises (Kashyap et al., 2008; Hanson et al., 2011; Koijen and Yogo, forthcoming; Kisin and Manela, 2013).
   11
      For example, He and Krishnamurthy (2012) (page 757, Section 4.4.5) consider a setting in which the second shock
affects the severity of agency problems when intermediaries contract with households. In equilibrium, a negative shock
to agency frictions lowers the households’ equity capital contribution, which drives the evolution of leverage and hence
the pricing kernel in (2).




                                                                       9
implies

                                                                   dWt              dηt
                                                                                           
                       Et dRti − rtf dt = γEt dRti ·                   + γEt dRti ·
                                                                   Wt               ηt
                                                    i              i
                                                 = βW,t dt · λW + βη,t dt · λη .                    (3)


                2
The term λW ≡ γσW,t > 0 is the price of risk on aggregate wealth shocks (or “market risk”) and
       2 > 0 is the price of intermediary capital risk, where we use the standard notation for
λη ≡ γση,t

variance and beta:

                                                          Et dRti · (dWt /Wt )
                                                                                           
                                          dWt
                                                     
                        2                            i
                       σW,t dt  = V art          , βW,t =                        ,
                                          Wt                 V art [dWt /Wt ]
                                                         Et dRti · (dηt /ηt )
                                                                            
                                          dηt
                                             
                         2                         i
                        ση,t dt = V art         , βη,t =                       .
                                          ηt               V art [dηt /ηt ]

Equation (3) is the two-factor pricing model that guides our cross-sectional pricing tests, and in

particular predicts that the price of both market risk and intermediary capital risk are positive.

The intuition behind the prediction is that a positive shock to either Wt or ηt drives down the

marginal value of wealth Λt ; hence, the higher an asset’s covariance with either factor, the higher

the expected equilibrium return that the asset must promise to compensate its investor, all else

equal.


2.2      An intermediary asset pricing model

We now provide a theoretical framework where the exact intermediary pricing kernel in (2) arises

in general equilibrium. Consider a two-agent economy populated by households and financial

intermediaries. Suppose that the intermediary (or, the specialist/expert who runs the intermediary

in the language of He and Krishnamurthy (2013); Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)) has power

utility over its consumption stream

                              ˆ                                   "ˆ
                                     ∞                                  ∞
                                                                                c1−γ
                                                                                     #
                          E              e−ρt u (ct ) dt = E                e−ρt t   dt ,
                                 0                                  0           1−γ

with ρ being the discount rate and γ being the constant relative risk aversion.

   Since intermediaries (rather than households) are always marginal investors in risky assets, their


                                                              10
marginal utility of wealth, which equals the marginal utility of consumption, prices all assets in

equilibrium.12 To a first-order approximation, the intermediary’s consumption ct is proportional

to its wealth WtI . That is, ct = βWtI , where β is a positive constant. For log utility this simple

consumption rule is exact with β = ρ. Hence the intermediary’s discounted marginal utility of

consumption is
                                                                        −γ
                                    Λt = e−ρt u0 βWtI = e−ρt βWtI                .                                (4)

It is the intermediary’s wealth WtI (or the bankers’ net worth, in connection to the macro finance

literature) that enters directly into the pricing kernel.

       Let aggregate wealth, Wt , include the wealth of both the household and intermediary sectors,

and define ηt as the intermediary sector’s share of aggregate wealth in the economy:


                                                   WtI = ηt Wt .                                                  (5)


That is, the intermediary’s wealth share is directly linked to the its level of capital, and captures

the soundness of the intermediary sector in this economy.

   This brings us back to our definition of the intermediary capital ratio in Section 2.1, ηt =
Equityt
Assetst . Under stylized assumptions, the intermediary’s capital ratio exactly coincides with its
wealth share. For instance, He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013) assume that risky assets are held

directly only by the intermediary sector.13 Then, in general equilibrium, equity measures the

intermediary’s net worth and assets on the intermediary balance sheet measure aggregate wealth,

thus the capital ratio indeed measures the wealth share of the intermediary sector.14 Therefore,

plugging (5) into (4) arrives at the pricing kernel in Equation (2).

       We emphasize, though, that our reduced form cross-sectional asset pricing tests only rely on

qualitative properties of the pricing kernel, and hence this stringent assumption about asset holdings

can be easily relaxed. For the pricing kernel specification (2) to price assets, we require that the
  12
     We need not to specify the utility function of households as the intermediary’s optimality condition yields the
pricing relations that we take to data.
  13
     Although the assumption in He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013) appears rather stark, it is consistent with
He et al. (2010) who document that mortgage-related toxic assets are always on the balance sheet of financial
intermediaries (mainly commercial banks) at the height of the crisis, 2008Q4 to 2009Q1.
  14
     In He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013), households can also access risky assets indirectly through the intermediary
sector with certain agency frictions, which could bind (the “constrained” region) or not (the “unconstrained” region).
This mapping between ηt and the capital ratio is exact in the constrained region.



                                                         11
intermediary’s capital ratio is positively correlated with its wealth share ηt . This key property

holds in Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), which allows households to manage risky assets at

some exogenous holding cost.15



3         Cross-Sectional Analysis

We present our main empirical results in this section. After explaining the data construction, we

perform formal cross-sectional asset pricing tests for a variety of asset classes.


3.1        Data

3.1.1        Primary dealers’ market equity capital ratio

Our definition of the intermediary sector is the set of primary dealers. These form a select group

of financial intermediaries that serve as trading counterparties to the Federal Reserve Bank of New

York in its implementation of monetary policy. We obtain the historical list of primary dealers from

the NY Fed’s website, and hand-match dealers to data on their publicly-traded holding companies

from either CRSP/Compustat (for US dealers) or Datastream (for foreign dealers). We list current

primary dealer designees in Table 1 and provide the full historical list in Table A.1.16

         The primary dealer sector is a natural candidate for the representative financial intermediary.

These institutions are large and active intermediaries who are likely to be marginal in almost all

financial markets. Table 2 shows that this relatively small group of firms represents essentially all of

the broker-dealer sector by size, a substantial share of the broader banking sector, and is even large

relative to the entire publicly traded sector.17 Below, we use “primary dealer” and “intermediary”

interchangeably whenever there is no ambiguity in the context.
    15
     In Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), a series of negative shocks impairs the capital of intermediaries leading
them to reduce their borrowing and shed assets and by selling them to households. Nevertheless, debt reduction lags
behind the pace of equity impairment, and the endogenous capital ratio of the intermediary sector falls following
negative shocks. As a result, the intermediaries’ wealth share ηt moves together with their capital ratio.
  16
     Cheng et al. (2015) also focus on primary dealers in their study of executive compensation in financial firms.
  17
     For comparison, we focus on US-only firms in Table 2, and define the total broker-dealer sector as the set of US
primary dealers plus any firms with a broker-dealer SIC code (6211 or 6221). Note that had we instead relied on the
SIC code definition of broker-dealers, we would miss important dealers that are subsidiaries of holding companies
that not classified as broker-dealers, for instance JP Morgan.




                                                         12
       Each quarter t, we construct the (aggregate) primary dealer capital ratio as

                                                     P
                                                       i Market   Equityi,t
                                    ηt = P                                                              (6)
                                             i   Market Equityi,t + Book Debti,t

where firm i is a NY Fed primary dealer designee during quarter t. We use book value of debt to

proxy for the unobserved market value of debt, as customary in corporate finance. Our data inputs

for the capital ratio come from the quarterly CRSP/Compustat file for US firms. Book value of

debt is equal to total assets less common equity, using the most recent data available for each firm

at the end of a calendar quarter. The market value of equity is share price times shares outstanding

on the last trading day of the quarter. We follow the same calculation with Datastream data for

public holding companies of foreign primary dealers.

       We plot the intermediary capital ratio, which runs from 1970 to 2012, in Figure 1 (with shaded

areas indicating NBER recessions). Intermediary capital falls during recessions and reaches its

nadir in the 2008 financial crisis. The capital ratio also exhibits a sudden drop and rebound around

the 1998 LTCM collapse, representing shocks that only affect certain asset markets (e.g., options)

but not the entire stock market.

       We construct the capital ratio growth rate, denotes ηt∆ , as follows. We estimate a shock to the

capital ratio in levels, ut , as an innovation in the auto-regression η t = ρ0 + ρη t−1 + ut ,18 and convert

this to a growth rate by dividing by the lagged capital ratio


                                                     ηt∆ = ut /ηt−1 .


This serves as the risk factor that is the key input into our cross section tests.

       Figure 1 plots ηt and ηt∆ , and Table 3 shows their correlations with an array of aggregate

macro variables. Specifically, we compare to the S&P 500 earnings-to-price ratio from Shiller,

the unemployment rate, GDP growth, the Chicago Fed National Financial Conditions Index (for

which a high level corresponds to weak financial conditions), and realized volatility of the CRSP

value-weighted stock index. Correlations with ηt∆ are based on log changes in each macro variable.

All correlations reflect pro-cyclicality of the capital ratio (or counter-cyclicality of leverage) in that
  18
       In this time-series regression with quarterly frequency, the estimated AR(1) coeffcient is 0.94.




                                                            13
low intermediary capital growth coincides with adverse economic shocks, measured as increases

in the earnings-to-price ratio, increases in high unemployment rate, decreases in GDP growth, a

deterioration in financial conditions (based on the Chicago Fed index), or increases in realized

volatility.


3.1.2      Asset portfolios

A key feature distinguishing our paper from existing literature is our use of test portfolios that

span a wide range of asset classes. To avoid potential arbitrariness in our choice of test portfolios,

especially for asset classes that are less standard than the Fama-French equity data, we rely on

readily available asset portfolios provided by authors of pre-existing studies wherever possible.

       For equities, we use the Fama and French (1993) 25 size and value sorted portfolios (from Ken

French’s website). For US bond portfolios, we include government and corporate bond portfolios

in the same class.19 We use ten maturity-sorted government bonds portfolios from CRSP’s “Fama

Bond Portfolios” file with maturities in six month intervals up to five years. For corporate bonds,

we use ten portfolios sorted on yield spreads from Nozawa (2014). These portfolios are based on a

comprehensive bond data set combining TRACE, the Lehman bond database, and others, starting

in 1973.

       For sovereign bonds we use six portfolios from Borri and Verdelhan (2012). These portfolios are

based on a two-way sort on a bond’s covariance with the US equity market return and the bond’s

Standard & Poor’s credit rating. Monthly portfolio returns begin in January 1995 and end in April

2011.

       For options, we use 54 portfolios of S&P 500 index options sorted on moneyness and maturity

from Constantinides et al. (2013), split by contract type (27 call and 27 put portfolios), and starting

in 1986. Portfolio returns are leverage-adjusted, meaning that each option portfolio is combined

with the risk free rate to achieve a targeted market beta of one. According to Constantinides et al.

(2013), “The major advantage of this construction is to lower the variance and skewness of the

monthly portfolio returns and render the returns close to normal (about as close to normal as the

index return), thereby making applicable the standard linear factor pricing methodology.” To keep
  19
    Our choice to combine US government and corporate bonds into a single asset class is driven by our desire to
estimate prices of intermediary capital risk separately for each asset class. Treating US government bonds as its own
asset class is not statistically sensible due to the very high correlation in the returns on these portfolios.


                                                         14
the number of portfolios used in our tests similar across asset classes, we reduce the 54 portfolios to

18 portfolios by constructing equal-weighted averages of portfolios that have the same moneyness

but different maturity (though our results are essentially unchanged if we use all 54 portfolios

separately).

    For foreign exchange, we combine two datasets of currency portfolios to arrive at a total of

twelve portfolios. First is the set of six currency portfolios sorted on the interest rate differential

from Lettau et al. (2014). Second is the set of six currency portfolios sorted on momentum from

Menkhoff et al. (2012). We use the sample period intersection of these datasets, covering March

1976 to January 2010.20

    For commodities, we include 24 commodity futures returns studied in Koijen et al. (2013). The

commodities series include six energy products, eight agricultural crops, three livestock, and seven

metals. We use the sample during which all futures returns are non-missing (beginning in 2002).

    CDS is the only asset class for which we do not have portfolio returns from preexisting studies.

To fill this gap, we construct 20 portfolios sorted by spreads using individual name 5-year CDS.

The data are from Markit and begin in 2001. We focus on 5-year CDS contracts for the well known

reason that these are the most liquid contracts. Our definition of CDS returns follows Palhares

(2013). In particular, let CDSt be the credit spread at day t. The one-day return on a short CDS

strategy (in the case of no default) is

                                                   CDSt−1
                                  CDStret =               + 4CDSt × RDt−1 .
                                                    250

The first term on the right-hand-side is the carry component of the return due to the seller’s receipt

of insurance premium payments. The second term is the capital gain return, equal to the change

in spread times the lagged risky duration of the contract (denoted RDt−1 ). The risky duration

capitalizes the future per-period CDS spread that a seller receives into a present value, which when
  20
     We use combined data because the underlying data sources for the two sets of portfolios differ somewhat and
the portfolio correlations are relatively low. Multiple regression of each Lettau et al. portfolio on to all six Menkhoff
et al. portfolios yields R2 s of 0.53, 0.74, 0.82, 0.81, 0.75, and 0.56. Since these portfolios are far from collinear, our
tests benefit from improved power by doubling the number of portfolios. However, the qualitative results of our tests
are identical if we restrict our currency analysis to only one of the two data sets.




                                                            15
multiplied by the change in spread approximates the log capital gain of the short position.21

       We also consider tests in which all portfolios are gathered into a single large cross-section.

Because some asset classes (such as CDS and commodities) are only available toward the end of

our sample, the tests of all portfolios use an unbalanced panel of portfolio returns.

       Table 4 provides summary statistics by asset class. For each class, we report the average

portfolio excess return and time series beta with respect to each risk factor. Importantly for our

tests, we observe considerable risk dispersion within and across asset classes. For example, the

Fama-French portfolios have an average time-series intermediary capital beta (βη ) of 0.07, with a

standard deviation of 0.11 across the 25 portfolios. The last two columns show in the pool of all

asset classes, the dispersion in βη is even higher, with a mean of 0.01 and standard deviation of

0.17.


3.2       Cross-sectional asset pricing tests

We turn next to formal cross-sectional asset pricing tests. These assess whether differential exposure

to intermediary capital shocks across assets can explain the variation in their expected returns. We

investigate each asset class separately, and also conduct joint tests using the full universe of asset

classes together.


3.2.1       Estimated price of intermediary capital risk across asset classes

Our investigation of these seven asset classes begins with cross-sectional asset pricing tests in each

class separately. For each portfolio i in asset class k, we estimate betas from time-series regressions
                              ik
of portfolio excess returns, Rt+1 − rtf , on the intermediary capital risk factor, ηt+1
                                                                                    ∆ , and on the

  21
       The risky duration for CDS of maturity M years with quarterly premium payments is computed as
                                                     4M
                                                   1 X −jλ/4 −j(rtj/4 )/4
                                           RDt =        e   e
                                                   4
                                                     j=1

                                                                                                           j/4
                                                     j/4
where e−jλ/4 is the quarterly survival probability, rt is the risk-free rate for the quarter j/4, and e−j(rt )/4 is
the quarterly discount function. In the empirical implementation we assume that the term structure of survival
probabilities is flat and extract λ each day from the 5-year spread as λ = 4 log(1 + CDS/4L), where CDS is the
spread and L is the loss given default (assumed to be 60%). The risk-free term structure is constructed using swap
rates for maturities 3 and 6 months and US Treasury yields for maturities from 1 year to 10 years (data from
Gürkaynak et al., 2007). Risk-free rates are interpolated with a cubic function to find rates for each quarter.




                                                           16
                                        W − r f :22
excess return of the market portfolio, Rt+1  t


                                                                              
                            ik
                           Rt+1 − rtf = aik + βηik ηt+1
                                                    ∆      ik
                                                        + βW   W
                                                              Rt+1 − rtf + it+1
                                                                              k
                                                                                 .                                (7)


We then run a cross-sectional regression across of average excess portfolio returns on the estimated

betas within each asset class k in order to estimate the asset class-specific risk prices λkη and λkW :23

                                   h            i
                                     ik
                                 Ê Rt+1 − rtf = γk + λkη β̂ηik + λkW β̂W
                                                                        ik
                                                                           + ν ik .                               (8)


    Our main focus is on the price of the intermediary capital risk, λkη . Table 5 reports estimates for

the 1970Q1–2012Q4 period. The first seven columns include results from independent estimation

within each asset class. Below estimated risk prices we report Fama-MacBeth (1973) t-statistics (t-

FM) that correct for return cross-correlation as well as GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) that correct for

cross-correlation and first-stage estimation error in betas (as advocated by Cochrane (2005)). The

measures of model fit that we report are the cross-sectional R2 for average portfolio returns, and

the related mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) in percentage terms (that is, the mean absolute

residual in the cross-sectional regression multiplied by 100).

    Intermediary capital risk price estimates are positive in all asset classes, supporting the main

empirical prediction of our proposed pricing kernel. Risk price estimates range from 7% for equities

to 22% for options, and are statistically significant in all but one asset class at the 5% level, and

in all classes at the 10% (the GMM t-statistic based on six sovereign bond portfolios is 1.66). The

model provides the closest fit for option portfolios (R2 of 99%) and the weakest fit for commodities

(R2 of 44%).

    The last column of Table 5 reports results when all 125 portfolios from seven asset classes are

included simultaneously in the cross-sectional test. The estimated price of intermediary capital
  22
     Notice that the model (3) is in the conditional form. Our empirical implementation uses an unconditional
test. If test asset betas are constant over time, then the risk prices that we estimate are simply unconditional
expectations of potentially state-dependent risk prices. If, however, the true betas are time-varying, then in general
(7) and (8) are misspecified. The divergence between model and empirics is due to data limitations and for the
sake of transparency. The conditional test requires an estimate of conditional betas, which is challenging due to the
intermediary capital factor’s reliance on quarterly accounting information (data limitations). This may be overcome
with more sophisticated estimators and ad hoc specification of conditioning information, though we leave this for
future research (sake of transparency).
  23
     The cross section regressions in (8) include the constant γk . Section 5.7 reports estimation results that impose
the model restriction γk = 0, which produces nearly identical results.



                                                         17
risk is 9% per quarter with a GMM t-statistic of 2.56 and R2 of 45%. This risk price estimate

is economically large. For example, the cross-sectional standard deviation in intermediary capital

growth betas for the all portfolios case is 0.17 (see Table 4). Thus, a one standard deviation

difference in the capital risk beta of two assets corresponds to a difference of 0.17 × 0.09 × 4, or

6.12 percentage points, in their annual risk premium.24

       It is interesting to note that in our main bivariate specification, the estimated price of risk on

the market portfolio is positive in all asset classes, though it is significant only in the FX test. The

significance of intermediary capital risk after controlling for the market return indicates that our

pricing kernel statistically improves on the CAPM for all sets of test assets. In Section 5.6, we

show that capital risk remains a powerful determinant of asset price behavior after controlling for

other standard risk factors.


3.2.2      Are prices of risk similar across asset classes?

The sign of the estimated price of risk for intermediary capital factor is consistently positive across

all asset classes in Table 5. What can we learn from the magnitudes of the estimates?

       Theoretically, if (2) is indeed an appropriate pricing kernel for all asset classes, then the price

of risk from each asset class should be the same (up to sampling error). Risk prices are determined

solely by the pricing kernel of marginal investors, and therefore must be invariant with respect to

the attributes of the assets it is pricing. This is trivially evident from the Euler equation, which

implies a functional form for risk prices that is independent of the specific asset in question:

                                 
                       Et dRtik − rtf dt = βη,t
                                            ik         2
                                                dt · γση,t    ik
                                                           + βW,t        2
                                                                  dt · γσW,t , for all i, k.                          (9)
                                                         | {z }             | {z }
                                                          λη                 λW

The quantity of risk, or beta, is an attribute of the asset and can differ substantially across classes.

Equation (9) makes the theoretical statement that any difference in risk premia across asset must

come solely from differences in betas, holding risk prices fixed. If λ is for some reason higher in a

particular asset class, then the intermediary can earn a higher expected return (without increasing

its risk) by shifting its portfolio toward this class. In turn, prices of risk would equalize, reinforcing
  24
    Figure 3 plots average portfolio returns in all asset classes versus predicted values from the two-factor intermediary
capital model. Appendix Table A.1 draws the same plot using separate parameter estimates within each asset class.



                                                           18
the equilibrium consistency of risk prices across all assets.

   The test in the last column of Table 5, i.e., the “all portfolios” column, indeed imposes that risk

prices are equal across asset classes. Figure 2 compares intermediary risk prices from different asset

classes, and also compares with the “all portfolios” estimate, to illustrate the impressive similarity

in estimates across tests. Formally, our GMM test cannot reject the hypothesis that the estimated

risk price is equal to 9% per quarter (the value found in the “all portfolios” case) for any of the

individual asset classes, at the 5% significance level. This is not merely a statement that our

standard errors are large and lack power—we indeed reject the null of a 0% risk price in all classes

(at the 10% significance level or better).

   From a theory perspective, the prediction of equal risk prices relies on the following key as-

sumptions. First, the proposed financial intermediary pricing kernel represents the intermediaries’

marginal value of wealth. Second, financial intermediaries are actively making trading decisions

in all asset markets. Also implicit in these assumptions is a degree of homogeneity in the pricing

kernels of individual financial intermediaries. That all financial intermediaries are homogeneous is

the most standard but perhaps the most tenuous assumption. Its failure could potentially explain

the somewhat higher options and FX point estimates, if intermediaries that specialize in trading

these instruments differ in some way from other intermediaries (see for example Gârleanu et al.,

forthcoming).


3.2.3   Are primary dealers special?

We next explore the role of our specific intermediary sector definition for the preceding results.

We conduct placebo tests that replicate our cross section analysis, but replace the capital ratio of

primary dealers with that of other “intermediary” definitions.

   First, we consider defining intermediaries according to SIC codes of US broker-dealers—codes

6211 (“security brokers, dealers, and flotation companies”) and 6221 (commodity contracts brokers

and dealers)—but exclude firms that are designated NY Fed primary dealers. This definition, which

we refer to as “non-primary” dealers, includes firms like Blackrock, Charles Schwab, and Waddell

& Reed. As shown in Table 2, non-primary dealers are small relative to primary dealers.

   In Panel (a) of Table 6, we report cross section tests using non-primary dealer capital ratio

as a factor. Only equities and CDS show a significantly positive price of capital ratio risk based

                                                  19
on this intermediary definition; the estimated price of capital risk in other asset classes is either

insignificant or has a negative sign.

       Extending this idea further, we construct the equity capital ratio risk factor for the entire US

non-bank sector, i.e., all public firms in CRSP/Compustat with SIC codes that do not begin with

6. The results, reported in Panel (b), demonstrate the overall inability of the non-bank capital

ratio to price assets, with estimates switching sign across classes and a point estimate of nearly

zero in the “all portfolios” test. Overall, Table 6 provides additional indirect evidence supporting

our assumption that primary dealers are pricing-relevant financial intermediaries.


3.2.4       Which is more important for pricing, equity or debt?

Innovations in our measure of intermediary capital ratio are driven by either changes in market

value of equity or changes in book debt. We investigate which of these is the more important driver

of our asset pricing result.

       We first show that our intermediary capital factor, which is the shock to ln ηt = ln EtE+D
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                    , can

be decomposed into the growth rate of the primary dealer market equity, denoted by d ln Et , and

the growth rate of their debt, denoted by d ln Dt . More specifically, as we are only interested in

diffusion terms (which implies that we can ignore Ito’s correction terms which contribute to the

drift), we have25
                                                    Et
                                d ln ηt = d ln           = (1 − ηt ) (d ln Et − d ln Dt ) .                                 (10)
                                                 Et + Dt

As a result, our innovations d ln ηt equal the equity growth rate shock d ln Et minus the debt growth

rate shock d ln Dt , both scaled by 1−ηt . Guided by (10), we test a three-factor version of our model

that decomposes the capital risk factor into log innovations in primary dealer market equity and

log innovations in their book value of debt. The decomposition in (10) also implies that the equity

growth rate shock carries a positive price of risk, while price of the debt growth rate shock should

be negative.26
  25                                                                 Et
       The derivation with intermediate steps is (recall ηt =      Et +Dt
                                                                            and ignore drift terms with Ito corrections)

                                                               Et d ln Et + Dt d ln Dt
             d ln ηt = d ln Et − d ln (Et + Dt ) = d ln Et −                           = (1 − ηt ) (d ln Et − d ln Dt ) .
                                                                       Et + D t

  26
    The capital ratio decomposition gives rise to an ηt term premultiplying the difference in equity growth and debt
growth. This scales down the risk prices in this three-factor model relative to the benchmark model. But, because the
time-series average of ηt is 0.06, this effect is quantitatively small, and risk price magnitudes can still be meaningfully


                                                                 20
    Because the primary dealer list changes over time, we construct equity and debt growth measures

that are insensitive to entry and exit. The equity growth rate from quarter t to t + 1 is defined as

the log change in total market equity of all designated primary dealers as of time t. That is, if a

designee enters the list in t + 1, its equity is excluded from the t + 1 growth rate calculation, and if

it exits before t + 1 then its market equity is still included in the growth rate (likewise for debt).27

    The results are presented in Table 7. In all asset classes, the estimated price of risk on interme-

diary equity shocks remains positive and economically large (at least 5% per quarter in each asset

class). For the “all portfolios” test, the price of intermediary equity risk is 9% per quarter. Overall,

the pricing ability of intermediary equity is similar, but somewhat weaker, than that of the capital

ratio variable. The estimated price on book debt innovations is negative in six out of seven asset

classes, as we expect given our theory and the negative functional relation between debt shocks

and capital ratio shocks. However, the magnitudes are often small and insignificant. For the all

portfolios test, the intermediary debt risk price is −2% per quarter and is insignificant.

    In sum, these results suggest that while book debt innovations play some role in our main

pricing results, it is the market equity component of the capital ratio that is most important for

the effects that we document.



4     Comparison with AEM: Empirics, Sample Composition, and

      Theory

4.1    Brief review of AEM

AEM is an important precursor to our paper and is the first paper to bring the intermediary-based

pricing paradigm into the conversation of “mainstream” empirical pricing models. These authors

propose a one-factor intermediary pricing kernel. The factor is the innovation in broker-dealer book

leverage derived from data in the Flow of Funds. In principle, the main intermediary leverage state

variable in their empirical model is exactly the reciprocal of our capital ratio state variable. Though

empirically, there are a number of important differences in our analyses that we discuss below.
compared to those in Table 7.
  27
     We use this calculation to demonstrate that our findings are not driven by changes in the primary dealer list,
though our results are unaffected if we allow entry and exit in our calculation.




                                                        21
       AEM conduct standard cross section pricing tests using the 25 Fama-French equity portfolios,

10 momentum equity portfolios, and six Treasury bond portfolios. The main result is the robust

ability of broker-dealer leverage for pricing the cross section of stocks and Treasury bonds. They

estimate a large and significant positive price of risk on leverage shocks. This has the interpretation

that intermediary marginal value of wealth is higher when its leverage is lower, or equivalently

implies that a high equity capital ratio indicates intermediary financial distress.

       Due to the reciprocal relationship between capital ratio and leverage, AEM’s finding is in direct

contradiction with our finding of a robust positive price of risk price on the intermediary capital ratio.

The AEM finding also contradicts the theoretical prediction of He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013)

and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) that a low capital ratio proxies for intermediary distress

and hence a high marginal value of wealth.

       The tension in the two sets of results is rather puzzling. Theoretically, we are attempting to

measure the same quantity—financial distress of the intermediary sector—with the only conceptual

difference being that their preferred measure is the inverse of our measure. Therefore, we would

expect our price of risk estimates to always have the opposite sign, with otherwise similar magnitude

and statistical significance. The facts are in stark contrast to this prediction. It stands to reason,

therefore, that our empirical measures do not behave inversely to one another as predicted. Indeed,

Figure 4a illustrates the inconsistency. Our capital ratio measure and AEM’s leverage measure are

significantly positively related in the time series, sharing a 42% correlation in levels. Figure 4b

compares innovations in the two series, which share a 14% correlation.

       We devote this section to understanding the differences in our empirical facts, and to place

these differences in context of various intermediary asset pricing theories.


4.2      Empirical performance of AEM in many asset classes

First, we extend our multiple asset class tests to better understand the empirical performance of

AEM’s intermediary pricing kernel. This portion of our analysis is exactly analogous to our earlier

tests using the capital ratio. In particular, we consider a two-factor model that includes AEM

leverage innovations and the return on the market portfolio.28
  28
    We construct the AEM leverage factor for the 1970–2012 period as described in their paper. It is 0.99 correlated
with the one provided by Tyler Muir at faculty.som.yale.edu/tylermuir/LEVERAGEFACTORDATA_001.txt, which
ends in 2009.


                                                        22
   Table 8 reports the estimated AEM leverage factor risk price and related model statistics for

each asset class. For equities and US bonds, the AEM leverage factor carries a significantly positive

price, which essentially replicates the key findings reported by AEM (with the exception that our

“US bonds” definition also includes corporates). In these two classes, the performance of the AEM

pricing kernel is superior to ours, as reflected in their higher cross-sectional R2 . AEM also emphasize

that their leverage measure successfully explains differences in average returns among momentum-

sorted equity portfolios. Our measure, on the other hand, does not explain the momentum anomaly

in equities.

   The AEM model delivers very different results in other assets classes. The leverage risk price

either becomes strongly negative (options, CDS, and FX) or remains positive but statistically

insignificant (foreign sovereign bonds and commodities). In the “all portfolios” joint test, the

estimated price of risk is positive but statistically insignificant. Furthermore, the estimated risk

price of 13% is economically smaller. From Table 9, the standard deviation in AEM leverage betas

across all portfolios is 0.05, implying differences in annual AEM leverage premia of 0.05 × 0.13 × 4,

or 2.6 percentage points, for a one standard deviation difference in beta (or forty percent of the

risk premium effect that we find for our intermediary capital factor). Figure 5 illustrates the extent

of inconsistency in AEM pricing performance across asset classes, which contrasts with the capital

ratio model results in Figure 2.

   We next consider a three-factor horse-race specification that includes our capital ratio factor and

the AEM leverage factor together (along with the market return). Table 10 reports the estimation

results for each asset class. In the equity market, the presence of AEM renders the capital ratio

insignificant, reiterating the strong pricing power of AEM for the US equity market. In all other

asset classes, the price of intermediary capital risk is at least 6% per quarter, and only loses

statistical significance in the options market. The options market is an interesting case; in the

horse-race specification, the lack of statistical significance for our measure appears due to the large

and significant negative price of risk on the AEM factor.

   Our emphasis on a variety of asset classes is the key empirical feature that distinguishes our

paper from AEM. Most intermediary-based asset pricing models are founded on the limits-to-

arbitrage paradigm (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997), which implies that the pricing kernel of households

might not be relevant if some asset classes are too complicated for households to trade in directly.

                                                  23
Presumably, derivatives contracts or OTC markets are too sophisticated to be directly accessed by

most household investors. By contrast, financial intermediaries play a central role in the market

for derivatives and OTC assets. Our paper provides supporting evidence that this distinction is

important for understanding the behavior of a wide variety of assets.


4.3     Data source and measurement

Our measure of financial distress differs from AEM in both the definition of a financial intermediary

and the data sources employed. We define intermediaries as the set of primary dealers and rely

on market equity and book debt data for their publicly traded holding companies. AEM define

intermediaries as the set of broker-dealer firms (often bank holding company subsidiaries) that feed

into the Flow of Funds broker-dealer accounts, and use the book equity and debt data reported in

those accounts.29

    The two key differences are (i) our use of market values for constructing capital ratios, versus

AEM’s reliance on accounting book values, and (ii) our use of data at the holding company level,

versus the broker-dealer subsidiary level information in the Flow of Funds. We explore the role of

these differences in this section.


4.3.1    Market leverage vs. book leverage

Our aim in constructing the capital ratio is to provide a current measure of financial distress that

reflects the information available in prevailing market prices. Virtually all intermediary asset pricing

theories would suggest using market values, which reflect forward looking information available in

traded securities prices. While the market value of equity is readily available for publicly traded

firms, market debt values are much more difficult to measure. Instead, we follow the standard

approach in empirical corporate finance and use firms’ most recently published book value of debt

from accounting statements. The inverse of our market equity capital ratio is referred to as “market

leverage.”

    Book leverage, on the other hand, relies on accounting statement data for both equity and debt.

One would expect a positive correlation between market and book capital ratios due to the fact
   29
      Flow of Funds broker-dealer data are from SEC tabulation of regulatory filings. It includes most broker-dealer
firms that file the Financial and Operational Combined Uniform Single (FOCUS) report or the Finances and Oper-
ations of Government Securities Brokers and Dealers (FOGS) report with their regulator (e.g. FINRA).


                                                        24
that broker-dealers and banks are required to frequently mark their books to market. When mark-

to-market is implemented perfectly, book leverage coincides with its market counterpart.30 Because

Flow of Funds data only includes book data for broker-dealers, Adrian et al. (2014a) rely on book

leverage for their analysis, and appeal to mark-to-market accounting to support the timeliness and

accuracy of their measure.31

       An advantage of our data set is that we have access to both book and market equity values. We

construct both book and market capital ratios for our sample of primary dealers, where the book

capital ratio is defined similarly as in (6), but replacing the market equity with its corresponding

book equity. We then investigate whether drastic differences in the two measures can potentially

reconcile differences in our findings with AEM. For example, a negative correlation between book

and market leverage in our sample could help explain the conflicting risk prices estimated in our

study and that of AEM.32

       We find, however, that the market capital ratio of primary dealers is in fact strongly positively

associated with book capital ratio. Book and market capital ratios have a correlation of 50% in

levels and 30% in innovations, indicating qualitatively similar behavior between them. This is

illustrated in the time series plot of Figure 4b, and suggests that Compustat book leverage of

primary dealers is in fact counter-cyclical. We present more direct evidence in appendix Table

A.2, where we estimate the two-factor asset pricing model which replaces the market capital ratio

factor with its corresponding book capital ratio. The estimated prices of intermediary book capital

risk remain largely positive (though become much less significant) across different asset classes,

consistent with idea that the market equity of financial institutions reflects more accurate and

timely information than their (accounting) book equity.

       Outside the sample of primary dealers, we find that book and market capital ratio measures

are also highly correlated for the wider universe of publicly traded broker-dealers (all public US
  30
      One caveat is that the market value of an financial intermediary not only reflects the market value of the financial
assets on its balance sheet, but also includes the present value of its profits earned from future activities. Our view
is that this future enterprise value also affects the intermediary’s financial distress, and therefore will show up in its
pricing kernel.
   31
      In the accounting literature, there is some debate regarding accounting manipulations in the practice of mark-to-
market and indication that mark-to-market accounting is especially inaccurate during financial crises when capital
requirements and credit channels tighten (Heaton et al., 2010; Milbradt, 2012). Ball et al. (2012) provide a skeptical
assessment of mark-to-market accounting in a large sample of banks’ trading securities.
   32
      Previous literature such as Adrian et al. (2014b); Adrian and Shin (2014) show that market and book leverage
can be negatively correlated for banks, and therefore note that empirical analyses can be sensitive to choice of
market-based versus book-based measures.


                                                           25
firms with SIC 6211 or 6221, which includes some primary dealers). This group generally includes

smaller broker-dealers that mainly focus on securities trading. Here we find a 75% correlation

between market capital ratio and book capital ratio, again indicating reasonably accurate marking-

to-market.

       The conclusion from this analysis is that the difference between market-based and book-based

measures of financial distress is unlikely to be responsible for the tension between our facts and

those of AEM.


4.3.2      Holding company vs. broker-dealer subsidiary

The more likely discrepancy between AEM and our paper is that we measure financial distress

at the holding company level for primary dealers, while the Flow of Funds data used by AEM

only aggregates balance sheet information at the broker-dealer subsidiary level. Most NY Fed

primary dealers are the broker-dealer subsidiaries of a large financial institutions holding companies.

Flow of Funds data come from quarterly FOCUS and FOGS reports filed with the Securities and

Exchange Commission (SEC) by these broker-dealer arms in isolation from other parts of their

larger institutions. The underlying Flow of Funds data is therefore not publicly available. However,

as most primary dealers are owned by publicly traded companies, market and financial statement

data for the holding company is widely available, and form the basis of our analysis. In short, our

definition of an intermediary is broader than AEM in the sense that we treat the entire holding

company as the observation of interest.33

       The holding companies of primary dealers also often hold significant commercial banking busi-

nesses,34 making the distinction between holding company and broker-dealer arm potentially im-

portant. We find that the AEM implied capital ratio (i.e., the inverse of AEM leverage) is more

closely in line with the capital ratio of non-primary dealers (defined in Section 3.2.3) than that of

primary dealers. While the AEM implied capital ratio and that of our primary dealer sample are

strongly negatively correlated at -59%, the correlation between the AEM capital ratio and non-

primary dealer capital ratio is 71 percentage points higher, at positive 12%. As shown in Table
  33
     At the same time, by focusing on primary dealers, we hone in on only the largest and most active intermediaries.
By incorporating all broker-dealers that are subject to regulatory oversight, the Flow of Funds includes many small
and standalone dealers.
  34
     For instance, JP Morgan Securities LLC is the broker-dealer subsidiary of JP Morgan, and Citigroup Global
Markets Inc. fulfills that role under the Citigroup umbrella.


                                                         26
2 and discussed in Section 3.2.3, the small overall size of non-primary dealers suggests that the

broker-dealer business is the dominant segment in these firms. The large difference between the

correlations of AEM with primary versus non-primary dealers is consistent with the interpreta-

tion that AEM only captures the leverage of broker-dealer sector, while the holding companies of

primary dealers include other intermediary businesses with potentially different leverage patterns.

   A key distinction between these two approaches—holding company data versus subsidiary-level

broker-dealer data—rests on the role of internal capital markets in the primary dealer’s holding

company. A well established view in corporate finance is that internal capital markets within a

conglomerate are likely to diversify and transmit adverse financial shocks across divisions (e.g.

Stein, 1997; Scharfstein and Stein, 2000). If internal capital markets are important sources of funds

for broker-dealer subsidiaries, then the capital ratio of the intermediary’s holding company is the

economically relevant measure of financial distress. In the banking literature, Houston et al. (1997),

Houston and James (1998) and de Haas and van Lelyveld (2010) show evidence to this effect. For

instance, Houston et al. (1997) show that a bank subsidiary’s loan growth more strongly correlates

with the holding company’s capital position than with the subsidiary’s own capital position.

   In addition to the loan business, two anecdotes support the view that internal capital markets

play an important role in the financial health of broker-dealer subsidiaries. The first is the 2008

failure of Lehman Brothers. The bankruptcy examiner describes Lehman Brothers Holdings as a

“central banker” for Lehman subsidiaries (Valukas, 2010, Vol. 5, p. 1944). Its broker-dealer units

(the European in particular) required significant funding to unwind its prime brokerage services

in the days immediately prior to the September 15, 2008 bankruptcy filing. The holding company

attempted to avoid bankruptcy by using its liquid non-broker-dealer assets to guarantee the obliga-

tions of its broker-dealer subsidiaries to their clearing banks. This glimpse at the internal markets

of a large financial institution at the peak of its financial distress indicates the fungibility of capital

within broker-dealer holding companies. This point is further corroborated by the bankruptcy case

of the Drexel Burnham Lambert Group in 1990, which led to the liquidation of its broker-dealer

affiliate. In the three weeks before it filed for bankruptcy, approximately $220 million was trans-

ferred to the holding company from its broker-dealer arm in the form of short-term loans. This

instance of capital siphoning led the SEC to initiate group-wide risk assessments for all financial



                                                    27
institutions with significant broker-dealer subsidiaries.35

       Of course, if internal capital markets within the holding company malfunction, then the financial

distress of the primary dealer might be more directly reflected by the broker-dealer arm’s own

capital structure. The importance of internal capital markets is ultimately an empirical question.

Our evidence based on holding company financial ratios indirectly supports the view that internal

markets are important to understanding the effect of intermediary distress on asset prices.


4.4      Differences in theoretical motivation

The interpretation of differences in our empirical results is complicated by the fact that different

intermediary models predict different signs for the price of risk on intermediary capital shocks.

In this subsection we discuss the theoretical distinction between two classes of intermediary asset

pricing models, which we dub either “equity constraint” or “debt constraint” models.

       The equity constraint framework originates with net worth-based based models such as Bernanke

and Gertler (1989) and Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), and is exemplified by He and Krishnamurthy

(2013, 2012) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014). In these models, an adverse shock to the

intermediary’s equity capital reduces its risk bearing capacity. This leads to a fall in asset prices

which directly increases the intermediary’s leverage (holding debt fixed). At the same time, this rise

in leverage is countervailed by the intermediary endogenously reducing its debt financing. In general

equilibrium, the fall in equity values outweighs the debt reduction, and equilibrium leverage rises

(this is especially true when there is no debt constraint, as in He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013);

Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)). In other words, from the standpoint of the intermediary,

leverage is counter-cyclical, rising in distress states where the intermediary values its wealth the

most. This corresponds to a negative price of leverage risk, or a positive price of capital ratio risk.

       Another group of models, exemplified by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), and Adrian and

Shin (2014), are set in a “debt constraint” framework.36 These models rule out equity financing by

assumption; instead, they focus on a time-varying debt (or leverage) constraint that affects equilib-

rium pricing. The models are often static and feature a binding collateralized borrowing constraint,
  35
     See testimony of Robert L.D. Colby before the U.S. House Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer
Credit dated September 14, 2006, and Adoption of Amendments to SEC Rule 15c3-1 Regarding Withdrawals of Net
Capital dated March 5, 1991.
  36
     Other related papers are Geanakoplos and Fostel (2008), Adrian and Boyarchenko (2012) and Moreira and Savov
(2013).


                                                       28
either motivated by a value-at-risk constraint as in Adrian and Shin (2014) or an endogenous hair-

cut as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009). Bad times correspond to a tightening of the debt

constraint reflected as lower allowable leverage, and this triggers deleveraging and fire-sales during

which assets are sold to some second-best user at a lower equilibrium price. This directly implies

that leverage is pro-cyclical in these models—debt falls in those states where debt constraints bind

the most and intermediary marginal value of wealth is highest. This corresponds to a positive price

for leverage risk, or a negative price of capital ratio risk.

       This classification of theories, while in some ways over-simplified,37 is meant to clearly delineate

how different financial constraints can give rise to different equilibrium leverage patterns. More

importantly, we believe that given the spectrum of complexities in real world financial intermedi-

ation that these models may be attempting to describe, it should not be surprising that different

intermediary models give opposing predictions. It is likely that intermediaries face both equity and

debt constraints to varying degrees in different states of the world, leading to more nuanced and

complex behavior than either class alone can generate.

       A related possibility is that these two model classes describe different intermediary sub-sectors

that interact in financial markets. He et al. (2010) and Ang et al. (2011) describe one example

that supports this view. During a downturn when marginal value of wealth is likely to be high

for all investors, hedge funds (who are perhaps closer to the type of intermediary described by

debt constraint models) sell their assets to commercial banks (who may be better described by

equity constraint models), and so leverage of these two sectors moves in opposite directions. In the

appendix we present a simplified static equilibrium model that combines features of Brunnermeier

and Pedersen (2009) and He and Krishnamurthy (2012) into an intermediary model with two

sub-sectors. It illustrates how a debt-constrained “hedge fund” sector has procyclical leverage in

equilibrium while leverage of the equity-constrained “bank” sector is countercyclical.

       An interesting direction for future theory is to investigate different economic conditions under

which debt or equity constraints are more likely to impact asset values, and to use this to guide
  37
     For instance, Garleanu and Pederson (2011) build a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model with margin
constraints, which correspond to “debt constraint” in our language. However, the dynamic nature of that model
implies that the margin/debt contrasint does not bind in the normal state of world, and binds only after a sequence
of sufficiently negative shocks. This occasionally binding constraint is similar to He and Krishnamurthy (2013, 2012).
In Garleanu and Pederson (2011), because the deleveraging force is relatively weak in “normal” times when the
constraint does not bind, there is no simple monotonic relationship between leverage and state of the world.



                                                         29
construction of a more sophisticated pricing kernel that nests both mechanisms in a state-dependent

manner. And, ultimately, it is an empirical question whether our capital risk factor, the AEM

leverage factor, or some combination is the most useful representation of the pricing kernel.



5     Robustness

This section presents an array of robustness tests that support our main findings.


5.1    Pre-crisis and post-1990 subsamples

Table 11 presents the performance of our intermediary capital risk factor and the AEM leverage

factor during the 1970Q1–2006Q4 sample, which excludes the dramatic fluctuations associated with

the financial crisis. This test is designed to address the concern that average returns in some asset

classes are unduly influenced by the crisis subsample. We find that pre-crisis prices of capital ratio

risk are substantially smaller in three asset classes, US bonds, sovereign bonds, and commodities.

In the other four asset classes, the price of intermediary capital risk remains economically large.

In the “all portfolios” case, the risk price estimate is 9% per quarter, identical to that in the full

sample and highly significant.

    We separately investigate the recent sample beginning in 1990 in Table 12. The capital risk price

estimate remains economically large in five of the seven asset classes (the exceptions are equities

and US bonds). The “all portfolios” estimate remains positive and significant, both economically

and statistically.


5.2    Monthly frequency

Our main analysis focuses on the quarterly frequency, corresponding to the frequency of balance

sheet data going into our capital ratio measure. Similarly, AEM construct their leverage factor

based on the accounting Flow of Funds data and is only available at the quarterly frequency.

    An advantage of using CRSP data is that we can update the capital ratio as new market equity

data arrives each month. As a result, one can construct the monthly capital ratio for primary

dealers by using the monthly market equity information from CRSP, together with the most recent

quarterly book debt of their holding companies in Compustat. We repeat our cross section analysis


                                                 30
at the monthly frequency.

   Table 13 presents the results. The estimated price of intermediary capital risk remains positive

for all asset classes. The magnitudes of estimates are now in monthly terms, and should therefore be

multiplied by three in order to compare with our quarterly estimates in Table 5. The monthly price

of capital risk is noticeably weaker for equities and US bonds, but remains economically meaningful

in the other five asset classes. In the “all portfolios” test, the risk price estimate is 4% per month

and highly statistically significant.

   Our use of the most recently reported quarterly debt ignores within-quarter variation in the debt

taken by primary dealers. This approximation may hurt our model performance at the monthly

frequency, if the time-series variation in book debt plays a role in driving the pricing power of our

intermediary capital risk factor. From Table 7 in Section 3.2.4 we observe that book debt growth

does possess some pricing power, which suggests a potential explanation for the weaker monthly

performance of our intermediary capital risk factor.


5.3   Time-series return predictability

A common prediction of dynamic intermediary asset pricing models is that the risk premium is

time-varying, implying predictability in asset returns based on lagged state variables that captures

financial distress. We perform time-series predictive regressions in each asset class to evaluate this

prediction.

   Our framework requires additional structure to derive the time-varying risk premium, which is

typically a nonlinear function of the state variable. In a simplified version of He and Krishnamurthy

(2012) that focuses on the risk of intermediary capital ratio, the risk price can be described as

                                                                            2
                                                   dηt                 1
                                                                 
                                                           2
                                 λη = γV art           = γση,t ∝                 ,                (11)
                                                   ηt                  ηt

In words, the risk premium is linear in the squared reciprocal of the capital ratio of the intermediary

sector.

   Guided by (11), we regress the one-year holding period return on an equal weighted portfolio




                                                      31
of assets within each class on the lagged inverse of the squared intermediary capital ratio:

                                                                 1
                                    k
                                   Rt+1→t+4 − rtf = ak + bk          + ut+1→t+4 .                                 (12)
                                                                 ηt2

The model predicts a positive bk coefficient in Equation (11) because low intermediary capital ratio

(high leverage) states are associated with low expected future returns. The model’s prediction is

generally supported by Table 14, which reports a significantly positive b̂k for five of the seven asset

classes at the 10% significance level, and in four classes is significant at the 5% significance level.

       The dependent variable in the last column of Table 14 is the weighted average of individual asset

class portfolio returns, with weights inversely proportional to the unconditional standard deviation

of a portfolio’s return. This weighting scheme accounts for the fact that volatilities differ markedly

across asset classes, so prediction results for an equal-weighted average would be driven by a subset

of the highest volatility portfolios. We find a positive one-year-ahead predictive coefficient in the

“all portfolios” test with a t-statistic of 2.89.38

       For comparison, we also report predictive regression results for AEM, replaces 1/ηt2 with their

broker-dealer leverage ratio. The predictive coefficients are negative (as AEM would predict) in six

out of seven classes, and are significant in four classes at the 10% level.


5.4      Single factor models

Our main analysis focuses on a two-factor structure for the pricing kernel. Although the economic

rationale to include the market return is standard, the empirical price of risk associated with the

market return is generally insignificant in Table 5. Here we consider a one-factor specification that

omits the market return.

       Table 15 presents the estimation results. The only meaningful difference compared to our

main results in Table 5 appears in the case of the 25 Fama-French portfolios, where the price of

our intermediary capital risk is insignificant while the AEM result remains strong. This result is

consistent with the horse-race outcomes in Table 10 where AEM leverage drives out our capital

ratio factor in the equity market. But, for all other asset classes, the primary dealer capital ratio

consistently carries a positive and significant risk price, while the AEM leverage risk price estimates
  38
    Test statistics in Table 14 use Hodrick (1992) standard errors to adjust for the fact that annual returns are being
forecast using overlapping quarterly observations.


                                                          32
take opposite signs in CDS, Options, and FX markets. The take-away is basically the same as from

the baseline two-factor model.


5.5    Intermediary equity return

As explained in equation (4) in Section 2.2, the representative intermediary’s pricing kernel only

depends on its own net worth WtI , a result that holds exactly for log preferences (e.g., He and

Krishnamurthy (2012)). A similar derivation to equation (3) implies that the return on the inter-

mediary’s equity should be a sufficient statistic for the intermediary pricing kernel.

    We test this single factor asset pricing model by constructing the value-weighted equity return

for the primary dealer sector,39 and report the estimated price of the primary dealers’ equity return

in Table 16. We find a significantly positive price for all asset classes other than the Fama-French

25 portfolios at the 10% level. For the “all portfolio” test, the estimated price is positive and

significant based on the Fama-MacBeth t-statistics but not the GMM t-statistics.

    Recall that the single factor model with the factor being intermediary equity return holds only

under log preferences. This is because the pricing kernel is the marginal investor’s marginal utility

of consumption, and the consumption of log investors is always a constant fraction of their wealth.

But if the representative intermediary has recursive preferences, then future market prospects (say

persistent TFP shocks) will in general enter the intermediary’s pricing kernel, suggesting some

reduce-form specification in line with (2). Indeed, when we include the market return as another

factor in panel (b) of Table 15, we recover estimates that are closely in line with our baseline results

from Table 5. In particular, the estimated price of intermediary equity return factor is positive and

significant throughout. Overall, the results in this table suggest that primary dealers’ equity return

plays a similar role as the capital risk factor, offering further evidence in support of intermediary

asset pricing models.


5.6    Comparison with other factors

A large literature investigates factors that explain the cross section of asset returns. These analyses

focus on the pricing of US equities and have not been tested as pricing factors in many of the
  39
     This value-weighted equity return is slightly different from the intermediary (market) equity growth rate con-
structed in Section 3.2.4. The latter “intermediary equity growth rate” includes new equity issuance, while the equity
return does not.


                                                         33
asset classes we study. In Table 17, we compare the pricing power of our intermediary capital

ratio factor relative to the CAPM, the Fama and French (1993, 2015) three- and five-factor models,

the momentum factor, and the Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factor. The table reports

the cross section R2 and MAPE with and without the intermediary capital factor. Including the

intermediary capital factor improves the cross-sectional R2 in the “all portfolios” test by 15% and

reduces the MAPE by 27% relative to the Fama-French five-factor model. In all cases, the estimated

price of intermediary capital risk is essentially unchanged by inclusion of other commonly studied

factors, and remains significant with a GMM t-statistic of at least 2.56.40


5.7    Cross-sectional tests without an intercept

The empirical specification (8) allows the intercept γk , to vary across asset classes. The theory

discussed in Section 3.2.2, however, predicts that γk = 0 for all k as in (9). This additional

theoretical restriction might not be valid given potential model misspecification; however, it may

matter for the empirical cross-asset pattern of estimated prices of intermediary capital risk λkη .

    In Table 18 we repeat our main cross-sectional regressions without an intercept. We find that

constraining the intercept to zero has a minor impact on the prices of intermediary capital risk that

we estimate and, if anything, their statistical significance improves.



6     Conclusion

We find that differences in assets’ exposure to innovations in the capital ratio of primary dealers

explain variation in expected excess returns on equities, US bonds, foreign sovereign bonds, options,

CDS, commodities, and currencies. Our intermediary capital risk factor carries a positive price of

risk and is strongly pro-cyclical, implying counter-cyclical intermediary leverage. Our findings lend

new empirical support to the view that financial intermediaries are marginal investors in many

asset classes, and in turn support the view that the financial soundness of these intermediaries is

important for understanding wide ranging asset price behavior.
   40
      Because our capital ratio factor is non-traded and theoretically motivated, statistically oriented models such as
the Fama-French three and five-factor models are not natural benchmarks for comparison. In the words of Cochrane
(2005), “it is probably not a good idea to evaluate economically interesting models with statistical horse races against
models that use portfolio returns as factors.... Add any measurement error, and the economic model will underperform
its own mimicking portfolio. And both models will always lose in sample against ad hoc factor models that find nearly
ex post efficient portfolios.” Nonetheless, some readers may find the comparison is informative.


                                                          34
References
Adrian, Tobias, and Nina Boyarchenko, 2012, Intermediary leverage cycles and financial stability,
 Working paper, Staff Report, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and J Groen, 2011, Financial amplification of foreign exchange risk
 premia, European Economic Review 55, 354–370.

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014a, Financial intermediaries and the cross-section
 of asset returns, Journal of Finance LXIX, 2557–2596.

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Hyun Song Shin, 2009, Liquidity risk and the dynamics of
 arbitrage capital, Staff report 361, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Adrian, Tobias, Emanuel Moench, and Hyun Song Shin, 2014b, Dynamic leverage asset pricing,
 Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, Liquidity and leverage, Journal of Financial Interme-
 diation 19, 418–437, Risk Transfer Mechanisms and Financial Stability.

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2014, Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk, Review of Fi-
 nancial Studies 27, 373–403.

Allen, Franklin, 2001, Presidential address: Do financial institutions matter?, Journal of Finance
  56, 1165–1175.

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1994, Limited market participation and volatility of asset prices,
  American Economic Review 933–955.

Ang, Andrew, Sergiy Gorovyy, and Gregory B. van Inwegen, 2011, Hedge fund leverage, Journal
 of Financial Economics 102, 102–126.

Ball, Ray, Sudarshan Jayaraman, and Lakshmanan Shivakumar, 2012, Mark-to-market accounting
  and information asymmetry in banks, Working paper, Chicago Booth.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
  puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Basak, Suleyman, and Domenico Cuoco, 1998, An equilibrium model with restricted stock market
  participation, Review of Financial Studies 11, 309–341.

Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova, 2013, Asset prices and institutional investors, American
  Economic Review 103, 1728–58.

Bates, David S., 2003, Empirical option pricing: a retrospection, Journal of Econometrics 116,
  387–404, Frontiers of financial econometrics and financial engineering.

Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations, Amer-
  ican Economic Review 79, 14–31.

Borri, Nicola, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2012, Sovereign risk premia, Working paper.

Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity,
  Review of Financial studies 22, 2201–2238.

                                                 35
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial
  sector, American Economic Review 104, 379–421.

Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2007, Down or out: Assessing the welfare
  costs of household investment mistakes, Journal of Political Economy 115, 707–747.

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption based expla-
  nation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.

Cheng, Ing-haw, Harrison Hong, and Jose A. Scheinkman, 2015, Yesterday’s heroes: Compensation
 and risk at financial firms, Journal of Finance 70, 839–879.

Cochrane, John H., 2005, Asset Pricing, revised edition (Princeton University Press).

Constantinides, George M., Jens Carsten Jackwerth, and Alexi Savov, 2013, The puzzle of index
  option returns, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 3, 229–257.

de Haas, R., and I. van Lelyveld, 2010, Internal capital markets and lending by multinational bank
  subsidiaries, Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 1–25.

Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital, Journal of Finance 65, 1237–
 1267.

Edwards, A., L. Harris, and M. Piwowar, 2007, Corporate bond market transaction costs and
  transparency, Journal of Finance 62, 1421–1451.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
  bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics 116, 1–22.

Froot, Kenneth A, and Paul GJ O’Connell, 1999, The pricing of us catastrophe reinsurance, in The
  Financing of Catastrophe Risk, 195–232 (University of Chicago Press).

Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron, 2007, Limits of arbitrage: Theory
 and evidence from the mortgage-backed securities market, Journal of Finance 62, 557–595.

Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori, 2015, International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics,
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1369–1420.

Gârleanu, Nicolae, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu, forthcoming, Financial entanglement: A
 theory of incomplete integration, leverage, crashes, and contagion, American Economic Review .

Garleanu, Nicolae, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Allen M Poteshman, 2009, Demand-based option
 pricing, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4259–4299.

Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Pederson, 2011, Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the
 law of one price, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1980–2022.

Geanakoplos, John, and Ana Fostel, 2008, Leverage cycles and the anxious economy, American
 Economic Review 98, 1211–244.

Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially
  constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361–407.

                                               36
Gürkaynak, Refet S, Brian Sack, and Jonathan H Wright, 2007, The US treasury yield curve: 1961
 to the present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291–2304.

Haddad, Valentin, and David Sraer, 2015, The banking view of bond risk premia, Working paper,
 Princeton and UC Berkeley.

Hanson, Samuel, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2011, A macroprudential approach to
 financial regulation, Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, 3–28.

He, Zhiguo, In Gu Khang, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2010, Balance sheet adjustment in the 2008
  crisis, IMF Economic Review 1, 118–156.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2012, A model of capital and crises, The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 79, 735–777.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary asset pricing, American Economic
  Review 103, 732–70.

Heaton, John C., Deborah Lucas, and Robert L. McDonald, 2010, Is mark-to-market accounting
  destabilizing? analysis and implications for policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 57, 64–75,
  Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy: Credit Market Turmoil: Implications for
  Policy April 17-18, 2009.

Hodrick, Robert J, 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative procedures for
 inference and measurement, Review of Financial studies 5, 357–386.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real
 sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Hong, Harrison, and Motohiro Yogo, 2012, What does futures market interest tell us about the
 macroeconomy and asset prices?, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 473–490.

Houston, J., and C. James, 1998, Do bank internal capital markets promote lending?, Journal of
 Banking and Finance 22, 899–918.

Houston, J., C. James, and D. Marcus, 1997, Capital market frictions and the role of internal
 capital markets in banking, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 135–164.

Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2008, Rethinking capital regula-
 tion, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium on Maintaining Stability in a Changing
 Financial System 431–471.

Kisin, Roni, and Asaf Manela, 2013, The shadow cost of bank capital requirements, Working paper.

Koijen, Ralph SJ, Tobias J Moskowitz, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Evert B Vrugt, 2013, Carry,
 Working paper, NBER.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., and Motohiro Yogo, forthcoming, The cost of financial frictions for life insurers,
 American Economic Review .

Kondor, Peter, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2015, Liquidity risk and the dynamics of arbitrage capital,
 Working paper, LSE.



                                                 37
Kyle, Albert S, and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth effect, Journal of Finance 56, 1401–
 1440.

Lettau, Martin, Matteo Maggiori, and Michael Weber, 2014, Conditional risk premia in currency
  markets and other asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics 114, 197–225.

Menkhoff, Lukas, Lucio Sarno, Maik Schmeling, and Andreas Schrimpf, 2012, Carry trades and
 global foreign exchange volatility, Journal of Finance 67, 681–718.

Milbradt, Konstantin, 2012, Level 3 assets: Booking profits and concealing losses, Review of Fi-
 nancial Studies 25, 55–95.

Mitchell, Mark, Lasse Pederson, and Todd Pulvino, 2007, Slow moving capital, American Economic
 Review, Papers and Proceedings 97, 215–220.

Mitchell, Mark, and Todd Pulvino, 2009, Arbitrage crashes and the speed of capital, Working
 paper, AQR Capital Management.

Moreira, Alan, and Alexi Savov, 2013, The macroeconomics of shadow banking, Working paper,
 Yale.

Muir, Tyler, 2014, Financial crises and risk premia, Working paper, Yale.

Nozawa, Yoshio, 2014, What drives the cross-section of credit spreads?: A variance decomposition
 approach, Working paper, University of Chicago.

Palhares, Diogo, 2013, Cash-flow maturity and risk premia in CDS markets, Working paper, Uni-
  versity of Chicago.

Pástor, L’uboš, and Robert F Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal
  of Political Economy 111, 642–685.

Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon, 2007, Asset prices and exchange rates, Review of Financial
  Studies 20, 1139–1180.

Scharfstein, David S, and Jeremy C Stein, 2000, The dark side of internal capital markets: Divisional
  rent-seeking and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 2537–2564.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
  approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343–1366.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35–55.

Siriwardane, Emil, 2015, Concentrated capital losses and the pricing of corporate credit risk, Work-
  ing paper, Harvard Business School.

Stein, Jeremy C, 1997, Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources, Journal
  of Finance 111–133.

Valukas, Anton R., 2010, Lehman brothers holdings inc. chapter 11 proceedings, Examiner report.

Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to quality, flight to liquidity, and the pricing of risk, Working paper,
  NBER.



                                                  38
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002, Limited asset market participation and the elasticity of intertem-
  poral substitution, Journal of Political Economy 110, 825–853.

Xiong, Wei, 2001, Convergence trading with wealth effects: an amplification mechanism in financial
  markets, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247–292.




                                                39
A        Appendix
The purpose of this appendix is to offer a general equilibrium framework to reconcile the empirical regularities docu-
mented in Adrian et al. (2014a) and our paper. For simplicity the model will be cast in a one-period setting, although
given the “myopic” objective of agents (risk neutral and log preferences) the analysis will be valid in a dynamic
setting. We do not solve for equilibrium asset prices. Instead, we focus on the implications of general equilibrium
leverage patterns for heterogeneous financial sectors, taking as given some well-known equilibrium properties of state-
dependent asset pricing moments established in the literature. A version of this model was proposed in a conference
discussion of our paper by Alexi Savov, to whom we are grateful for the suggestion.
     The model combines the key features of He and Krishnamurthy (2012) and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009).
There are three classes of agents. “Households” are assumed to only hold zero net supply riskless assets with an
endogenous return of rf , due to lack of sophistication or infinite risk-aversion. “Hedge funds” are risk-neutral but
face a VaR constraint that binds in equilibrium, as in Adrian and Shin (2014). They are meant to represent the
group of intermediaries (dealers and hedge funds) studied in Adrian et al. (2014a). “Banks” are risk-averse and
have mean-variance preferences, with an absolute risk aversion of γ, following He and Krishnamurthy (2012), and
correspond to the holding companies of primary dealers that our paper studies. Hedge funds and banks both actively
trade in the risky asset market, which offers an endogenous return of R.
     Of course, in practice holding companies are likely to include both proprietary trading and traditional banking
businesses.41 And, in our framework, the financial health of the commercial banking sector matters for the equilibrium
pricing of sophisticated financial assets if internal capital markets in holding companies are well-functioning.
     Denote aggregate wealth by W . The wealth (net worth) of the hedge fund sector is denoted by W HF ≡ wHF W ,
and the wealth of bankers by W B ≡ wB W . The lower case symbols wHF and wB indicate the wealth fraction of each
sector relative to the whole economy. Both dealers and banks can take on leverage, so that their asset positions X j
                                                                                               Xj
may be greater than their net worth W j , j ∈ {HF, B}. Denote the leverage choice as αj ≡ W      j (assets over equity),
                                         j
and the resulting portfolio return by Rt+1 . Then we have
                                 j
                                Wt+1        j      f                f
                                                                                   
                                         = Rt+1 ≡ rt+1 + αi Rt+1 − rt+1 , j ∈ {HF, B} .                                         (A.1)
                                 Wtj
       In our model, hedge funds solve
                                           HF                         HF     2   2
                                                                                     ≤ σ2 ,
                                                                          
                                   max Et Wt+1            s.t. V art Rt+1 = αHF σR,t                                            (A.2)
                                   αHF

        2
where σR,t ≡ V art (Rt+1 ) is the conditional volatility of the risky asset and σ 2 is the maximum allowable risk in
                                                         f
                                                            
the hedge fund’s position. Assuming that Et Rt+1 − rt+1       > 0 so that the risky asset offers a strictly positive risk
                                                           σ
premium in equilibrium, the solution to (A.2) is αHF = σR,t   . On the other hand, given (A.1) bankers solve problem

                                                     B
                                                                  γ        B
                                                                                 
                                             max Et Wt+1 −            V art Wt+1   ,
                                                αB                  2
whose solution is
                                                                       f
                                                                                  
                                                          1 Et Rt+1 − rt+1
                                                     αB =         2
                                                                           .
                                                          γ      σR,t
Finally, we have the market clearing condition. Because only hedge funds and banks can hold risky assets, we have

                                                      wB αB + wHF αHF = 1.                                                      (A.3)

    We first explain how our model is able to generate leverage patterns found in the data. The solution for αHF
shows that hedge funds have lower leverage in bad states, when σR,t tends to be high (He and Krishnamurthy (2012),
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)). That is, hedge funds have procyclical leverage. Also, because both hedge
funds and banks take on leverage (and households save) in equilibrium, it is easy to show that their wealth shares
wB and wHF go down following negative fundamental shocks.42 Combining the two results above, (A.3) implies
               D
that αB = 1−wwBαD increases in bad states, so banks have countercyclical leverage in equilibrium. Intuitively, this

  41
     The latter is more likely to face equity-based constraints. Given deposit guarantees, the US commercial banking
system is able to attract demand deposits even during severe crises like that in 2008.
  42                                                        B
     Take banks as an example. Leverage implies that dW   WB
                                                               < dW
                                                                  W
                                                                     following a negative shock. I.e., banks experience
                                                                                                                    
                                                               dW B                                             WB
a worse equity return than the aggregate market. But           WB
                                                                        <   dW
                                                                            W
                                                                                 is equivalent to dwB = d       W
                                                                                                                         < 0.



                                                                   40
correponds to the situation in which hedge funds sell their assets to commercial banks after negative shocks, and the
leverages of these two sectors move in the opposite directions. This pattern is empirically supported by He et al.
(2010) and Ang et al. (2011).
    We briefly discuss how we map the pricing kernel in this simple model to the one used in our paper. In this
simple model banks are always marginal in pricing any asset. Given their mean variance preferences, the “CAPM”
type of result holds if one use the banks’ equity return as the pricing kernel, similar to He and Krishnamurthy (2012).
Naturally, the leverage of hedge funds can also be used to represent the pricing kernel, as in Adrian et al. (2014a),
because hedge fund leverage αD perfectly (negatively) correlates with bank equity.




                                                          41
           4




                                        Intermediary Capital Ratio


           2




           0




          -2



                                                Intermediary Capital Risk Factor




          -4
                              1980                   1990                          2000   2010


                   Figure 1: Intermediary Capital Ratio and Risk Factor
Intermediary capital risk factor (dashed line) is AR(1) innovations to the market-based capital ratio of
primary dealers (solid line), scaled by the lagged capital ratio. Both time-series are standardized to zero
mean and unit variance for illustration. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital
ratio is the ratio of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary
dealer holding companies. Shaded regions indicate NBER recessions.




                                                         42
 0.4




 0.2




 0.0




-0.2




-0.4

         FF25       US bonds Sov. bonds        Options        CDS      Commodities       FX      All Portfolios

          Figure 2: Intermediary Capital Risk Price λη Estimates by Asset Class
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio, from a two-factor model that includes the
excess return on the market. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of
portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression.
The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio is the ratio of total market equity
to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding companies. Shocks to capital
ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital ratio. The AEM
leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage level from Flow
of Funds, is from its authors. Solid error bars are the 95% confidence interval around the point estimates,
calculated using Fama-MacBeth standard errors that adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals.
Dotted error bars use the more robust GMM standard errors that additionally correct for estimation error
of the time-series betas.




                                                      43
                                                                                                        COM24
                          0.06                                                                                          COM22
                                                                             COM19            COM4
                                                                               COM2                             COM21
                                                         COM11                         COM1
                          0.04                                              COM18                     OPT10          SOV6
                                                                                COM5               OPT11       FF5
                                                                                                OPT12   FF15
                                                                                                      COM10
                                                                                                         FF4
                                                                                                       FF9   FF10
                                                                                              SOV5    FF8
 Actual Excess Returns




                                                                                              OPT13FF19   FF20 COM23
                                                                                                        FF14
                                                                                                        FF3
                                                                                       COM3      FF12
                                                                                                  FF7FF13
                                                                                                     FF2
                                                                                        CDS20        FF18
                          0.02                          COM12                            FF16OPT14
                                                                                                SOV3
                                                                                               SOV4
                                                                                           BND20
                                                                                             FF22
                                                                                            OPT15
                                                                                                         FF25
                                                                                                 FF17 FF24
                                                                                        FF11
                                                                                           OPT16
                                                                                          OPT17
                                                                                       FF21FF6      FF23
                                                                     COM9                 OPT18
                                                                                        SOV2
                                                                                        CDS19
                                   COM13                                            BND18
                                                                                      BND19
                                                                                    BND17
                                                                             COM16 BND15
                                                                                    BND16
                                                                                  BND13
                                                                                 BND14
                                                                             BND10    CDS18
                                                                                  BND12
                                                                             BND9
                                                                             FX12
                                                                              BND8
                                                                              BND7
                                                                              BND6
                                                                                 BND11
                                                                              BND5     SOV1 COM20
                                                                                     CDS17
                                                                                      OPT1
                                                                                       CDS16
                                                                                      OPT2       FF1
                                                                              BND4
                                                                              BND3
                                                                              BND2    OPT3
                                                                             BND1  CDS14
                                                                                   CDS15
                                                                                  CDS11
                                                                                CDS8CDS13
                                                                                 CDS12
                                                                                 CDS9
                          0.00                       COM14 COM8            FX6
                                                                         COM7
                                                                                CDS5
                                                                                CDS6
                                                                                CDS7
                                                                               CDS3
                                                                                CDS4 OPT4
                                                                                 CDS10
                                                                               CDS2 OPT5
                                                                            COM17
                                                                               CDS1
                                                                                    OPT6
                                                                                   OPT7
                                                                           FX11 OPT8
                                                                        FX4FX5 OPT9
                                                                       FX10
                                                                        FX8
                                                                      FX9
                                                                       FX3
                                                                           FX2
                         -0.02                                            FX7
                                                                       FX1
                                                             COM15

                         -0.04


                         -0.06
                                           COM6


                                 -0.06       -0.04         -0.02              0.00            0.02            0.04          0.06

                                                                 Predicted Excess Returns

                                             Figure 3: Pricing Errors: All Portfolios
Actual average excess returns on all tested portfolios versus predicted expected returns using their risk
exposures (betas) with respect to shocks to the intermediary capital ratio and the excess return on the
market. Test portfolios are abbreviated based on their asset class: equities (FF), US bonds (BND), foreign
sovereign bonds (SOV), options (OPT), CDS, commodities (COM), and foreign exchange (FX). Distance
from the 45 degree line represents pricing errors (alphas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series
regression. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio is the ratio of total
market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding companies.
Shocks to capital ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital
ratio.




                                                                       44
           100




                  Corr[Market,AEM]=0.42
                                                                                          AEM Leverage Ratio
            50    Corr[Market,Book]=0.50
                  Corr[AEM,Book]=-0.07




                                                                                                  Market Capital Ratio,%




            10




             5



                                                                                          Book Capital Ratio,%




                                            1980                  1990                           2000                      2010

                                             (a) Capital and Leverage Ratios (Levels)


            0.5                                                   Market Capital Factor




            0.0




                                           Book Capital Factor

           -0.5



                   Corr[Market,AEM]=0.14                                             AEM Levfac

                   Corr[Market,Book]=0.30

                   Corr[AEM,Book]=-0.06

           -1.0
                                             1980                  1990                           2000                     2010

                                                       (b) Risk Factors (Innovations)

                           Figure 4: Intermediary Capital Measures Comparison
Sub-Figure (a) compares our main state variable of interest, the aggregate market-based capital ratio of
NY Fed primary dealers with other measures of intermediary capital. Market capital ratio at t is defined
         Σi marketequityit
as Σi (marketequityit +bookdebtit )
                                    , where market equity is outstanding shares multiplying stock price, and book
debt is total asset minus common equity AT − CEQ. Book capital ratio simply replaces marketequityt
with bookequityt in this calculation. AEM leverage ratio is the leverage ratio of the broker-dealer sector
used by Adrian et al. (2014a), constructed from Federal Reserve Z.1 security brokers and dealers series:
Total Financial Assets (FL664090005) divided by Total Financial Assets (FL664090005) less Total Liabilities
(FL664190005). In Sub-Figure (a), the capital ratios are in the scale of percentage points (i.e., 5 means 5%).
Sub-Figure (b) draws a similar comparison for the risk factors (innovations in the state variables). Our main
asset pricing factor is AR(1) innovations to the market-based capital ratio of primary dealers, scaled by the
lagged capital ratio. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the
seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors.
                                                           45
Shaded regions indicate NBER recessions.
 0.0




-0.5




-1.0




         FF25       US bonds Sov. bonds         Options        CDS     Commodities        FX      All Portfolios

                                    Figure 5: AEM Leverage Factor
Risk price estimates for shocks to the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage factor (AEM), from a two-factor model
that includes the excess return on the market. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-
sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage
time-series regression. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio is the ratio
of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding
companies. Shocks to capital ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged
capital ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book
leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors. Solid error bars are the 95% confidence interval around
the point estimates, calculated using Fama-MacBeth standard errors that adjust for cross-asset correlation
in the residuals. Dotted error bars use the more robust GMM standard errors that additionally correct for
estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                       46
Primary Dealer                               Holding Company                                   Start Date
Goldman, Sachs & Co.                         Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., The                     12/4/1974
Barclays Capital Inc.                        Barclays PLC                                        4/1/1998
HSBC Securities (USA) Inc.                   HSBC Holdings PLC                                   6/1/1999
BNP Paribas Securities Corp.                 BNP Paribas                                        9/15/2000
Deutsche Bank Securities Inc.                Deutsche Bank AG                                   3/30/2002
Mizuho Securities USA Inc.                   Mizuho Financial Group, Inc.                        4/1/2002
Citigroup Global Markets Inc.                Citigroup Inc.                                      4/7/2003
UBS Securities LLC                           UBS AG                                              6/9/2003
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC           Credit Suisse Group AG                             1/16/2006
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co.                      Cantor Fitzgerald & Company                         8/1/2006
RBS Securities Inc.                          Royal Bank Of Scotland Group PLC, The               4/1/2009
Nomura Securities International,Inc          Nomura Holdings, Inc.                              7/27/2009
Daiwa Capital Markets America Inc.           Daiwa Securities Group Inc. (Japan)                 4/1/2010
J.P. Morgan Securities LLC                   JPMorgan Chase & Co.                                9/1/2010
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith        Bank Of America Corporation                        11/1/2010
RBC Capital Markets, LLC                     Royal Bank Holding Inc.                            11/1/2010
SG Americas Securities, LLC                  Societe Generale                                    2/2/2011
Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC                     Morgan Stanley                                     5/31/2011
Bank Of Nova Scotia, NY Agency               Bank Of Nova Scotia, The                           10/4/2011
BMO Capital Markets Corp.                    Bank Of Montreal                                   10/4/2011
Jefferies LLC                                Jefferies LLC                                       3/1/2013
TD Securities (USA) LLC                      Toronto-dominion Bank, The                         2/11/2014

                       Table 1: Primary Dealers as of February 11, 2014
Primary dealers, as designated by the New York Fed serve as its trading counterparties as it implements mon-
etary policy. Primary dealers are obliged to: (i) participate consistently in open market operations to carry
out US monetary policy; and (ii) provide the NY Fed’s trading desk with market information and analysis.
Primary dealers are also required to participate in all US government debt auctions and to make reasonable
markets for the NY Fed. From 1960 to 2014 a total of 168 dealers were designated as primary ones, some
of whom lost this designation previously. See http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealers.html for
current and historical lists of primary dealers.




                                                     47
                           Total Assets                        Book Debt                          Book Equity                        Market Equity
                    BD      Banks     Cmpust.          BD      Banks       Cmpust.         BD      Banks     Cmpust.          BD       Banks    Cmpust.
      1960-2012    0.959     0.596        0.240       0.960     0.602       0.280         0.939    0.514        0.079        0.911     0.435         0.026
      1960-1990    0.997     0.635        0.266       0.998     0.639       0.305         0.988    0.568        0.095        0.961     0.447         0.015
      1990-2012    0.914     0.543        0.202       0.916     0.550       0.240         0.883    0.444        0.058        0.848     0.419         0.039
48




                                     Table 2: Primary Dealers as Representative Financial Intermediaries
     Average sizes of prime dealers relative to all broker-dealers (BD), all banks (Banks), and all firms in Compustat (Cmptust). At the end of each month,
     we calculate the total assets (and book debt, book equity, and market equity) of prime dealers and divide them by the total for the comparison group.
     To make the samples comparable, we focus in this table only on US-based primary dealer holding companies that are in the CRSP-Compustat data.
     We report the time series average of this ratio in each sample period.
                                       Market Capital              Book Capital            AEM Leverage
Market Capital                                    1.00                     0.50                       0.42
Book Capital                                                               1.00                      -0.07
AEM Leverage                                                                                          1.00
E/P                                               -0.83                    -0.38                     -0.64
Unemployment                                      -0.63                    -0.10                     -0.33
GDP                                                0.18                     0.32                     -0.23
Financial Conditions                              -0.48                    -0.53                     -0.19
Market Volatility                                 -0.06                    -0.31                      0.33
                                       (a) Correlations of Levels
                                 Market Capital Factor     Book Capital Factor      AEM Leverage Factor
Market Capital Factor                             1.00                      0.30                      0.14
Book Capital Factor                                                        1.00                      -0.06
AEM Leverage Factor                                                                                   1.00
E/P Growth                                        -0.75                    -0.10                     -0.18
Unemployment Growth                               -0.05                     0.12                     -0.08
GDP Growth                                         0.20                     0.09                      0.04
Financial Conditions Growth                       -0.38                    -0.29                     -0.06
Market Volatility Growth                          -0.49                    -0.18                     -0.08
                                      (b) Correlations of Factors

                                  Table 3: Pair-wise Correlations
Time-series pair-wise correlations over the 1970Q1–2012Q4 sample. Market Capital (ratio) is defined as the
ratio of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding
companies, constructed using CRSP-Compustat and Datastream data. Market equity is outstanding shares
multiplying stock price, and book debt is total asset minus common equity AT − CEQ. Market Capital
Factor is our main asset pricing factor defined as AR(1) innovations to the market capital ratio, scaled
by the lagged capital ratio. Book Capital and Book Capital Factor are similarly defined, but uses book
equity instead of market equity. The AEM implied capital is the inverse of broker-dealer book leverage from
Flow of Funds used in AEM, and the AEM leverage factor (LevF ac) is from its authors which is defined
as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage from Flow of Funds. Correlation for
factors are with growth (log change) of the earnings-to-price ratio, Unemployment, GDP, the Chicago Fed
National Financial Conditions Index (high level means poor financial conditions), or realized volatility of
CRSP value-weighted stock index.




                                                    49
                    FF25     US bonds      Sov. bonds      Options    CDS     Commod.        FX      All Ptfs.
 Mean(µi − rf )      0.02         0.01            0.02        0.01    0.00          0.02    -0.01        0.01
 Std(µi − rf )       0.01         0.00            0.01        0.01    0.01          0.03     0.01        0.02
 Mean(βi,η )         0.07         0.03            0.22       -0.01    0.06         -0.09    -0.08        0.01
 Std(βi,η )          0.11         0.04            0.14        0.05    0.04          0.32     0.03        0.17
 Mean(βi,W )         1.02         0.06            0.09        0.83    0.04          0.60     0.15        0.48
 Std(βi,W )          0.30         0.07            0.12        0.11    0.03          0.34     0.04        0.45
 Mean(R2 )           0.78         0.09            0.30        0.79    0.63          0.15     0.04        0.43
 Assets                25           20               6          18      20            24       12         125
 Quarters             172          148              65         103      47            42      135         172

               Table 4: Expected Returns and Risk Exposure by Asset Class
Average excess returns µi −rf , and risk exposures (betas) to shocks to the intermediary capital ratio, denoted
by βi,η , and to the excess return on the market (βi,W ), across portfolios in each asset class. The quarterly
sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio is the ratio of total market equity to total market
assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding companies. Shocks to capital ratio are
defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital ratio. The AEM leverage
factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage level from Flow of
Funds, is from its authors. Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression.




                                                      50
                FF25     US bonds      Sov. bonds      Options      CDS      Commod.         FX       All Ptfs.
 Capital         0.07          0.08           0.07        0.22       0.11          0.07       0.19        0.09
    t-FM        (2.14)        (3.08)         (2.41)      (5.96)     (3.92)        (2.30)     (4.70)      (5.53)
    t-GMM       (2.16)        (2.58)         (1.66)      (2.02)     (3.44)        (2.12)     (3.12)      (2.56)
 Market          0.01          0.01           0.01        0.03       0.01          0.03       0.10        0.02
    t-FM        (0.81)        (1.13)         (0.49)      (1.63)     (0.64)        (1.46)     (3.38)      (1.98)
    t-GMM       (0.78)        (0.82)         (0.32)      (0.67)     (0.41)        (1.29)     (2.17)      (0.95)
 Intercept       0.00          0.00           0.00       -0.01      -0.00          0.01      -0.01       -0.00
    t-FM        (0.37)        (2.15)         (0.56)     (-0.87)    (-5.69)        (0.85)    (-1.76)     (-0.19)
    t-GMM       (0.36)        (1.44)         (0.33)     (-0.31)    (-2.77)        (0.72)    (-0.83)     (-0.14)
 R 2             0.53          0.84           0.81        0.99       0.67          0.44       0.53        0.45
 MAPE, %         0.34          0.13           0.32        0.14       0.18          1.84       0.44        0.85
 RRA             4.21          4.63           4.32       13.73       6.79          4.24      11.86        5.71
 Assets            25            20              6          18         20            24         12         125
 Quarters         172           148             65         103         47            42        135         172

                 Table 5: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests by Asset Class
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio and the excess return on the market. The
capital ratio is defined as the ratio of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market
equity) of primary dealer holding companies. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-
sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage
time-series regression. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in
percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by
its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more
robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                       51
                FF25      US bonds       Sov. bonds    Options         CDS      Commod.       FX      All Ptfs.
 Capital         0.16          0.12            0.43       -0.86         0.67       -0.01     -0.03        0.08
    t-FM        (2.62)        (0.91)          (1.81)     (-4.89)       (5.22)     (-0.05)   (-0.17)      (1.44)
    t-GMM       (2.45)        (0.69)          (1.24)     (-2.33)       (2.55)     (-0.04)   (-0.12)      (0.52)
 Market         -0.02          0.04            0.06       -0.07         0.07        0.05      0.12        0.02
    t-FM       (-1.92)        (3.24)          (2.61)     (-2.45)       (3.62)      (2.18)    (3.45)      (2.03)
    t-GMM      (-1.66)        (2.51)          (1.74)     (-1.20)       (2.99)      (1.81)    (2.45)      (0.93)
 Intercept       0.04          0.00            0.00        0.07        -0.00       -0.00     -0.02        0.00
    t-FM        (3.83)        (1.75)          (0.43)      (3.26)      (-5.87)     (-0.20)   (-4.75)      (0.64)
    t-GMM       (3.36)        (1.49)          (0.22)      (1.48)      (-2.72)     (-0.19)   (-2.14)      (0.76)
 R 2             0.54          0.82            0.81        0.97         0.86        0.38      0.50        0.38
 MAPE, %         0.36          0.14            0.32        0.23         0.15        1.92      0.45        1.08
 Assets            25            20               6          18           20          24        12         125
 Quarters         165           148              65         103           47          42       135         172
                                        (a) Non-Primary Broker-Dealers


                 FF25     US bonds       Sov. bonds     Options        CDS      Commod.       FX       All Ptfs.
  Capital        -0.01          0.03           0.02           0.04      0.00        0.02      0.07        -0.00
     t-FM       (-0.70)        (3.76)         (2.21)         (3.99)    (0.34)      (2.13)    (5.17)      (-0.04)
     t-GMM      (-0.70)        (2.90)         (1.42)         (2.01)    (0.15)      (1.83)    (2.16)      (-0.04)
  Market         -0.01          0.03           0.02           0.09      0.09        0.05      0.14         0.02
     t-FM       (-0.85)        (2.51)         (1.00)         (5.15)    (4.32)      (2.16)    (5.42)       (2.19)
     t-GMM      (-0.83)        (1.72)         (0.88)         (3.09)    (1.78)      (1.87)    (2.78)       (1.08)
  Intercept       0.03          0.00           0.02          -0.06     -0.00       -0.00     -0.02         0.00
     t-FM        (3.18)        (1.96)         (1.59)        (-5.09)   (-4.13)     (-0.02)   (-4.64)       (0.20)
     t-GMM       (3.09)        (1.08)         (1.57)        (-2.99)   (-1.38)     (-0.02)   (-1.55)       (0.18)
  R 2             0.08          0.85           0.74           0.91      0.90        0.38      0.51         0.36
  MAPE, %         0.54          0.12           0.46           0.38      0.13        1.93      0.46         1.31
  RRA            -3.68         10.32           5.40          15.07      0.93        6.34     24.70        -0.11
  Assets            25            20              6             18        20          24        12          125
  Quarters         172           148             65            103        47          42       135          172
                                                 (b) Non-Banks

                     Table 6: Primary Dealers are Special: a Placebo Test
Risk price estimates for shocks to the capital ratios of complementary sets of financial intermediaries, and
the excess return on the market. Panel (a) examines non-primary dealers defined as US firms in the broker-
dealer SIC groups (6211, 6221) that are not in the NY Fed primary dealer list. Panel (b) examines non-banks
defined as US firms with an SIC code that does not start with 6. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-
period cross-sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in
a first-stage time-series regression. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio
is the ratio of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer
holding companies. Shocks to capital ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by
the lagged capital ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-
dealer book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is
in percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by
its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more
robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas.


                                                       52
                FF25      US bonds      Sov. bonds      Options      CDS      Commod.         FX       All Ptfs.
 ME               0.07          0.05           0.05        0.14       0.06          0.07      0.19         0.09
    t-FM         (2.03)        (2.18)         (1.38)      (3.74)     (1.87)        (2.24)    (5.66)       (5.04)
    t-GMM        (1.62)        (1.34)         (0.86)      (1.54)     (1.32)        (2.06)    (4.30)       (2.29)
 BD              -0.02          0.04          -0.07       -0.06      -0.10         -0.01     -0.00        -0.02
    t-FM        (-2.02)        (2.46)        (-2.93)     (-2.35)    (-4.54)       (-0.30)   (-0.13)      (-1.51)
    t-GMM       (-1.51)        (1.53)        (-2.24)     (-0.93)    (-2.12)       (-0.28)   (-0.08)      (-0.48)
 Market           0.01          0.05           0.02        0.01      -0.01          0.03      0.09         0.02
    t-FM         (0.57)        (3.78)         (0.89)      (0.50)    (-0.28)        (1.36)    (3.44)       (1.97)
    t-GMM        (0.46)        (2.01)         (0.48)      (0.19)    (-0.17)        (1.22)    (2.12)       (0.85)
 Intercept        0.01          0.00          -0.00       -0.00      -0.00          0.01     -0.01        -0.00
    t-FM         (0.73)        (1.67)        (-0.24)     (-0.05)    (-5.78)        (1.24)   (-1.47)      (-0.18)
    t-GMM        (0.56)        (1.19)        (-0.12)     (-0.02)    (-3.25)        (1.15)   (-0.76)      (-0.17)
 R 2              0.51          0.89           0.90        0.99       0.86          0.45      0.54         0.50
 MAPE, %          0.35          0.09           0.29        0.12       0.15          1.84      0.44         0.88
 RRA              3.71          2.42           2.58        7.07       2.86          3.60      9.82         4.81
 Assets             25            20              6          18         20            24        12          125
 Quarters          172           148             65         103         47            42       135          172

         Table 7: Market Equity is More Important for Pricing than Book Debt
Risk price estimates for the market equity growth (ME) and book debt growth (BD) of the aggregate
intermediary sector, and the excess return on the market. Both growth (log change) measures rely only on
firms that are in the sample in both periods. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-
sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage
time-series regression. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in
percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by
its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more
robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                       53
                FF25     US bonds     Sov. bonds     Options      CDS      Commod.         FX      All Ptfs.
 AEM            0.14          0.14           0.08       -0.58     -0.24          0.01     -0.14        0.13
    t-FM       (3.11)        (3.33)         (0.82)     (-4.83)   (-4.80)        (0.15)   (-2.38)      (3.73)
    t-GMM      (2.54)        (2.05)         (0.75)     (-1.52)   (-2.25)        (0.13)   (-1.46)      (0.66)
 Market         0.01          0.04           0.03        0.02      0.05          0.05      0.09        0.02
    t-FM       (0.66)        (3.67)         (1.54)      (0.94)    (2.52)        (2.08)    (4.08)      (2.15)
    t-GMM      (0.57)        (1.77)         (1.00)      (0.22)    (2.24)        (1.90)    (2.62)      (1.05)
 Intercept      0.01          0.00           0.01       -0.02     -0.00         -0.00     -0.02       -0.00
    t-FM       (0.69)        (1.28)         (1.64)     (-1.58)   (-2.48)       (-0.05)   (-4.38)     (-0.16)
    t-GMM      (0.56)        (0.64)         (1.65)     (-0.29)   (-1.15)       (-0.04)   (-2.22)     (-0.07)
 R 2            0.70          0.87           0.73        0.98      0.93          0.38      0.59        0.38
 MAPE, %        0.27          0.12           0.45        0.16      0.11          1.93      0.36        0.94
 RRA            5.88          6.14           3.39      -25.05    -10.24          0.55     -5.91        5.52
 Assets           25            20              6          18        20            24        12         125
 Quarters        172           148             65         103        47            42       135         172

 Table 8: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests by Asset Class: AEM Leverage Factor
Risk price estimates for the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage factor (AEM) and the excess return on the market.
Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on
risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression. The quarterly sample is
1970Q1–2012Q4. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer
book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in
percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by
its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more
robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                     54
                    FF25     US bonds     Sov. bonds      Options    CDS     Commod.        FX      All Ptfs.
 Mean(µi − rf )     0.02          0.01           0.02        0.01    0.00          0.02    -0.01        0.01
 Std(µi − rf )      0.01          0.00           0.01        0.01    0.01          0.03     0.01        0.02
 Mean(βi,AEM )      0.03          0.01          -0.01       -0.03    0.00          0.05    -0.02        0.01
 Std(βi,AEM )       0.05          0.01           0.04        0.02    0.01          0.08     0.02        0.05
 Mean(βi,W )        1.09          0.09           0.34        0.83    0.11          0.47     0.06        0.48
 Std(βi,W )         0.20          0.10           0.22        0.17    0.07          0.39     0.05        0.45
 Mean(R2 )          0.78          0.09           0.23        0.79    0.52          0.13     0.02        0.41
 Assets               25            20              6          18      20            24       12         125
 Quarters            172           148             65         103      47            42      135         172

Table 9: Expected Returns and Risk Exposure by Asset Class: AEM Leverage Factor
Average excess returns µi − rf , and risk exposures (betas) to the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage factor (AEM)
and to the excess return on the market (βi,W ), across portfolios in each asset class. The quarterly sample
is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio is the ratio of total market equity to total market assets
(book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding companies. Shocks to capital ratio are defined as
AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined
as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its
authors. Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression.




                                                     55
                FF25      US bonds     Sov. bonds      Options      CDS      Commod.         FX      All Ptfs.
 Capital        -0.02          0.08            0.11       0.13       0.06         0.07       0.14        0.09
    t-FM       (-0.48)        (3.14)          (3.13)     (3.03)     (2.17)       (2.30)     (4.54)      (5.59)
    t-GMM      (-0.32)        (3.32)          (2.95)     (1.00)     (2.59)       (2.13)     (2.92)      (2.60)
 Market          0.01          0.02            0.00       0.02       0.02         0.03       0.07        0.02
    t-FM        (0.40)        (1.99)          (0.15)     (1.00)     (1.27)       (1.34)     (2.91)      (1.85)
    t-GMM       (0.29)        (0.73)          (0.07)     (0.44)     (1.01)       (1.32)     (1.90)      (0.92)
 AEM             0.18          0.13           -0.12      -0.26      -0.21         0.03      -0.12        0.01
    t-FM        (3.91)        (3.19)         (-1.17)    (-2.46)    (-4.39)       (0.35)    (-2.15)      (0.36)
    t-GMM       (2.23)        (1.88)         (-0.56)    (-0.85)    (-3.24)       (0.29)    (-1.38)      (0.09)
 Intercept       0.01          0.00           -0.01      -0.01      -0.00         0.01      -0.01       -0.00
    t-FM        (0.92)        (1.36)         (-0.94)    (-0.88)    (-2.99)       (0.85)    (-2.10)     (-0.03)
    t-GMM       (0.64)        (0.63)         (-0.78)    (-0.36)    (-1.94)       (0.73)    (-1.02)     (-0.02)
 R 2             0.71          0.88            0.85       0.99       0.94         0.44       0.62        0.48
 MAPE, %         0.27          0.11            0.29       0.10       0.09         1.83       0.38        0.87
 RRA            -0.94          4.74            6.49       7.71       3.53         4.24       8.76        5.76
 Assets            25            20               6         18         20           24         12         125
 Quarters         172           148              65        103         47           42        135         172

                    Table 10: Horse-races with the AEM Leverage Factor
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio (Capital), the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage
factor (AEM), and the excess return on the market. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period
cross-sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a
first-stage time-series regression. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio
is the ratio of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer
holding companies. Shocks to capital ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by
the lagged capital ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-
dealer book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is
in percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by
its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more
robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                       56
                        FF25                 US bonds               Sov. bonds                Options
                  HKM          AEM       HKM          AEM         HKM           AEM       HKM         AEM
 Capital           0.12         0.14      0.02        0.02       -0.00          -0.03      0.20       -0.34
    t-FM          (2.66)       (3.20)    (0.42)      (0.38)     (-0.05)        (-0.72)    (6.43)     (-6.46)
    t-GMM         (1.84)       (2.22)    (0.33)      (0.31)     (-0.05)        (-0.56)    (2.04)     (-3.10)
 Market            0.03         0.01      0.05        0.04        0.07           0.05     -0.00        0.05
    t-FM          (1.58)       (0.94)    (3.55)      (3.08)      (3.05)         (2.28)   (-0.06)      (2.40)
    t-GMM         (1.14)       (0.72)    (2.56)      (2.79)      (2.54)         (2.05)   (-0.02)      (1.04)
 Intercept        -0.01         0.00      0.00        0.00        0.02           0.01      0.01       -0.04
    t-FM         (-0.82)       (0.25)    (2.50)      (3.46)      (2.47)         (0.86)    (0.67)     (-2.39)
    t-GMM        (-0.59)       (0.18)    (2.11)      (3.56)      (1.98)         (0.80)    (0.22)     (-1.08)
 R 2               0.70         0.72      0.86        0.83        0.71           0.54      0.99        0.98
 MAPE, %           0.34         0.30      0.11        0.10        0.53           0.67      0.14        0.18
 RRA               8.96         9.04      1.14        1.28       -0.12          -1.93     14.42      -21.50
 Assets              25           25        20          20           6              6        18          18
 Quarters           148          148       128         128          48             48        83          83
                        CDS                  Commod.                      FX                  All Ptfs.
                  HKM          AEM       HKM          AEM         HKM           AEM       HKM         AEM
 Capital           0.08       -0.16       0.03       -0.01        0.16          -0.03      0.09        0.11
   t-FM           (2.62)     (-3.55)     (0.97)     (-0.27)      (4.00)        (-0.57)    (4.93)      (3.52)
   t-GMM          (1.88)     (-2.50)     (0.91)     (-0.26)      (2.82)        (-0.34)    (3.76)      (2.40)
 Market            0.07        0.06       0.02        0.03        0.10           0.11      0.02        0.02
   t-FM           (3.27)      (2.31)     (0.93)      (1.06)      (3.19)         (5.02)    (1.90)      (2.10)
   t-GMM          (3.23)      (1.50)     (0.81)      (0.91)      (1.98)         (2.94)    (0.95)      (1.03)
 Intercept        -0.00       -0.00       0.04        0.04       -0.01          -0.01     -0.00       -0.00
   t-FM          (-2.22)     (-1.77)     (3.65)      (3.05)     (-1.08)        (-3.57)   (-0.19)     (-0.35)
   t-GMM         (-1.55)     (-0.88)     (3.77)      (2.96)     (-0.55)        (-1.78)   (-0.33)     (-0.28)
 R2                0.84        0.95       0.13        0.12        0.55           0.52      0.06        0.06
 MAPE, %           0.12        0.08       2.90        2.87        0.38           0.41      1.60        1.46
 RRA               5.92      -10.13       2.08       -0.95       11.87          -1.79      6.80        6.76
 Assets              20          20         24          24          12             12       125         125
 Quarters            23          23         19          19         123            123       148         148

    Table 11: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests by Asset Class: Pre-crisis Sample
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio (HKM) or the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage
factor (AEM), and the excess return on the market. Here we focus on the pre-crisis quarterly sample
1970Q1–2006Q4. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of portfolio
excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression. The
intermediary capital ratio is the ratio of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market
equity) of primary dealer holding companies. Shocks to capital ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the
capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted
growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors. Mean absolute
pricing error (MAPE) is in percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital
risk factor, scaled by its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in
the residuals. The more robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the
time-series betas.

                                                     57
                        FF25                 US bonds               Sov. bonds                Options
                  HKM          AEM       HKM          AEM         HKM           AEM       HKM         AEM
 Capital           0.02         0.09      0.04        0.00        0.07          0.08       0.36       -0.52
    t-FM          (0.70)       (1.39)    (1.20)      (0.06)      (2.36)        (0.82)     (5.86)     (-5.65)
    t-GMM         (0.75)       (1.34)    (1.21)      (0.05)      (1.58)        (0.75)     (1.21)     (-1.95)
 Market           -0.00         0.00      0.03        0.03        0.01          0.03      -0.00        0.02
    t-FM         (-0.03)       (0.11)    (2.24)      (2.28)      (0.50)        (1.54)    (-0.11)      (1.36)
    t-GMM        (-0.03)       (0.11)    (2.01)      (2.07)      (0.33)        (1.00)    (-0.03)      (0.35)
 Intercept         0.02         0.02      0.01        0.01        0.00          0.01       0.01       -0.02
    t-FM          (1.33)       (1.34)    (4.94)      (4.77)      (0.56)        (1.64)     (0.94)     (-1.78)
    t-GMM         (1.40)       (1.37)    (4.60)      (4.42)      (0.32)        (1.65)     (0.21)     (-0.34)
 R 2               0.28         0.30      0.64        0.64        0.80          0.73       0.96        0.95
 MAPE, %           0.42         0.41      0.22        0.22        0.33          0.45       0.22        0.26
 RRA               1.30         2.95      2.30        0.11        4.22          2.65      21.06      -17.40
 Assets              25           25        20          20           6             6         18          18
 Quarters            92           92        88          88          65            65         88          88
                        CDS                  Commod.                      FX                  All Ptfs.
                  HKM          AEM       HKM          AEM         HKM           AEM       HKM         AEM
 Capital           0.10       -0.24       0.07        0.01        0.07          -0.14     0.06         0.08
   t-FM           (3.62)     (-4.80)     (2.26)      (0.15)      (2.35)        (-2.90)   (3.53)       (1.50)
   t-GMM          (3.75)     (-2.25)     (2.09)      (0.13)      (2.15)        (-2.24)   (1.96)       (0.49)
 Market            0.03        0.05       0.03        0.05        0.05           0.03     0.01         0.02
   t-FM           (1.51)      (2.52)     (1.54)      (2.08)      (1.83)         (1.35)   (1.50)       (1.96)
   t-GMM          (1.20)      (2.24)     (1.37)      (1.90)      (1.65)         (1.18)   (0.85)       (1.11)
 Intercept        -0.00       -0.00       0.01       -0.00       -0.01          -0.01     0.00         0.00
   t-FM          (-5.62)     (-2.48)     (0.71)     (-0.05)     (-1.19)        (-1.43)   (1.55)       (0.96)
   t-GMM         (-3.14)     (-1.15)     (0.59)     (-0.04)     (-0.91)        (-1.02)   (0.69)       (0.37)
 R2                0.64        0.93       0.42        0.38        0.18           0.43     0.40         0.33
 MAPE, %           0.19        0.11       1.86        1.93        0.48           0.39     0.94         1.00
 RRA               5.87       -8.00       3.90        0.43        4.18          -4.59     3.69         2.52
 Assets              20          20         24          24          12             12      125          125
 Quarters            47          47         42          42          80             80       92           92

     Table 12: Cross-sectional Asset Pricing Tests by Asset Class: Recent Sample
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio (HKM) or the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage
factor (AEM), and the excess return on the market. Here we focus on the more recent quarterly sample
1990Q1–2012Q4. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of portfolio
excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression. The
intermediary capital ratio is the ratio of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market
equity) of primary dealer holding companies. Shocks to capital ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the
capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted
growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors. Mean absolute
pricing error (MAPE) is in percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital
risk factor, scaled by its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in
the residuals. The more robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the
time-series betas.

                                                     58
                FF25     US bonds      Sov. bonds     Options      CDS       Commod.         FX      All Ptfs.
 Capital        0.01          0.01            0.02        0.23      0.06          0.03       0.07        0.04
    t-FM       (1.20)        (0.77)          (1.65)      (5.09)    (5.32)        (2.36)     (4.64)      (6.34)
    t-GMM      (1.16)        (0.71)          (1.35)      (0.80)    (3.09)        (2.25)     (3.51)      (3.32)
 Market         0.00          0.01            0.02        0.02     -0.00          0.01       0.03        0.01
    t-FM       (0.17)        (1.90)          (2.72)      (3.70)   (-0.23)        (1.71)     (2.57)      (3.44)
    t-GMM      (0.17)        (1.71)          (2.16)      (0.74)   (-0.16)        (1.62)     (1.76)      (1.55)
 Intercept      0.01          0.00            0.00       -0.02     -0.00          0.00      -0.00       -0.00
    t-FM       (1.71)        (4.73)          (0.09)     (-4.33)   (-6.85)        (0.54)    (-2.21)     (-2.16)
    t-GMM      (1.68)        (4.39)          (0.06)     (-0.77)   (-3.90)        (0.47)    (-1.30)     (-1.28)
 R 2            0.27          0.78            0.71        0.96      0.72          0.37       0.32        0.37
 MAPE, %        0.16          0.05            0.17        0.07      0.07          0.60       0.16        0.34
 RRA            2.89          2.72            3.76       47.49     11.54          5.59      14.34        8.21
 Assets           25            20               6          18        20            24         12         125
 Quarters        516           449             196         310       143           128        407         516

                  Table 13: Cross-sectional Tests at the Monthly Frequency
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio and the excess return on the market. The
monthly sample is January 1970 to December 2012. The monthly intermediary capital ratio here is the
ratio of total market equity (measured monthly) to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of
primary dealer holding companies, where book debt is the latest quarterly observation. Shocks to capital
ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital ratio. Risk prices are
the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures
(betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression. The AEM leverage factor, defined as
the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its
authors. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the
price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for
cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for
estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                      59
                         FF25                 US bonds                Sov. bonds               Options
                   HKM            AEM      HKM          AEM        HKM            AEM      HKM         AEM
 Leverage           0.12       -2.12        0.09       -1.63        0.15          -0.33     0.09       -2.92
    t-Hodrick      (3.19)     (-1.73)      (1.75)     (-1.81)      (4.41)        (-0.15)   (2.05)     (-2.00)
 R 2                0.15        0.08        0.09        0.06        0.21           0.00     0.06        0.16
 Assets               25          25          20          20           6              6       18          18
 Quarters            168         168         145         145          62             62      100         100
                            CDS               Commod.                       FX                 All Ptfs.
                   HKM            AEM      HKM          AEM        HKM            AEM      HKM         AEM
 Leverage           0.14       -1.30       -0.01       -1.97       -0.10          0.65      0.09       -1.93
   t-Hodrick       (3.20)     (-0.49)     (-0.46)     (-1.98)     (-2.15)        (0.70)    (2.89)     (-2.03)
 R2                 0.21        0.04        0.01        0.26        0.10          0.01      0.13        0.10
 Assets               20          20          24          24          12            12       125         125
 Quarters             44          44          39          39         132           132       169         169

                        Table 14: Predictive Regressions by Asset Class
One-year-ahead predictive regression results for each asset class. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4.
We regress the mean return on all assets of an asset class on lagged intermediary leverage, which is either the
squared inverse of the intermediary capital ratio (HKM), or the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage ratio (AEM).
Regression coefficients are multiplied by 100. Hodrick (1992) t-statistics are reported in parentheses.




                                                      60
                        FF25                 US bonds               Sov. bonds                Options
                  HKM          AEM        HKM        AEM         HKM            AEM       HKM         AEM
 Capital           0.00         0.14      0.05        0.25        0.06          0.19       0.13       -1.13
   t-FM           (0.02)       (3.26)    (3.16)      (4.48)      (2.37)        (2.19)     (5.03)     (-5.44)
   t-GMM          (0.02)       (2.60)    (3.05)      (1.25)      (1.83)        (0.67)     (3.12)     (-0.37)
 Intercept         0.02         0.00      0.00        0.00        0.00          0.02      -0.05        0.03
   t-FM           (1.63)       (0.43)    (2.11)      (1.95)      (0.73)        (3.04)    (-4.54)      (2.93)
   t-GMM          (1.63)       (0.26)    (1.78)      (0.93)      (0.51)        (1.08)    (-2.75)      (0.25)
 R2                0.00         0.69      0.83        0.21        0.77          0.57       0.95        0.91
 MAPE, %           0.55         0.27      0.13        0.29        0.42          0.55       0.29        0.37
 RRA               0.04         6.06      3.10       10.93        3.63          8.20       8.17      -48.30
 Assets              25           25        20          20           6             6         18          18
 Quarters           172          172       148         148          65            65        103         103
                        CDS                  Commod.                      FX                  All Ptfs.
                  HKM          AEM        HKM        AEM         HKM            AEM       HKM         AEM
 Capital           0.08       -0.26       0.07        0.11        0.19          -0.26      0.04        0.16
   t-FM           (3.24)     (-5.14)     (2.28)      (1.42)      (4.55)        (-3.59)    (2.36)      (3.82)
   t-GMM          (3.25)     (-2.84)     (2.04)      (0.89)      (3.28)        (-2.27)    (1.19)      (0.55)
 Intercept        -0.00        0.00       0.01        0.01       -0.01          -0.02     -0.00        0.00
   t-FM          (-5.72)      (2.52)     (0.53)      (1.18)     (-2.70)        (-3.87)   (-0.06)      (0.33)
   t-GMM         (-3.71)      (1.06)     (0.40)      (0.93)     (-1.15)        (-1.62)   (-0.05)      (0.06)
 R2                0.64        0.35       0.43        0.11        0.53           0.37      0.40        0.25
 MAPE, %           0.20        0.33       1.85        2.15        0.44           0.49      0.95        1.00
 RRA               5.20      -11.26       4.18        4.66       11.83         -11.27      2.28        7.05
 Assets              20          20         24          24          12             12       125         125
 Quarters            47          47         42          42         135            135       172         172

             Table 15: Capital Ratio or AEM Leverage: Single Factor Models
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio (HKM) or the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage
factor (AEM) alone. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio is the ratio
of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding
companies. Shocks to capital ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged
capital ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book
leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in percentage
terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by its variance.
Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more robust GMM
t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                     61
                 FF25     US bonds      Sov. bonds      Options        CDS      Commod.       FX      All Ptfs.
  Capital        -0.00          0.05           0.06           0.14      0.09        0.07      0.19        0.04
    t-FM        (-0.14)        (3.17)         (2.32)         (5.01)    (3.24)      (2.22)    (4.66)      (2.32)
    t-GMM       (-0.14)        (3.10)         (1.77)         (2.99)    (2.91)      (1.95)    (3.44)      (1.15)
  Intercept       0.02          0.00           0.00          -0.05     -0.00        0.00     -0.01       -0.00
    t-FM         (1.80)        (1.91)         (0.69)        (-4.64)   (-5.74)      (0.31)   (-3.02)     (-0.08)
    t-GMM        (1.79)        (1.68)         (0.48)        (-2.67)   (-3.73)      (0.24)   (-1.38)     (-0.08)
  R2              0.00          0.84           0.72           0.94      0.63        0.42      0.58        0.39
  MAPE, %         0.56          0.13           0.46           0.32      0.20        1.88      0.42        0.95
  RRA            -0.21          2.99           3.51           7.97      5.25        3.91     10.68        2.06
  Assets            25            20              6             18        20          24        12         125
  Quarters         172           148             65            103        47          42       135         172
                                           (a) Single Factor Model


                FF25      US bonds      Sov. bonds     Options         CDS      Commod.      FX       All Ptfs.
  Capital        0.06          0.07           0.07        0.29          0.13       0.07       0.19       0.09
     t-FM       (1.89)        (2.67)         (2.17)      (5.99)        (4.10)     (2.21)     (4.77)     (5.36)
     t-GMM      (1.89)        (2.55)         (1.52)      (1.71)        (3.00)     (1.93)     (3.40)     (2.25)
  Market         0.01          0.02           0.02        0.03          0.02       0.03       0.09       0.02
     t-FM       (0.91)        (1.63)         (0.96)      (1.69)        (0.92)     (1.52)     (2.99)     (2.18)
     t-GMM      (0.89)        (1.15)         (0.60)      (0.54)        (0.56)     (1.31)     (1.81)     (1.07)
  Intercept      0.00          0.00           0.00       -0.01         -0.00       0.01      -0.01      -0.00
     t-FM       (0.24)        (2.47)         (0.37)     (-0.84)       (-5.77)     (0.52)    (-1.51)    (-0.59)
     t-GMM      (0.24)        (2.23)         (0.22)     (-0.24)       (-2.60)     (0.42)    (-0.68)    (-0.42)
  R 2            0.45          0.85           0.74        0.99          0.68       0.42       0.59       0.49
  MAPE, %        0.39          0.12           0.43        0.16          0.19       1.86       0.44       0.81
  RRA            3.36          3.73           3.91       16.05          7.30       3.87      10.85       4.80
  Assets           25            20              6          18            20         24         12        125
  Quarters        172           148             65         103            47         42        135        172
                                            (b) Two Factor Model

                              Table 16: Intermediary Equity Return
The capital factor considered here is the value-weighted equity return of primary dealers. Panel (a) reports
risk price estimates for primary dealers’ equity return alone, while Panel (b) also includes the excess return
on the market. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio is the ratio of total
market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding companies.
Shocks to capital ratio are defined as AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital
ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book
leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its authors. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in percentage
terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by its variance.
Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more robust GMM
t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                       62
 Benchmark:                    CAPM            FF3F           FF5F           Momentum            PS-liquidity
 Capital                          0.09          0.10           0.09                 0.10                 0.09
   t-FM                          (5.53)        (5.30)         (4.96)               (6.27)               (5.83)
   t-GMM                         (2.56)        (2.94)         (2.89)               (2.68)               (2.72)
 Market                           0.02          0.02           0.01                 0.02                 0.02
   t-FM                          (1.98)        (2.51)         (2.00)               (2.19)               (1.99)
   t-GMM                         (0.95)        (0.93)         (0.77)               (1.00)               (0.95)
 SMB                                            0.00           0.01
   t-FM                                        (0.64)         (1.28)
   t-GMM                                       (0.17)         (0.54)
 HML                                            0.02           0.02
   t-FM                                        (3.23)         (3.11)
   t-GMM                                       (0.90)         (1.04)
 CMA                                                           0.01
   t-FM                                                       (3.07)
   t-GMM                                                      (1.41)
 RMW                                                          -0.01
   t-FM                                                      (-1.42)
   t-GMM                                                     (-0.56)
 MOM                                                                                0.01
   t-FM                                                                            (0.59)
   t-GMM                                                                           (0.15)
 PS                                                                                                     -0.01
   t-FM                                                                                                (-0.65)
   t-GMM                                                                                               (-0.18)
 R2                               0.45          0.50           0.55                 0.46                 0.62
 MAPE, %                          0.85          0.84           0.85                 0.91                 0.84
 RRA                              5.71          6.37           5.68                 6.03                 5.82
 Assets                            125           125            125                  125                  125
 Quarters                          172           172            172                  172                  172
 R2 w/o Capital                   0.33          0.40           0.48                 0.34                 0.42
 MAPE w/o Capital                 1.02          1.05           1.17                 1.02                 1.04

                 Table 17: Comparison with Commonly-used Pricing Factors
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio and the excess return on the market,
controlling for commonly used benchmark pricing factors. All test portfolios are included in all columns.
The capital ratio is defined as the ratio of total market equity to total market assets (book debt plus market
equity) of primary dealer holding companies. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-
sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage
time-series regression. The quarterly sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in
percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by
its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more
robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas. The
bottom two statistics are R2 and MAPE for similar specifications but without the intermediary capital risk
factor.



                                                        63
                          FF25               US bonds               Sov. bonds                Options
                  HKM            AEM      HKM         AEM        HKM            AEM      HKM          AEM
 Capital          0.08            0.16     0.07       0.29        0.08          -0.02     0.25        -0.82
    t-FM         (4.38)          (4.13)   (2.90)     (2.82)      (3.41)        (-0.23)   (5.38)      (-5.18)
    t-GMM        (3.81)          (3.38)   (3.20)     (0.92)      (3.49)        (-0.18)   (1.39)      (-0.58)
 Market           0.02            0.02     0.05       0.05        0.01           0.05     0.01        -0.01
    t-FM         (2.18)          (2.14)   (2.50)     (3.56)      (0.55)         (2.98)   (1.63)      (-1.30)
    t-GMM        (2.09)          (2.09)   (2.16)     (1.96)      (0.33)         (2.47)   (1.11)      (-0.26)
 R 2              0.53            0.70     0.84       0.87        0.81           0.73     0.99         0.98
 MAPE, %          0.34            0.27     0.25       0.15        0.34           0.51     0.16         0.20
 RRA              4.79            6.66     4.27      12.32        4.98          -0.76    15.12       -35.19
 Assets             25              25       20         20           6              6       18           18
 Quarters          172             172      148        148          65             65      103          103
                          CDS                Commod.                      FX                  All Ptfs.
                  HKM            AEM      HKM         AEM        HKM            AEM      HKM          AEM
 Capital          0.07        -0.26        0.07       0.01        0.24           0.02     0.09         0.13
    t-FM         (2.61)      (-5.29)      (2.47)     (0.13)      (5.15)         (0.43)   (6.16)       (3.87)
    t-GMM        (2.58)      (-2.54)      (2.19)     (0.11)      (2.57)         (0.37)   (2.70)       (0.65)
 Market           0.00         0.04        0.04       0.05        0.07          -0.06     0.02         0.02
    t-FM         (0.19)       (2.11)      (1.98)     (2.27)      (2.59)        (-1.83)   (2.26)       (2.45)
    t-GMM        (0.15)       (1.86)      (1.46)     (2.06)      (1.17)        (-1.47)   (0.90)       (0.94)
 R 2              0.67         0.93        0.44       0.38        0.53           0.59     0.45         0.38
 MAPE, %          0.26         0.12        1.92       1.92        0.50           0.99     0.85         0.94
 RRA              4.03       -11.15        4.47       0.51       14.55           1.01     5.60         5.68
 Assets             20           20          24         24          12             12      125          125
 Quarters           47           47          42         42         135            135      172          172

                     Table 18: Cross-sectional Tests without an Intercept
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio (HKM) or the Adrian et al. (2014a) leverage
factor (AEM), and the excess return on the market, without an intercept in the cross-sectional regression.
Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of portfolio excess returns on
risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression. The quarterly sample is
1970Q1–2012Q4. The intermediary capital ratio is the ratio of total market equity to total market assets
(book debt plus market equity) of primary dealer holding companies. Shocks to capital ratio are defined as
AR(1) innovations in the capital ratio, scaled by the lagged capital ratio. The AEM leverage factor, defined
as the seasonally adjusted growth rate in broker-dealer book leverage level from Flow of Funds, is from its
authors. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in percentage terms. Relative risk aversion (RRA) is the
price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by its variance. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for
cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more robust GMM t-statistics (t-GMM) additionally correct for
estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                     64
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.020
                                 0.035                                                                                                               FF5                                                                                                                                                BND20

                                                                                                                             FF15

                                 0.030                                                                                         FF4           FF10
                                                                                                                       FF9
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.015
         Actual Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                                                             Actual Excess Returns
                                                                                                                      FF8
                                                                                                                         FF14 FF20
                                 0.025                                                                              FF19FF3
                                                                                                      FF12        FF13
                                                                                                                FF2
                                                                                                      FF7
                                                                                                                  FF18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BND18    BND19
                                 0.020
                                                                              FF16
                                                                                                                                    FF25                                                             0.010                                                         BND17
                                                                                                         FF17                                                                                                                                                   BND16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BND15
                                                                                            FF22
                                                                                                                            FF24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BND13
                                 0.015                                  FF11                                    FF23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BND14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BND12
                                                                                     FF6                                                                                                                                      BND10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BND9
                                                                       FF21                                                                                                                                                     BND8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BND7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BND6                 BND11
                                 0.010                                                                                                                                                               0.005                       BND5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BND4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BND3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BND2
                                 0.005                                                             FF1                                                                                                                         BND1

                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.000
                                              0.005          0.010               0.015                0.020                 0.025            0.030           0.035                                           0.000                  0.005                        0.010                       0.015                     0.020

                                                                                     Predicted Excess Returns                                                                                                                                         Predicted Excess Returns


                                                                                 (a) FF25                                                                                                                                                   (b) US Bonds

                                 0.040
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.04                                                                                                                  OPT10
                                                                                                                                                                   SOV6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OPT11
                                 0.035
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OPT12
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.03
                                 0.030
         Actual Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                                                             Actual Excess Returns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OPT13

                                                                                     SOV5
                                 0.025                                                                                                                                                                0.02                                                                  OPT14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OPT15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OPT16
                                 0.020                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OPT17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OPT18
                                                                                        SOV3
                                                                                      SOV4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.01
                                 0.015                                                                                                                                                                                                 OPT1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OPT2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OPT3
                                                                  SOV2                                                                                                                                                            OPT4
                                 0.010                                                                                                                                                                0.00                      OPT5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OPT6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OPT7
                                                                SOV1                                                                                                                                             OPT8
                                 0.005                                                                                                                                                                           OPT9
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.01
                                           0.005        0.010            0.015                0.020               0.025              0.030           0.035          0.040                                    -0.01             0.00                   0.01                  0.02                 0.03                   0.04

                                                                                     Predicted Excess Returns                                                                                                                                         Predicted Excess Returns


                                                             (c) Sovereign bonds                                                                                                                                                              (d) Options

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COM24
                                                                                                          CDS20                                                                                       0.06                                                                                                               COM22
                                 0.020                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COM19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COM2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COM4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COM21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COM11               COM1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.04                                                                 COM18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COM5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COM10
                                 0.015
         Actual Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                                                             Actual Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COM3            COM23
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.02                                                        COM12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COM13 COM9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             COM16               COM20
                                                                                                           CDS19
                                 0.010                                                                                                                                                                0.00                                                                COM17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COM14COM8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COM7



                                                                                       CDS18
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.02
                                                                                      CDS17
                                 0.005                                                             CDS16                                                                                                                                                                  COM15

                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.04
                                                            CDS14
                                                            CDS15 CDS13
                                               CDS8 CDS12CDS11
                                                    CDS9
                                 0.000           CDS6 CDS10
                                              CDS5
                                              CDS7
                                            CDS3
                                          CDS2CDS4
                                          CDS1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COM6


                                                0.000                  0.005                         0.010                         0.015                   0.020                                                 -0.06         -0.04            -0.02              0.00               0.02             0.04            0.06

                                                                                     Predicted Excess Returns                                                                                                                                         Predicted Excess Returns


                                                                                     (e) CDS                                                                                                                                           (f) Commodities

                                                                                                                                                               FX12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COM24
                                  0.005                                                                                                                                                               0.06                                                                                                       COM22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  COM19               COM4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COM2                                COM21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COM11                            COM1
                                  0.000                                                                         FX6                                                                                   0.04                                                       COM18                     OPT10          SOV6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COM5               OPT11       FF5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OPT12   FF15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COM10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FF4 FF10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FF9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SOV5    FF8
                                                                                                                                                                             Actual Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OPT13FF19   FF20 COM23
         Actual Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FF14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FF3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            COM3      FF12FF13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FF7FF2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CDS20        FF18
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.02                                  COM12                             FF16OPT14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SOV3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SOV4      FF25
                                 -0.005                                                                                            FX11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BND20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FF11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FF22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OPT15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OPT16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OPT17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FF17 FF24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FF23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          COM9              FF21FF6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OPT18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COM13                                                   SOV2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CDS19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BND18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BND19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  COM16  BND17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BND15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BND16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BND13
                                                                              FX4                                                                                                                                                                                 BND9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FX12BND14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BND10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BND8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BND7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BND6    CDS18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BND12SOV1 COM20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CDS17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OPT1
                                                                                                      FX10                                                                                                                                                            BND11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BND5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BND4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BND3     CDS16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OPT2       FF1
                                                                                                        FX5                                                                                                                                                        BND2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BND1     OPT3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CDS14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CDS15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CDS13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CDS11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CDS12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS8
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.00                             COM14 COM8               FX6   CDS9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CDS3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CDS2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COM17    OPT4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CDS10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CDS1 OPT5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COM7       OPT6
                                 -0.010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OPT7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FX11 OPT8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FX4FX5 OPT9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FX10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FX8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FX9
                                                                        FX9FX8                                                                                                                                                                              FX3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FX2
                                                                          FX3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.02                                                     FX7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FX1
                                 -0.015                                                                            FX2                                                                                                                           COM15

                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.04
                                 -0.020                                          FX7


                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             COM6
                                                                          FX1

                                                    -0.020              -0.015                     -0.010                -0.005               0.000                0.005                                         -0.06         -0.04            -0.02              0.00               0.02             0.04            0.06
                                                                                      Predicted Excess Returns                                                                                                                                        Predicted Excess Returns


                                                                                      (g) FX                                                                                                                                          (h) All Portfolios

                                                                                                                              Figure A.1: Pricing Errors
Actual average excess returns on tested portfolios versus predicted expected returns using their risk exposures
(betas) with respect to shocks to the intermediary capital ratio and the excess return on the market. Test
portfolios are abbreviated based on their asset class: equities (FF), US bonds (BND), foreign sovereign bonds
(SOV), options (OPT), CDS, commodities (COM), and foreign exchange (FX).

                                                                                                                                                                            65
 Primary Dealer           Start Date    End Date         Primary Dealer         Start Date    End Date
 ABN Amro                  9/29/1998    9/15/2006        HSBC                     5/9/1994      Current
 Aubrey Lanston            5/19/1960    4/17/2000        Hutton                  11/2/1977   12/31/1987
 BA Securities             4/18/1994    9/30/1997        Irving                  5/19/1960    7/31/1989
 Banc One                   4/1/1999     8/1/2004        Jefferies               6/18/2009      Current
 Bank of America           5/17/1999    11/1/2010        JP Morgan               5/19/1960      Current
 Bank of America          11/17/1971    4/15/1994        Kidder Peabody           2/7/1979   12/30/1994
 Bank of Nova Scotia       10/4/2011      Current        Kleinwort Benson        2/13/1980   12/27/1989
 Bankers Trust             5/19/1960   10/22/1997        Lehman                 11/25/1976    9/22/2008
 Barclays                   4/1/1998      Current        Lehman                  2/22/1973    1/29/1974
 Barclays De Zoete Wedd    12/7/1989    6/30/1996        LF Rothschild          12/11/1986    1/17/1989
 Bartow Leeds              5/19/1960    6/14/1962        Lloyds                 12/22/1987    4/28/1989
 Bear Stearns              6/10/1981    10/1/2008        Malon Andrus            5/19/1960   11/24/1965
 Becker                   11/17/1971    9/10/1984        Manufac. Hanover        8/31/1983   12/31/1991
 Blyth                     4/16/1962    1/14/1970        Merrill Lynch           5/19/1960    2/11/2009
 Blyth Eastman Dillon      12/5/1974   12/31/1979        Merrill Lynch           11/1/2010      Current
 BMO                       10/4/2011      Current        MF Global                2/2/2011   10/31/2011
 BMO Nesbitt               2/15/2000    3/31/2002        Midland-Montagu         8/13/1975    7/26/1990
 BNP Paribas               9/15/2000      Current        Mizuho                   4/1/2002      Current
 BNY                        8/1/1989     8/9/1990        Morgan Stanley           2/1/1978      Current
 Brophy, Gestal, Knight     5/8/1987    6/19/1988        NationsBanc              7/6/1993    5/16/1999
 BT Alex Brown            10/23/1997     6/4/1999        Nesbitt Burns            6/1/1995    2/14/2000
 BZW                        7/1/1996    3/31/1998        Nikko                  12/22/1987     1/3/1999
 Cantor Fitzgerald          8/1/2006      Current        Nomura                 12/11/1986   11/30/2007
 Carroll McEntee           9/29/1976     5/6/1994        Nomura                  7/27/2009      Current
 CF Childs                 5/19/1960    6/29/1965        Northern Trust           8/8/1973    5/29/1986
 Chase                     7/15/1970    4/30/2001        Nuveen                 11/18/1971    8/27/1980
 Chemical                  5/19/1960    3/31/1996        NY Hanseatic             2/8/1984    7/26/1984
 CIBC                      3/27/1996     2/8/2007        Paine Webber           11/25/1976    12/4/2000
 Citigroup                 6/15/1961      Current        Paine Webber            6/22/1972    6/27/1973
 Continental               5/19/1960    8/30/1991        Paribas                  5/1/1997    9/14/2000
 Country Natwest           9/29/1988    1/13/1989        Pollock                 5/19/1960     2/3/1987
 Countrywide               1/15/2004    7/15/2008        Prudential             10/29/1975    12/1/2000
 Credit Suisse            10/12/1993      Current        RBC                      7/8/2009      Current
 CRT                      12/22/1987     7/5/1993        RBS                      4/1/2009      Current
 Daiwa                    12/11/1986      Current        REFCO                  11/19/1980     5/7/1987
 Dean Witter Reynolds      11/2/1977    4/30/1998        Robertson Stephens      10/1/1997    9/30/1998
 Deutshe Bank             12/13/1990      Current        Salomon Smith Barney    5/19/1960     4/6/2003
 Dillon Read               6/24/1988     9/2/1997        Sanwa                   6/20/1988    7/20/1998
 Discount Corp.            5/19/1960    8/10/1993        SBC                     3/29/1990    6/28/1998
 DLJ                        3/6/1974    1/16/1985        Second District         6/15/1961    8/27/1980
 DLJ                      10/25/1995   12/31/2000        Securities Groups       5/19/1960     6/5/1983
 Dresdner Kleinwort         5/8/1997    6/26/2009        Security Pacific       12/11/1986    1/17/1991
 Drexel Burnham            5/19/1960    3/28/1990        SG Americas              2/2/2011      Current
 DW Rich                   5/19/1960   12/31/1969        SG Cowen                 7/1/1999   10/31/2001
 Eastbridge                6/18/1992    5/29/1998        SG Warburg              6/24/1988    7/26/1995
 FI Dupont                12/12/1968    7/18/1973        Smith Barney            8/22/1979    8/31/1998
 First Boston              5/19/1960   10/11/1993        Souther Cal. S&L         6/7/1983     8/5/1983
 First Chicago             5/19/1960    3/31/1999        TD                      2/11/2014      Current
 First Interstate          7/31/1964    6/17/1988        Thomson McKinnon       12/11/1986     7/7/1989
 First N.B. of Boston      3/21/1983   11/17/1985        UBS                     12/7/1989      Current
 First Pennco               3/7/1974    8/27/1980        Weeden                  6/17/1976    5/15/1978
 Fuji                     12/28/1989    3/31/2002        Wertheim Schroder       6/24/1988    11/8/1990
 Goldman Sachs             12/4/1974      Current        Westpac Pollock          2/4/1987    6/27/1990
 Greenwich                 7/31/1984     4/1/2009        White Weld              2/26/1976    4/18/1978
 Harris                    7/15/1965    5/31/1995        Yamaichi                9/29/1988    12/4/1997
                                                         Zions                   8/11/1993    3/31/2002


                            Table A.1: Primary Dealers, 1960–2014
The New York Federal Reserve Bank’s list of primary dealers. We have condensed the list slightly by
combining entries that differ due to name changes but maintain continuity in primary dealer role, most
commonly due to the dealer acquiring another firm. However, we continue to list acquisition targets or
merged entities separately for the period that they appear on the dealer list prior to acquisition.



                                                    66
                FF25      US bonds     Sov. bonds     Options      CDS      Commod.         FX      All Ptfs.
 Capital         0.02         -0.02           0.07        0.10      0.08         0.03      -0.09        0.03
    t-FM        (1.58)       (-0.43)         (2.23)      (4.94)    (4.07)       (1.88)    (-3.99)      (2.31)
    t-GMM       (1.53)       (-0.33)         (2.07)      (2.18)    (2.59)       (1.75)    (-1.06)      (1.37)
 Market         -0.02          0.05          -0.01        0.02      0.01         0.04       0.13        0.02
    t-FM       (-1.45)        (1.44)        (-0.37)      (1.36)    (0.28)       (1.69)     (4.68)      (2.16)
    t-GMM      (-1.33)        (1.19)        (-0.34)      (0.91)    (0.19)       (1.41)     (2.08)      (1.04)
 Intercept       0.04          0.00           0.01       -0.00     -0.00         0.01      -0.03        0.00
    t-FM        (3.72)        (5.27)         (2.50)     (-0.34)   (-5.76)       (0.50)    (-6.83)      (0.44)
    t-GMM       (3.39)        (4.36)         (2.15)     (-0.21)   (-3.46)       (0.37)    (-1.90)      (0.27)
 R 2             0.10          0.82           0.95        0.97      0.69         0.48       0.72        0.43
 MAPE, %         0.52          0.13           0.17        0.18      0.18         1.78       0.37        0.94
 RRA            10.33         -7.53          32.08       49.49     37.44        15.36     -44.78       12.53
 Assets            25            20              6          18        20           24         12         125
 Quarters         172           148             65         103        47           42        135         172

                         Table A.2: Book Equity instead of Market Equity
Risk price estimates for shocks to the intermediary capital ratio and the excess return on the market. Here,
the capital ratio is defined as the ratio of total book equity to total book assets of primary dealer holding
companies. Risk prices are the mean slopes of period-by-period cross-sectional regressions of portfolio excess
returns on risk exposures (betas). Betas are estimated in a first-stage time-series regression. The quarterly
sample is 1970Q1–2012Q4. Mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) is in percentage terms. Relative risk
aversion (RRA) is the price of intermediary capital risk factor, scaled by its variance. Fama-MacBeth
t-statistics (t-FM) adjust for cross-asset correlation in the residuals. The more robust GMM t-statistics
(t-GMM) additionally correct for estimation error of the time-series betas.




                                                      67
