                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   STATE CAPACITY AND AMERICAN TECHNOLOGY:
                        EVIDENCE FROM THE 19TH CENTURY

                                        Daron Acemoglu
                                         Jacob Moscona
                                       James A. Robinson

                                       Working Paper 21932
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21932


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2016




This paper was prepared as a comment on Robert J. Gordon's The Rise and Fall of American Growth,
to be published in the American Economic Review papers and proceedings. We are extremely grateful
to Tom Nicholas for sharing the county-level patent data for the 19th century, and to Zorina Kahn
and Tom Nicholas for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Daron Acemoglu, Jacob Moscona, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
State Capacity and American Technology: Evidence from the 19th Century
Daron Acemoglu, Jacob Moscona, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 21932
January 2016
JEL No. D70,N11,N41,O3

                                             ABSTRACT

Robert Gordon's The Rise and Fall of American Economic Growth provides a compelling interpretation
of how technical change and innovation has radically changed the living standards of the citizens of
the US in the past 150 years. Lying behind these changes are the institutions which have allowed the
country to harness its human potential. In this paper we conduct an empirical investigation of the impact
of one key set of institutions, the capacity of the US state as proxied by the presence of post offices
in a county, on innovation. We show that between 1804 and 1899, the time when the US became the
world technological leader, there is a strong association between the presence and number of post
offices in a county and patenting activity, and it appears that it is the opening of postal offices that
leads to surges in patenting activity, not the other way around. Our evidence suggests that part of the
yet untold story of US technological exceptionalism is the way in which the US created an immensely
capable and effective state.


Daron Acemoglu                                      James A. Robinson
Department of Economics, E18-269D                   University of Chicago
MIT                                                 Harris School of Public Policy
77 Massachusetts Avenue                             1155 East 60th Street
Cambridge, MA 02139                                 Chicago, Illinois 60637
and CIFAR                                           and NBER
and also NBER                                       jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu
daron@mit.edu

Jacob Moscona
Harvard University
468 Cabot Mail Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
jmosconaskolnik@college.harvard.edu
   In the Rise and Fall of American Growth Robert J. Gordon provides a magisterial overview
of the economic and human changes that have re-shaped US society since the middle of the
19th century. In addition to the rich, lively details about the many technologies that have
made us so much more prosperous, comfortable and healthy than our ancestors, Gordon also
provides a conceptual framework for thinking about American technology. In this framework,
technology progresses at a normal pace during regular times, but then accelerates during
distinctive episodes, such as in the aftermath of the second industrial revolution between
1920 and 1970, because of the availability of major “Great Inventions,” (p.2) which created
opportunities in a wide array of industries and applications. There is no puzzle, according to
this framework, as to why productivity growth slowed down after the 1970s: we were simply
in a lucky period of accelerated technological opportunities until the 1970s, which then made
way to the regular workings of our economy.
   In this richly woven narrative, how endogenous these technological changes were receives
relatively little attention. Economists have come to think of both the pace and the direction
of technological change as endogenous for two related reasons (see Daron Acemoglu, 2009, for
an overview): (1) within a given institutional environment, technology advances by innovation
decisions, a¤ected by such things as taxes, R&D subsidies and tax credits, and the supplies of
other factors of production; (2) the institutional environment has a key impact on technological
progress through the security of property rights, patent laws, educational system and general
competition policy. These factors receive minimal attention in this voluminous tome. Gordon
recognizes the importance of certain policies, for instance in his discussion of the New Deal
and World War II. He also notes “Even in the laissez-faire environment of the nineteenth
century, the government intervened in the development of the economy in numerous ways.
Government actions included a wide range of legislation, the granting of land to railroads and
homesteading settlers, food and drug regulations, the establishment of land grant universities
and agricultural research stations, the patent system, deposit insurance, Social Security, and
unemployment compensation” (p. 289), and

         “Perhaps the most important government activity to stimulate growth was the
     patent o¢ ce and the process of patent approval” (p. 312).

   But Gordon does not link these important institutional underpinnings to the pace and
nature of American innovation or the existence of potential “Great Inventions”. Perhaps
what enabled the United States to become more innovative than all other countries in the
19th century and then come to dominate technology, paving the way to the second industrial
revolution, were its policies and the institutional structure lying behind these. If so, it is

                                               1
plausible that the potential for growth of the American economy in the next several decades
will also depend not just on exogenous technological constraints, but on these institutions. We
do not get answers to these critical questions from Gordon.
   Scholars of American innovation, most notably Kenneth Sokolo¤ (1988) and Zorina Khan
(2005), emphasize the critical role of these institutional factors. In this short paper, we go one
step further and provide evidence that one particular set of institutions, the presence of the
state’s infrastructural capacity, played a signi…cant role in 19th-century innovations. Though
the American state is commonly regarded as being weak in the 19th century, a recent historical
literature has fundamentally challenged this view (Novak, 2008, King and Lieberman, 2009).
Indeed, the 19th-century US state quickly started forming a huge web connecting the country.
At the center of this web was the post o¢ ce, created by the Post O¢ ce Act of 1792, which soon
became the single most important government employer in the …rst half of the 19th century. In
1816 for example, 69% of the federal civilian workforce were postmasters, by 1841 this number
was 79% (John 1995, p. 3). As John (1995, p. 4) puts it, in this period

         “for the vast majority of Americans the postal system was the central govern-
      ment”. (italics in original)

   The New York Times in 1852 described it as the “mighty arm of civil government” (John,
1995, p. 10). Its pervasiveness was apparent to de Tocqueville during his famous travels in
1831, who noted: “There is as astonishing circulation of letters and newspapers among these
savage woods ... I do not think that in the most enlightened districts of France there is an
intellectual movement either so rapid or on such a scale as in this wilderness”(de Tocqueville,
1969, p. 283). He also noted how it provides a “great link between minds” and “penetrates”
into the “heart of the wilderness” (1969, pp. 384-385,11).
   The presence of the post o¢ ce was signi…cant for innovation for at least three reasons. First,
by facilitating ‡ows of information and knowledge, it helped ideas to spread and facilitated the
creation of new ones. Second, for the more prosaic reason that it made patenting and securing
intellectual property rights much easier. Khan (2005, p. 59) notes that “rural inventors in the
United States could apply for patents without serious obstacles, because applications could
be submitted by mail free of postage. The US Patent and Trademark O¢ ce also maintained
repositories throughout the country, where inventors could forward their patent models at
the expense of the post o¢ ce. As such, it is not surprising that much of the initial surge in
patenting during early American industrialization occurred in rural areas.”Finally, and no less
importantly, the presence of a post o¢ ce is indicative of a much broader state presence and
functionality, for example via legal services and regulation, access to land, and security of other
forms of property rights, which are requisites for most innovative activity. Also important was

                                                2
the fact that already by the 1830s, the post o¢ ce was a modern bureaucratized institution.
       Building on this third observation and in the spirit of the empirical approach in Acemoglu,
Camilo García-Jimeno and James A. Robinson (2015), we use the number of post o¢ ces in a
county as a proxy for the general presence and ‘infrastructural power’of the state. We argue
it was this, as well as the availability of postal services, that made innovation and patenting
feasible and desirable. Our main dependent variable is the number of patents granted to
residents of a county in a particular period.
       In the remainder of this short paper, we …rst present our post o¢ ce and patent data, then
describe our empirical strategy, and …nally present original results for a panel of US counties
between 1804 and 1899. Our results show a strong association between the presence and
number of post o¢ ces in a county and patenting activity, and it appears that it is the opening
of postal o¢ ces that leads to surges in patenting activity, not the other way around, indicating
that it is not a simple reverse causality story underpinning this association. Though our results
do not unambiguously establish causality, the interpretation that this statistical relationship
mostly re‡ects the impact of the post o¢ ces and the state institutions associated with them
on innovative activity receives support from the evidence presented in John (1995) that the
expansion of the postal network re‡ected a range of idiosyncratic factors and motivations.1


Data

Data on the number of post o¢ ces in each county were compiled from lists of United States
post o¢ ces that were assembled for several years during the 19th century by the United States
Post O¢ ce Department (predecessor to the United States Postal Service), headed by the US
postmaster general. Along with the post o¢ ce name and title of the o¢ ce’s postmaster (one
postmaster is assigned to each post o¢ ce), the lists present the state and county in which the
post o¢ ce was located. The number of post o¢ ces is therefore equivalent to the number of
postal service employees employed by the federal government. To establish a post o¢ ce, the
federal government appoints a single postmaster to the o¢ ce. Additional o¢ ce employees are
employed by and under the jurisdiction of each o¢ ce’s postmaster rather than the postmaster
general or the federal government. Indeed, the Register of O¢ cers and Agents, Civil, Military,
and Naval, in the Service of the United States, a publication established by the US Congress in
   1
     For example, he notes (pp. 44-45) that pressure from certain segments of society for the state’s services
“guaranteed that the postal network would expand rapidly into the transappalachian West well in advance of
commercial demand.”
   Similarly Cushing (1893, p. 286) reports “The establishment of post o¢ ces in Oklahoma and in other regions
recently opened has often been in advance of the actual settlement. Before the Oklahoma counties were named
they were called by the Department, A, B, C, D, E, etc. Postmasters were appointed upon recommendations of
the delegate from Oklahoma and of Senators Plumb, Paddock and Manderson. The theory of the Department
is that the establishment of an o¢ ce in a new locality is often the means of educating the people who become
its patrons.”


                                                      3
1816 to list all US federal employees, the only post o¢ ce employees listed are the postmasters
themselves.
   We obtained the number of post o¢ ces in each US County for the years 1804, 1811, 1819,
1830, 1837, 1846, 1850, 1855, 1867, 1870, 1879, 1891, and 1899. For the years before 1879, we
used United States Post O¢ ce Department publications titled List of the Post O¢ ces in the
United States (in some years, the publication was referred to as Table of Post O¢ ces in the
United States). In 1874, the federal government began publishing post o¢ ce information more
systematically in a publication titled The United States Postal Guide, which is digitized only
for some years. This publication is our source for the years 1879, 1891, and 1899.
   Patent data for 1836-1900 are from a data set compiled and shared by Tom Nicholas. The
data set contains patent number, granting year, and county of residence of the …rst inventor
for all patents granted by the United States Patent and Trademark O¢ ce between 1836-1900.
Inventor location was identi…ed using optimal character recognition techniques (Ackigit et. al.
2013). We excluded patents credited to inventors resident outside the United States.


Empirical Evidence

Our basic empirical speci…cation is a panel data model with county …xed e¤ects and time
e¤ects. We look at two separate samples: a balanced sample of 935 counties over nine time
periods (1837, 1846, 1850, 1855, 1867, 1870, 1879, 1891, and 1899) and an unbalanced sample
consisting of a maximum of 2644 counties. We also use information on lags of the post o¢ ce
variable from the years 1804, 1811, 1819 and 1830 so as to maximize the span of our sample.
Because there are many county-year pairs with zero patents (4,863 in the balanced panel and
10,188 in the unbalanced panel) and also many counties have no post o¢ ces, we start with
linear models of the form
                                  J
                                  X
          log(1 + patentsct ) =         j   log(1 + post o¢ cesct   j)   + Xct +   t   +   c   +   ct :            (1)
                                  j=1

Here patentct is the number of patents issued to residents of county c in time t, post o¢ cesct
is the number of post o¢ ces in county c in time t, Xct is a covariate vector which always
includes the log of county population and will later include time interactions with baseline
county characteristics. In addition,        t   denotes a full set of time e¤ects,     c   denotes a full set
of county …xed e¤ects, and   ct   is an error term. The coe¢ cients of interest are the                   j ’s   which
measure the potential e¤ect of lagged post o¢ ces on patents. Our focus on lagged post o¢ ces is
motivated by the fact that new post o¢ ces cannot plausibly be expected to have an impact on
patenting right away. Since patents is a count variable, we also estimate Poisson and negative
binomial models. Because these nonlinear models cannot accommodate the rich set of time


                                                       4
interactions we later include to control for other county-level trends, we opt for the OLS models
as our baseline. Nevertheless, results from these models show that the exact speci…cation we
use does not have a disproportionate impact on the general patterns we document.
       Table 1 presents our …rst set of results. Panel A is for the balanced sample, and Panel B
for the unbalanced sample. The …rst two columns are for the OLS estimates of (1) including
only log population of the county in that year as a covariate. In column 1, we just have the
one period lagged post o¢ ce variable on the right-hand side. This variable is not signi…cant.
This picture changes dramatically when we add four lags of post o¢ ce in column 2.2 Now the
second lag is positive and signi…cant at 10%. The third and the fourth lags are larger and
more precisely estimated, and in consequence, statistically signi…cant at less than 1%. This
pattern is plausible and suggests that it is mostly the presence of post o¢ ces in the previous
two decades or so that is most strongly associated with increases in patenting activity. The
relationship in column 2 is not only statistically powerful, but economically sizable as well: in
the long run, once the full e¤ects of lagged post o¢ ces are realized, the opening of a post o¢ ce
in a county that did not previously have a post o¢ ce or previous patents increases the number
of patents, on average, by 0.18.3 The patterns and quantitative magnitudes are similar in Panel
B with the unbalanced sample. Columns 3-6 show broadly similar patterns when we estimate
the Poisson and negative binomial models, though with some di¤erences. Now the …rst lag of
the post o¢ ce variable entered by itself is signi…cant, and when all four lags of the post o¢ ce
variable are included together, it is the …rst and the third lags that are robustly signi…cant.
The quantitative magnitudes are a little smaller with the Poisson and slightly larger with the
negative binomial model. These di¤erences notwithstanding, the conclusion that there is a
strong association between the presence of post o¢ ces and subsequent patenting activity in a
county remains both with the balanced sample and the unbalanced sample.4
       An obvious concern is that the results presented in Table 1 re‡ect not the impact of post
   2
      Because of the gap between di¤erent years in our panel is not even, we also estimated these models normal-
izing the e¤ects of di¤erent lags by the inverse of the distance with the next date. These modi…ed models are
not reported to conserve space. They yield broadly similar results, and in fact in this case, the equivalent of the
speci…cation in column 1 also shows a signi…cant e¤ect comparable in magnitude to the Poisson and negative
binomial models.
    3
      The opening of a post o¢ ce in a county with no previous post o¢ ces increases the right-hand side variable,
log(1+post o¢ ces), from log 1 = 0 to log 2 = 0:69. The long-run e¤ect is given by summing the coe¢ cients
of the four lags, which gives approximately 0:24, thus increasing the left-hand side variable, log(1+ patent),
by 0:24 0:69 ' 0:166. Then, the quantitative e¤ect of interest, when evaluated starting from zero patents,
is an increase in the number of patents given by e0:166 1 ' 0:18. If we were to instead evaluate both the
increase in the post o¢ ce and the impact on patents starting from their mean sample values (respectively,
19:86 and 6:29), then the implied increase of the right-and side would be approximately 0:047, that is, from
log(1 + 19:86) ' 3:038 to log(1 + 19:86 + 1) ' 3:085. This would raise the left-hand side by 0:24 0:047 ' 0:011,
that is, from log(1 + 6:292) ' 1:987 to 1:998. This corresponds to an increase of e1:998 7:292 ' 0:08, which is
about half the e¤ect evaluated at zero post o¢ ces and patents.
    4
      We also estimated these models using citations of the patents as weights. However, since the citations are
available only after 1947, most patents have zero citations, and perhaps because of this reason, the coe¢ cient
estimates are less stable, even though the overall pattern of results is quite similar.


                                                        5
o¢ ces on patenting, but reverse causality or omitted time-varying factors, such as the expansion
of economic activity, which might have simultaneously impacted the location of post o¢ ces
and patenting. Table 2 investigates these issues focusing on OLS models. Column 1 replicates
column 2 from Table 1 for reference, though for 930 counties for which we have data for the
covariates we will use in column 2. In column 2, we add a whole range of baseline country
characteristics, each interacted with a full set of time dummies. These characteristics are:
fraction slave population in 1860, fraction of the adult population that are literate in 1850,
and the values of farmland and manufacturing output relative to population in 1850 (with both
of these variables parameterized in the form of log(1 + x) since there are some zeros). Counties
that di¤er in terms of these characteristics could have varying potential for industrialization and
innovation, and these time interactions ‡exibly control for any di¤erential trends in patenting
related to these di¤erences. Despite the addition of 36 controls, the pattern in column 2
is quite similar to that in column 1, with the only di¤erence being that the second lag is
also insigni…cant now, but the third and fourth ‡ags continue to be strongly signi…cant. The
quantitative magnitude is somewhat smaller. The opening of a post o¢ ce in a county without
patents or post o¢ ce now increases the number of patents, on average, by 0.05 patents. Column
3 turns to the question of reverse causality. We include the current value and lead of the post
o¢ ce variable in the speci…cation of column 2. Both of these variables are quantitatively very
small (for example, less than 1/9th the size of the coe¢ cient of the fourth lags), negative
and statistically far from signi…cance. This result suggests that it is unlikely to be patenting
activity leading to the opening of post o¢ ces. In column 4 we add county-level linear trends
(thus 930 additional controls) as a check against di¤erential county-level trends accounting for
our results. The results are broadly similar even though now only the fourth lag is statistically
signi…cant — while the third lag has a very similar magnitude to before, it is less precisely
estimated and thus not signi…cant at 5%. Finally, columns 5-8 repeat the speci…cations for the
unbalanced sample, with very similar results.
   Overall, the results in Tables 1 and 2 show a fairly robust correlation between the presence
of the state in the recent past as proxied by the number of post o¢ ces in the previous several
decades and patenting activity in a county. Moreover, the evidence indicates that it is post
o¢ ces predicting future patenting, not the other way around. While we cannot claim to have
unambiguously estimated the causal e¤ect of post o¢ ces — or the presence of the state —
on innovative activity, this evidence nonetheless points in the direction of an important role
of the infrastructural capacity of the US state in undergirding and supporting innovation and
technological change in this critical period of US economic growth.




                                                6
References

   Acemoglu, Daron (2009) Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press.
      Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo Garcia-Jimeno and James Robinson (2015) “State
Capacity and Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 105(8), 2364-2409.
      Akcigit, Ufuk, William R. Kerr, and Tom Nicholas (2013) “The Mechanics of
Endogenous Innovation and Growth: Evidence from Historical U.S. Patents,” Unpublished.
      Cushing, Marshall H. (1893) The Story of Our Post O¢ ce, Boston: A.M. Thayer &
Co.
      Gordon, Robert J. (2016) The Rise and Fall of American Growth, forthcoming Prince-
ton University Press.
      John, Richard R. (1995) Spreading the News, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
      Khan, B. Zorina (2005) The Democratization of Invention, New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
      King, Desmond and Robert C. Lieberman (2009) “Ironies of State Building: A
Comparative Perspective on the American State,” World Politics, 61(3), 547-588.
      Novak, William (2008) “The Myth of the ‘Weak’American State,”American Historical
Review, 113(3), 752-72.
      Sokolo¤, Kenneth L. (1988) “Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence
From Patent Records, 1790–1846,” Journal of Economic History, 48(04), 813-850.
      de Tocqueville, Alexis (1969) Democracy in America, ed. J.P. Mayer, Garden City:
Doubleday & Co.




                                             7
                                       Table 1: Baseline Results




Notes: Panel A is a balanced panel of counties established by 1830 and Panel B is an unbalanced panel of all
counties 1830-1890, in which counties are added as they are established. Columns 1 and 2 present results from
OLS models where log (1+patent cou) is the outcome variable. Columns 3-4 present results from Poisson
models and columns 5-6 present results from negative binomial models. The left-hand-side in Columns 3-6
is patent count. County and year fixed e↵ects as well as the log of county population are included in all
regressions. Standard errors, robust and clustered by county in Columns 1-4, are in parentheses.




                                                     1
                                                    Table 2: Robustness and Timing of E↵ects




2
    Notes: The outcome variable is log(1+patent count).The log of county population and county year fixed e↵ects are included in all specifications.
    Columns 2-4 and 5-8 include the characteristics listed at the bottom of the table (slave population share in 1860, adult literacy share in 1850, log
    farmland value in 1850 and log manufacturing value in 1850) interacted with a full set of time dummies. Columns 4 and 8 include linear county
    trends. The p-values of the corresponding F-tests for the controls and county trends are reported in brackets. Robust standard errors clustered by
    county are in parentheses.
