NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEGEMONIC STABILITY THEORIES OF
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM

Barry Eichengreen

Working Paper No. 2193

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1987

Prepared for the Brookings Institution program in international
economics. An earlier version of this paper was presented
at the CEPR Conference on International Regimes and the Design
of Macroeconomic Policy, London, November 11-13, 1986. I
thank my conference discussant, Peter Kenen, as well as Dilip
Abreu, Joanne Gowa, Robert Keohane, Charles Kindleberger
and Kala Krishna for comments and discussion. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2193
March 1987

Hegemonic Stability Theories of the International Monetary System

ABSTRACT
Specialists in international relations have argued that international
regimes operate smoothly and exhibit stability only when dominated by a
single, exceptionally powerful national economy. In particular, this
"theory of hegemonic stability" has been applied to the international
monetary system. The maintenance of the Bretton Woods System for a quarter
century through 1971 is ascribed to the singular power of the United States
in the postwar world, while the persistence of the classical gold standard
is similarly ascribed to Britain's dominance of the 19th-century
international economy. In contrast, the instability of the interwar goldexchange standard is attributed to the absence of a hegemonic power.

This paper assesses the applicability of hegemonic stability theory to
international monetary relations, approaching the question from both
theoretical and empirical vantage points. While that theory is of some help
for understanding the relatively smooth operation of the classical gold
standard and early Bretton Woods System as well as some of the difficulties
of the interwar years, much of the evidence proves to be difficult to
reconcile with the hegemonic stability view.

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720

An international monetary system is a set of rules or conventions

governing the economic policies of nations. From a narrowly national

perspective, it is an unnatural state of affairs. Adherence to a common set
of rules or conventions requires a certain harmonization of monetary and
fiscal policies, despite that the preferences and constraints influencing

policy formulation diverge markedly across countries. Governments are
expected to forswear beggar-thy-neighbor policies that redistribute economic
welfare from foreigners to domestic residents, and to contribute voluntarily
to provision of the international public good of global monetary stability.
In effect, they are expected to solve the defection problem which plagues
cartels attempting to function in the absence of binding agreements and
-—

equivalently

in this context --

the

free-rider problem hindering public good

provision in the absence of a means of preference revelation.1 Since they are
likely to succeed incompletely, the public good of international monetary

stability tends to be underproduced. From this perspective, the paradox of
international monetary affairs is not the difficulty of designing a stable
international monetary system but that such systems have not only existed but
even persisted for periods of decades.

Specialists in international relations have offered the notion that

dominance by one country -- a hegemonic power --

is

needed to insure the

smooth functioning of an international regime.2 The concentration of economic
power is seen as a way of internalizing the externalities associated with

systemic stability and of insuring its adequate provision. The application of
this "theory of hegemonic stability" to international monetary affairs is

—2—

straightforward.3 The maintenance of the Bretton Woods System for a quarter
century through 1971 is ascribed to the singular power of the United States in
the postwar world, much as the persistence of the classical gold standard is
ascribed to Britain's dominance of international financial affairs in the

second half of the 19th century. "The monetary systems of the past were
relatively stable when a single currency dominated: sterling through most of
the nineteenth century, the dollar in the early postwar period" (Bergsten,

1975, p. 31). By contrast, the instability of the interwar gold-exchange
standard is attributed to the absence of a hegemonic power, due to Britain's
inability to play the dominant role and America's unwillingness to accept it.

The appeal of this notion lies in its resonance with the public good and
cartel analogies for international monetary affairs, through what might be

called the carrot and stick variants of hegemonic stability theory. In the
carrot variant, the hegemon, like a dominant firm in an oligopolistic market,
maintains the cohesion of the cartel by making the equivalent of side payments

to members of the fringe. In the stick variant, the hegemon, like a dominant
firm, deters defection from the international monetary cartel by using its

economic policies to threaten retaliation against renegades. In strong
versions of the theory (what Snidel, 1985, refers to as the benevolent strand
of the theory), all participants are rendered better off by the intervention

of the dominant power. In weak versions (what Snidel, 1985, p. 851, citing
Keohane refers to as the coercive strand of the theory), either because
systemic stability is not a purely public good or because its costs are
shunted onto smaller states, the benefits of stability accrue disproportionately or even exclusively to the hegemon.

—3—

Three problems bedevil attempts to apply hegemonic stability theory to

international monetary affairs. First is the ambiguity surrounding three
concepts central to the theory, namely hegemony, the power the hegemon is
assumed to possess, and the regime whose stability is ostensibly enhanced by the

exercise of hegemonic power. Rather than adopting the general definitions
offered previously and devoting this paper to their criticism, I adopt
specialized definitions tailored to my concern with the international monetary
system.

I employ the economist's definition of economic --

or

market -- power:

sufficient size in the relevant market to influence prices and quantities.4
define a hegemon analogously to a dominant firm: as a country whose market
power, understood in this sense, significantly exceeds that of all rivals.
Finally, I avoid having to define the concept of regime around which much debate
has revolved by posing the question narrowly: whether hegemony is conducive to
the stability of the international monetary system (where the system is
defined as those explicit rules and procedures governing international

monetary affairs), rather than whether it is conducive to the stability of the
international regime, however defined.5
The second problem plaguing attempts to apply hegemonic stability theory
to international monetary affairs is ambiguity about the instruments with

which the hegemon makes its influence felt. This is the distinction between
what are characterized above as the carrot and stick variants of hegemonic

stability theory. Does the hegemon alter its monetary, fiscal or commercial
policies to discipline countries that refuse to play by its rules, as "basic

force" models of international relations would suggest?6 Does it link
international economic policy to other issue areas and impose military or

—4—

diplomatic sanctions on uncooperative nations?7 Or does it stabilize the
system through the use of "positive sanctions," financing the public good of
international monetary stability by actIng as lender of last resort even when
the probability of repayment is slim and forsaking beggar-thy-neighbor

policies even when used to advantage by other countries?8
The third problem plaguing attempts to implement hegemonic stability
theories of the international monetary system is ambiguity about their scope.
In principle, such theories could be applied equally to the design, the

operation or the decline of the international monetary system.9 Yet in
practice, hegemoniic stability theories may shed light on the success of

efforts to design or reform the international monetary system but not on its

day-to-day operation or eventual decline. Other combinations are equally
plausible a priori. Only analysis of individual cases can throw light on the
theory's range of applicability.
In this paper, I structure an analysis of hegemonic stability theories of
the international monetary system around the dual problems of range of

applicability and mode of implementation. I consider separately the genesis
of international monetary systems, their operation in normal periods and times

of crisis, and their disintegration. In each context, I draw evidence from
three modern incarnations of the international monetary system: the classical

gold standard, the interwar gold-exchange standard, and Bretton Woods. These
three episodes in the history of the international monetary system are
typically thought to offer two examples of hegemonic stability --

before 1914, the U.S. after 1944 —— and one episode —-

destablized

by the absence of hegemony.

Britain

the interwar years ——

I make no effort to document

—5—

Britain's dominance of international markets prior to 1914 or the dominance of
the U.S. after 1944; I simply ask whether that market power which Britain and
the U.S. possessed was causally connected to the stability of the
international monetary system.

Before embarking on this historical analysis, I attempt to systemize the
discussion of hegemonic stability theories of the international monetary
system by employing some simple tools of game theory.

I analyze theoretically

the implications of different structures of international economic relations
for the applicability of hegemonic stability theories to international

monetary affairs.
Both the theoretical and historical analyses indicate that the

relationship between the market power of the leading economy and the stability
of the international monetary system is considerably more complex than

suggested by simple variants of hegemonic stability theory. While one cannot
simply reject the hypothesis that on more than one occasion the stabilizing
capacity of a dominant economic power has contributed to the smooth
functioning of the international monetary system, neither can one reconcile
much of the evidence, notably on the central role of international negotiation
and collaboration even in periods of hegemonic dominance, with simple versions

of the theory. Though both the appeal and limitations of hegemonic stability
theories are apparent when one takes a static view of the international

monetary system, those limitations are most evident when one considers the

evolution of international monetary system over time. An international
monetary system whose smooth operation at a point in time is predicated on the
dominance of one powerful country may in fact be dynamically unstable.

-6—

Historical experience suggests that the hegemon's willingness to act in a
stabilizing capacity at a point in time tends to undermine its continued
capacity to do so over time.
The notion that a concentration of economic power may be intrinsic to the
smooth operation of the international monetary system, while intuitively
appealing to political scientists for whom the concept of power is bread and
butter, may seem to economists as strange as, say, the pareto optimality of
free trade or the efficiency of perfect competition is to nearly everyone but

economists.1° The point of departure of this paper is necessarily different,
therefore, from that which characterizes most work in economics, and requires
of economists in the audience, like theatre goers, a willing suspension of
disbelief.

I.

Theoretical Foundations of Hegemonic Stability Theory

In this section, I examine the implications of different structures of

international economic relations for the applicability of hegemonic stability
theories to the international monetary system.

I consider models of two

countries faced with the decision of whether to continue to adhere to an

established system. One can think of each country, having previously
maintained a fixed exchange rate, as deciding whether or not to devalue.11 To
avoid unnecessary complications introduced by the "nth country problem," I
consider gold-standard-like systems in which each country declares a parity

against a common numeraire (gold).12
The central assumption maintained throughout this section is that

—7—

countries derive benefits from participation in the internationa1 monetary

system, and that they incur costs upon defection. This might be thought of as
a transactions cost associated with the existence of more than one currency
(analogous to extra costs of interstate trade in the United States if there

existed 50 state monies, all floating against one another). Thus, the
efficiency gains of a common system are analogous to those associated with a

unified currency on the national level. If both countries incur a cost with
either country's defection, then systemic stability has the character of an

international public good. A country will choose to incur the cost associated
with interrupting public good provision when it is less than the benefits of
adjustment through devaluation, as in the optimal currency area literature.13
The intuition for how such a model works can be derived from Figure 1,
where the best—response or reaction functions for the countries are plotted.
Each country is a Nash player, taking the policies of its foreign counterpart

as fixed. The magnitude of the defection cost is constant. Each country has
an upward sloping reaction function in e-e* space, where e and e* are the

domestic— and foreign-currency prices of gold, so a rise in e or e* signifies
devaluation.14 The Nash equilibrium is at the intersection of the home and
foreign reaction functions.
Since both countries incur a transactions cost c when either changes
its exchange rate, in the neighborhood of the initial Nash equilibrium, a
country will change its exchange rate in response to a change in the other

only when benefits exceed that transactions cost.15 In that neighborhood, the
home (foreign) reaction function is vertical (horizontal), as in Figure 1, in

the range where the cost c exceeds the benefits. Assume now that the foreign

I.

R

e*

R*

e

Figure 1

-8-

country "abandons its gold standard parity," defecting from the international
monetary system in response to an exogenous shock which shifts its reaction

function R* upward in Figure 2.16 If the foreign devaluation is sufficiently
small, the home country will not abandon its fixed parity.17
Note that Figure 2 and the results derived from it are independent of the
extent to which participation in the international monetary system is an

international, as opposed to a national, public good. Whether the benefits of
participation are purely national (i.e., the home country incurs no cost with
the foreign country's departure from the system) or the benefits are an
international public good (the home country incurs a cost c with the foreign
country's defection as well as with its own), the response, as depicted in

Figure 2, is the same. If the benefits of the international monetary system
come as a reduction of transaction costs and the participants adopt Nash
strategies, the extent to which those benefits spill over internationally is
irrelevant to their decisions.

Assume now that the home country, denoted the hegemon, grows large

relative to its foreign counterpart. The larger that country, the less it is
influenced by foreign economic policies, and the more it influences policies

abroad.18 The home country's reaction function will become more steeply
inclined and the foreign reaction function less flat. Holding constant the
fixed cost of changing the exchange rate, this will tend to lengthen the
vertical segment of R and shorten the horizontal segment of R*, as in

Figure 3. It becomes increasingly likely that the home country will remain on
the standard despite a foreign devaluation of given size, but less likely that
the foreign country will choose to remain despite a home—country devaluation.

R

e*

R*I
R*

e

Figure 2

—9—

While the costs of defection remain the same (by assumption), the benefits to
the home country (in the form, for example, of a devaluation-induced
improvement in the competitiveness of domestic goods in international markets)

decline as that country grows. Hence the hegemon has a greater incentive and
tendency to remain on an established international monetary standard.
In contrast, the smaller a country, the greater its propensity to depart
from an established international monetary standard in response to a shock of

given size. In this model the existence of a hegemon, even one disinclined to
defect from an established standard, does not deter its smaller counterpart

from defecting. While the cost of defection is fixed, the benefits
(associated with improved competitiveness) rise as the foreign country

shrinks. Among the shocks for which this result holds is a home—country
devaluation. In contrast to the (large) home country, which becomes
increasingly likely to remain on the standard despite a foreign devaluation of
given size, it is less likely that the (small) foreign country will choose to

remain on that standard despite a home-country devaluation of given size. Not
only does the hegemon have a greater tendency to remain on an established
international monetary standard, but it has a greater capacity to drive other

countries from that standard.
A shortcoming of this formulation is the unrealistic assumption made

about anticipated foreign reactions. As a Nash player, each government takes
the policy stance of its foreign counterpart as fixed. The logical response
of the domestic government is not permitted to influence the strategy of its

foreign counterpart. To relax this assumption of static expectations, it is
convenient to write the the model in extensive form.

I simplify by

e*

S

R*I
#S

S

R*

e

Figure 3

-10—

considering a country's choice not between a continuum of values for the
exchange rate but between the current exchange rate an a devaluation of

size M. (Again, e denotes the domestic-currency price of a unit of foreign
exchange, so Ae > 0 signifies a devaluation.)

output Q

divided

between the two countries (Q

I assume a constant world

denoting home output, Q* foreign

output). At initial exchange rates (e and e*), which for convenience are
normalized to equality, the share of the foreign (home) country in world

output is s (1-s). s and (1-s) are also measures of the relative size
(populations) of the two countries.

Each country can use beggar-thy-neighbor exchange-rate policy to attempt
to increase its share of world output, where a is the response of output with
respect to exchange—rate changes.

(1)

Q=Q+Q*

(2)

Q*sQ+a(e*-e)

(3)

Q = (1-s)Q

-

a(e*

-

e)

As before, individuals incur a cost c when either country defects from
the established international monetary system by changing its exchange rate.
International monetary stability is assumed to be pure public good, so that

the cost of its destruction is borne equally by each individual. The cost to
the home and foreign countries of one country's devaluation is therefore

(1-s)c and sc, respectively. When both countries devalue, these amounts are
doubled.

The timing of play is as follows. The foreign country moves first by

deciding whether to raise its exchange rate by te*. The home country then
decides whether to retaliate with a competitive depreciation of equal size.
In Figure 4 this game is represented in extensive form, with

foreign—country payoffs written first. Consider two countries of equal size
(s =

1/2),

which I characterize as the absence of hegemony. There are two

cases to consider, depending on the sign of aAe* —

sc.

If aAe* < sc, the

benefits of increasing output through devaluation are outweighed by the costs

of destroying the public good of monetary stability. Neither country
devalues, and the outcome is the upper-right-hand limb of the decision tree.
If aAe* > sc, devaluation without retaliation improves the payoff for the
devaluing country, while devaluation with retaliation leaves it worse off.

But if aAe* > Sc, the home country prefers to retaliate. ae* > sc means that
the benefits to the country which moves second of reversing its initial loss
of competitiveness are greater than the costs of causing additional monetary

instability. Since retaliation is guaranteed, neither country has an
incentive to defect.

Contrast this result with that which obtains when the foreign country is

small (s < ).

The smaller the foreign country, the larger the benefits of

devaluation relative to the costs (the smaller s, the greater the probability

aAe* > sc). Analogously, the larger the home country, the smaller the benefits
of devaluation relative to the costs (the smaller s, the greater the

probability ae < (1-s)c). For given values of ate and c, the smaller a
country the greater its incentive to defect if no retaliation is anticipated,

and the less the incentive for its larger rival to respond with retaliation or
negative sanctions.

Figure 4

Foreign
Country

Maintains

Devalues

Parity

Country

Devalues

F: sQ -

2sc

H: (1—s)Q — 2(1—s)c

F: sQ
H: (1-s)Q
Maintains

Parity

F: sQ + e H: (1—s)Q — aLe

sc
—

(1—s)c

—12—

This result is identical to that which obtains in the model of Figures

1—3. The extensive—form representation merely provides additional intuition
for the reasons it occurs. The defection problem confronting countries of
varying size which adhere to an international monetary system is analogous to
the cartel problem in the case of a dominant firm and a competitive fringe.
The smaller the members of the fringe, the greater the incremental market
share they are able to secure with an unmatched price cut, and the less they
need worry about foregone profits due to lower prices on inframarginal sales.
The larger the dominant firm, the less it is inclined to respond with a
retaliatory price cut, since the costs it incurs from lower prices on
inframarginal sales are larger than the benefits of regaining the incremental
market share.

The fringe is expected to set price equal to marginal cost,

defecting from the cartel, while the dominant firm is not expected to

retaliate against its smaller counterparts. An analogous result obtains in
the present setting.

These results are difficult to reconcile with hegemonic stability theory.
Although a hegemon is unlikely to defect from an established international

monetary system, which in and of itself may lend that system a semblance of
stability, the hegemon is unlikely also to use its retaliatory power to deter

defection by other countries. In the terminology of hegemonic stability
theory, the hegemon is unlikely to use negative sanctions because they hurt

the hegemon more than the targets of the action. This model suggests that a
system comprised of identical or similarly sized countries is the most likely
to be stable, supporting hegemonic stability theory only in the weak sense
that the hegemon itself is unlikely to engage in destabilizing actions, not in

—13—

the strong sense that it is able to deter smaller participants from doing the
same.

This analysis is subject to four limitations. First, positive sanctions
(bribes or side payments) have not been permitted; second, only the two case
has been considered; third, complete information has been assumed; and fourth,
other differences between large and small countries have been neglected.

The first of these limitations is of some consequence. All players
prefer bribes to no response. This is because the terms sc and (1-s)c
represent a bargaining inefficiency. The foreign country's gain from

devaluation (ae* - Sc) 5 smaller than the home country's loss in the event
that the latter prefers not to retaliate (_aAe*_(1_s)c). Any side payment
greater than the first amount and smaller than the second is pareto improving.
If in the absence of side payments the second player (the home country)

prefers no retaliation, in their presence it will switch to bribes. Hence the
passive response to defection will not be observed whether or not there is a

hegemon. The dominant strategies are retaliation and bribes -- positive and
negative sanctions --

to

prevent the initial defection. In addition,

introducing positive sanctions reduces the likelihood that negative sanctions

will be preferred. Side payments which eliminate the inefficiency reduce the
costs of alternatives to retaliation. Assuming the bribe equals the amount
the foreign country stands to gain in the absence of home-country reaction,

positive sanctions are preferred to negative sanctions whenever (1-s)c > ae*.
While the costs of retaliation increase with the size of the dominant player,

the costs of side payments decline. The more hegemonic a country (as measured
by s), the more likely it will prefer positive over negative sanctions.

—14-

Moreover, side payments may undermine the stability of a system comprised

of symmetrical countries. Recall the argument for stability in the absence of
side payments: that whenever countries have an incentive to defect, their
symmetrical counterparts have an incentive to retaliate, leaving everyone

worse off and deterring defection. But if the respondents have an incentive
to use positive rather than negative sanctions, this argument loses its force.
Countries which defect gain if they receive bribes from other players.
Potential renegades are therefore more likely to defect because the
introduction of side payments reduces the costs of alternatives to
retaliation.

The second limitation of the model -— two players --

is

of little

consequence. Extending the analysis to three or more countries only

reinforces the conclusions. Assume no side payments. Then the probability
that the returns to one country's depreciation ae outweigh the costs sc is
greater with three countries than with two, since s =

1/3 rather than 1/2

while the other parameters are assumed to be unchanged. Although this implies
that countries which anticipate no retaliation are more likely to defect, for
the same reasons it implies that the others are more likely to retaliate.
Knowing retaliation is likely, leaving everyone worse off, there is still no

incentive to defect. This is analogous to a common result in theoretical
analyses of cartels: that a cartel of similar firms is more likely to be
stable than one in which the participants are heterogeneous.

The word "knowing" is a critical part of the phrase "knowing retaliation
is likely.. ."

The incentive symmetrical countries have to retaliate against

renegades serves as a deterrent only if potential renegades understand the

—15—

structure of payoffs. Similarly, the hegemon's inability to deter defection
because retaliation hurts it more than those against whom that retaliation is
directed fails to serve as a deterrant only if small countries understand the

costs to the hegemon. In the absence of complete information, symmetry may
fail to serve as an effective deterrant.
One source of uncertainty is the value policymakers attach to output
gains and the costs they associate with monetary instability --

in

other

words, uncertainty about their objective functions. These matters are of
relatively little consequence in a static game, except that, insofar as
policymakers are risk averse, uncertainty may deter them from taking any

action. But in a repeated game, policymakers learn over time about the
preferences of their foreign counterparts, and players may invest in a
reputation for retaliating which reinforces the stability of the monetary

system. Alt et al. (1986) argue that large countries can most efficiently
cultivate a reputation for willingness to retaliate.
A final limitation of the model is its treatment of countries as

symmetrical in every respect but size. Countries which differ by size may
also differ systematically in other respects. If small countries are also
more open, the costs they suffer due to systemic instability may be larger
owing to their exceptional dependence on international transactions (in other

words, c* >

c),

a possibility raised in the optimal currency area literature.

If sufficiently strong, such structural asymmetries could offset the tendency
of small countries to defect from an established system and the unwillingness

of large countries to retaliate against renegades. Whether such structural
asymmetries dominate behavior cannot be answered on theoretical grounds.

-16-

Thus, theory suggests no simple mapping from broad characteristics of the
international monetary system to the capacity of a dominant country to use

different strategies to insure the maintenance of that system. Whether
history suggests such generalizations is a separate question, to which I now
turn.

II. Hegemonic Stability Theories of the Genesis of Monetary Systems

Of the three episodes considered here, the origins of the classical gold
standard are the most difficult to assess, for there occurred in the 19th
century no centralized discussions, like those in Genoa in 1922 or Bretton
Woods in 1944, concerned with the design of the international monetary

system.19 There was general agreement that currencies should have a
metallic basis and that payments imbalances should be settled by international

shipments of specie. But there was no concensus on which precious metals
should serve as the basis for money supplies or on how unimpeded international
specie movements should be.

Only Britain maintained a full-fledged gold standard for anything

approaching the century preceding 1913. Although gold coins had circulated
alongside silver since the 14th Century, Britain was on a de facto gold
standard only from 1717, when Sir Isaac Newton, as Master of the Mint, set too
high a silver price of gold and drove full—bodied silver coins from

circulation. In 1798 silver coinage was suspended, and from 1819 silver was
no longer accepted to redeem paper currency. But for half a century following
her official adoption of the gold standard in 1821, Britain essentially

—17—

remained alone. Other countries which retained bimetallic standards were
buffeted by alternating gold and silver discoveries. The United States and
France, for example, while officially bimetallic, first found their internal
circulations placed on a silver basis by growing Mexican and South American
silver production in the early decades of the 19th century, which depressed
the market price of silver relative to the mint price, encouraging silver to
be imported for coinage and gold to be shipped abroad where its price was

higher. Starting in 1848, gold discoveries in Russia, Australia and
California depressed the market price of gold below the mint price, afl but
driving silver from circulation and placing bimetallic currencies on a gold

basis. Finally, silver discoveries in Nevada and other mining territories
starting in the 1870s dramatically inflated the silver price of gold and
forced the bimetallic currencies back onto a silver basis.

The last of these disturbances led nearly all bimetallic countries to

adopt the gold standard, starting with Germany in 1871.20 Why, after taking no
comparable action in response to previous disturbances, did countries respond
to post-1870 fluctuations in the price of silver by abandoning bimetalism and

going onto gold? What role if any did Britain, the hegemonic financial power,
play in their decisions?
One reason for the decision to go onto gold was the desire to prevent the
inflation that would result from continued silver convertibility and coinage.

Hence the plausible explanation for the contrast between the 1870s and earlier
years is the danger of exceptionally rapid inflation due to the magnitude of

post—1870 silver discoveries. Between 1814 and 1870, the sterling price of
silver, of which so much was written, remained within two percentage points of

-18—

its 1814 value, alternatively driving gold or silver from circulation in
bimetallic countries but fluctuating insufficiently to raise the spectre of

significant price level changes. Then between 1871 and 1881 the London price
of silver fell by 15 per cent, and by 1891 the cumulative fall had reached 25

per cent.21 Gold convertibility was the only alternative to continued silver
coinage that was judged both respectable and viable.22 The only significant
resistance to the adoption of gold convertibility eminated from silver-mining
regions and from agricultural areas like the American West, populated by
proprietors of encumbered land who might benefit from inflation.
Seen from this perspective, the impetus for adopting the gold standard
existed independently of Britain's rapid industrialization, dominance of

international finance, and preeminence in trade. Still, the British example
surely provided encouragement to follow the path ultimately chosen. The
experience of the Latin Monetary Union impressed upon contemporaries the
advantages of a common monetary standard in minimizing transactions costs.23
The scope of that common standard would be greatest for countries which linked

their currencies to sterling. The gold standard was also attractive to
domestic interests concerned to promote economic growth. Industrialization
required foreign capital, and attracting foreign capital required monetary

stability. For Britain, the principal source of foreign capital, monetary
stability was measured in terms of sterling and best insured by joining

Britain on gold. Moreover, London's near monopoly of trade credit was of
concern to other governments which hoped that, by establishing gold parities
and central banks, their dependence on the London discount market might be

reduced. Aware that Britain monopolized trade in newly-mined gold and was the

—19—

home of the world's largest organized commodity markets, other governments
hoped that by emulating Britain's gold standard and financial system they
might secure a share of this business.
Where Britain's prominance -in foreign commerce, overseas investment and

the provision of trade credit forcefully conditioned the evolution of the gold
standard system was in the practice by central banks of holding key currency
balances abroad and -in their concentration in London. It is unlikely that
this practice would have developed so quickly or so far had foreign countries
not grown accustomed to transacting in the London market, that it would have
become so widespread in the absence of unmatched confidence in the stability
and liquidity of sterling deposits, or that such a large share of foreign
deposits would have gravitated to a single center had Britain not possessed
such a highly articulated set of financial markets.
But neither Britain's dominance of international transactions nor the
desire to emulate Bank of England practice prevented countries from tailoring

the gold standard to domestic needs. Germany and France continued to allow
large internal gold circulations, while other nations limited gold coin

circulation to low levels. The central banks of France, Belgium and
Switzerland retained the right to redeem their notes in silver, and the French

did not hesitate to charge a premium for gold.24 The Reichsbank could at its
option issue fiduciary notes upon the payment of a tax.25 In no sense did
British example or suggestion dictate the form of the monetary system.

The interwar gold-exchange standard offers a radically different picture:
on the one hand, the absence of a single dominant power like 19th—century
Britain or m-id-2Oth—century America; on the other, conscious efforts by the

-20—

rivals to shape the international monetary order to their national advantage.

Contemporary views of the design of the interwar monetary system
were aired at a series of international meetings, the most important of which
was the Genoa Economic and Financial Conference convened in April 1922.26
Although the United States declined to send an official delegation to Genoa,

proceedings there reflected the differing economic objectives of Britain and

the U.S. British officials were aware that the war had burdened domestic
industry with problems of adjustment, had disrupted trade and had accentuated

financial rivalry between London and New York. Their objectives were to
prevent worldwide deflation which was sure to exacerbate the problems of
structural adjustment, to promote the expansion of international trade to

which the nation's prosperity was inextricably tied, and to recapture the

financial business diverted to New York as a result of the war.27 To prevent
deflation, they advocated that countries economize on the use of gold by
adopting the gold—exchange standard along lines practiced by members of the

British Empire. Presuming London to be a reserve center, these measures
promised to restore the City to its traditional prominence in international

finance. Stable exchange rates would stimulate international trade,
particularly if the United States forgave its war debt claims, permitting
Reparations to be reduced and encouraging creditor countries to extend loans
to Central Europe.
The U.S., in contrast, was less dependent for its prosperity on the rapid

expansion of trade. It was less reliant on income from financial and
insurance services and perceived as less urgent the need to encourage the

deposit of foreign balances in New York. Influential American officials,

—21--

notably Benjamin Strong of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, opposed any

extension of the gold-exchange standard.28 Above all, American officials were
hesitant to participate in a conference whose success appeared to hinge on
unilateral concessions regarding war debts.29
In the absence of an American delegation, Br-itain's proposals formed the

basis for the resolutions of the Financial Commission of the Genoa Conference.
These resolutions proposed the adoption of an international monetary
convention formally empowering countries, "in addition to any gold reserve
held at home, [to] maintain in any other participant country reserves of
approved assets in the form of bank balances, bills, short-term securities, or
other suitable liquid resources."3° Countries participating -in this system
would fix their exchange rates against one another, and any that failed to do

so would lose the right to hold the reserve balances of the others. The
principal creditor nations were encouraged to take immediate steps to restore
convertibility in order to become "gold centers" where the bulk of

foreign-exchange reserves would be held. Following earlier recommendations by
the Cunliffe Committee, governments were urged to economize on gold by
eliminating gold coin from circulation and concentrating reserves at central

banks. Countries with significantly depreciated currencies were urged to
stabilize at current exchange rates rather than attempting to restore prewar
parities through drastic deflation which would only delay stabilization.
To implement this convention, the Bank of England was instructed to call

an early meeting of central banks, including the Federal Reserve. But efforts
to arrange this meeting, which bogged down in the dispute over war debts and

reparations, proved unavailing. Still, if the official convention advocated

—22—

by the Financial Committee failed to materialize, the Genoa resolutions were

not without influence.31 Many of the innovations suggested there were adopted
by individual countries on a unilateral basis and compromised the
distinguishing features differentiating the prewar and interwar monetary
standards. 32

The first effect of Genoa was to encourage the adoption of statutes
permitting central banks to back notes and sight deposits with foreign

exchange as well as gold. New regulations broadening the definition of
eligible assets and specifying minimum proportions of total reserves to be

held in gold were widely implemented in succeeding years. The second effect
was to encourage the adoption of gold economy measures, including the
withdrawal of gold coin from circulation and provision of bullion for export

only by the authorities. The third effect was to provide subtle encouragement
to countries experiencing ongoing inflation to stabilize at depreciated rates.
Thus, Genoa deserves partial credit for transforming the international

monetary system from a gold to a gold-exchange standard, from a gold coin to a
gold bullion standard, and from a fixed-rate system to one in which central
banks were vested with some discretion over the choice of parities.
Given its dominance of the proceedings at Genoa, Britain's imprint on the
interwar gold—exchange standard was as apparent as its influence over the

structure of the prewar system. That British policymakers achieved this
despite a pronounced decline in Britain's position in the world economy and
the opposition of influential American officials suggests that planning and
effort were substitutes, to some extent, for economic power.
Of the three cases considered here, U.S. dominance of the Bretton Woods

—23—

negotiations is most clearly supportive of hegemonic stability theories of the

genesis of the international monetary system.33 U.S. dominance of the postwar
world economy is unmistakable.34 Yet despite the trappings of hegemony and
American dominance of the proceedings at Bretton Woods, a less influential
power, Great Britain, was able to secure surprisingly extensive concessions in
the design of the international monetary system.

American and British officials offered different plans for postwar
monetary reconstruction both because they had different views of the problem
of international economic adjustment and because they represented economies

with different strengths and weaknesses. British officials were preoccupied
by two weaknesses of their economic position. First was the spectre of

widespread unemployment. Between 1920 and 1938, unemployment in Britain had
scarsely dipped below double digit levels, and British policymakers feared its

recurrence. Second was the problem of sterling balances. Britain had
concentrated its wartime purchases within the sterling bloc and, because they
were allies and sterling was a reserve currency, exporters had accepted

settlement in sterling, now held in London. Since these sterling balances
were large relative to Britain's gold reserve, even the possibility that they
might presented for conversion into gold threatened plans for the restoration

of convertibility.35
U.S. officials, in contrast, were confident that the competitive position
of American industry was strong and little preoccupied by the spectre of

unemployment. The concentration of gold reserves in the United States
combined with the economy's international creditor position freed them from
worry that speculative capital flows or foreign government policies might

-24-

undermine the dollar's stability. U.S. concerns centered on the growth of
preferential trading systems from which its exports were excluded, notably the
sterling bloc.

The British view of international economic adjustment was dominated by

concern over inadequate liquidity and asymmetrical adjustment. A central
lesson drawn by British policymakers from the experience of the 1920s was the
difficulty of operating an international monetary system in which liquidity or

reserves were scarce. Given how slowly the global supply of monetary gold
responded to fluctuations in its relative price and how sensitive its
international distribution had proven to be to the economic policies of
individual states, it was foolhardy in their view to base the international

monetary system on a reserve base comprised exclusively of gold. Given the
perceived inelasticity of global gold supplies, a gold-based system threatened
to impart a deflationary bias to the world economy and to worsen unemployment.
This preoccupation with unemployment due to external constraints was
reinforced by another lesson drawn from the 1920s: the costs of asymmetries in

the operation of the adjustment mechanism. If the experience of the 1920s was
repeated, surplus countries, in response to external imbalances, would need
only to sterilize reserve inflows, while deficit countries would be forced to

initiate monetary contraction to prevent the depletion of reserves. Monetary
contraction, according to Keynes, whose views dominated those of the British

delegation, facilitated adjustment by causing unemployment. To prevent
unemployment, symmetry had to be restored to the adjustment mechanism through
the incorporation of sanctions compelling surplus countries to revalue their
currencies or stimulate demand.

—25—

From the American perspective, the principal lessons of interwar
experience were not the costs of asymmetries and inadequate liquidity but the
instability of floating rates and the disruptive effects of exchange—rate and

trade protection. U.S. officials were concerned to insure order and stability
in the foreign exchange market and to prevent the development of preferential
trading systems cultivated through expedients such as exchange control.

The Keynes and White Plans that formed that basis for negotiations are

too well known to require more than brief summary.36 Exchange control and the
centralized provision of liquidity ("bancor") were two central elements of

Keynes's plan for an international clearing union. Provision of bancor was
designed to permit "the substitution of an expansionist, in place of a
contractionist, pressure on world trade."37 Exchange control would insulate
pegged exchange rates from sudden moves to liquidate short-term balances.

Symmetry would be insured by a charge on creditor balances held with the
clearing bank.

The White Plan acknowledged the validity of the British concern with
liquidity but was intended to prevent both inflation and deflation rather

than to exert an expansionary influence. It limited the Stabilization Fund's
total resources to $5 billion, in contrast to $26 billion under the Keynes
Plan, and was patterned on the principles of American bank lending, under
which decision-making power rested ultimately with the bank, in contrast to
the Keynes Plan's resemblance to the British overdraft system, in which the

overdraft was at the borrower's discretion.38 The fundamental difference,
however, was that the White Plan limited the total U.S. obligation to its $2

billion contribution, while the Keynes Plan limited the value of unrequited

-26—

U.S. exports that might be financed by bancor only to the total drawing rights
of other countries ($23 billion).
It is typically argued that the Bretton Woods Agreement reflected
America's dominant position, presumably on the grounds that the Fund Charter
specified quotas of $8.8 billion (much closer to the White Plan's $5 billion
than to the Keynes Plan's $26 billion) and a maximum U.S. obligation of
$2.75 billion (in contrast to $2 billion under the White Plan and $23 billion

under the Keynes Plan). Yet, relative to the implications of simple versions
of hegemonic stability theory, a surprising number of British priorities were

incorporated as well. One was the priority Britain attached to exchange rate
flexibility. The U.S. initially had wished to invest the Fund with veto power
over a country's decision to change its exchange rate. Subsequently it
proposed that 80 per cent of Fund members be required to approve any change in

parity. But the Articles of Agreement permitted devaluation without Fund
objection when needed to eliminate fundamental disequilibrium. Lacking any
definition of this term, there was scope for devaluation by countries other

than the United States to reconcile internal and external balance. On only
one occasion did the Fund in fact treat an exchange rate change as

unauthorized.39 If countries hesitated to devalue, they did so as much for
domestic reasons as for reasons related to the structure of the international

monetary system.
Another British priority incorporated into the agreement was tolerance of

exchange control. Originally, the White Plan obliged members to abandon all
exchange restrictions within six months of ceasing hostilities or joining the

Fund, whichever came first. A subsequent U.S. proposal would have required a

country to eliminate all exchange controls within a year of joining the Fund.

But Britain succeeded in incorporating into the Articles of Agreement a
distinction between controls for capital transactions, which were permitted,

from controls on current transactions, which were not. In practice, even
non-discriminatory exchange controls on current transactions were sometimes
authorized under IMF Article VIII.4° As a result of this compromise, the U.S.
protected itself from efforts to divert sterling bloc trade toward the British
market, while Britain protected herself from destabilization by overseas

sterling balances.41
Compared to the above, British efforts to restore symmetry to the

international adjustment mechanism proved unavailing. With abandonment of the
overdraft principle, the British embraced White's "scarce currency" proposal,
under which the Fund was empowered to ration its supply of the scarce currency
and members were authorized to impose limitations on freedom of exchange

operations in that currency. Thus, a country running payments surpluses
sufficiently large to threaten the Fund's ability to supply its currency might

face restrictions on foreign customers' ability to purchase its exports. But
the scarce currency clause had been drafted by the United States not with the
principle of symmetry in mind but in order to deal with problems of immediate
postwar adjustment ---specifically, the prospective dollar shortage. With the
development of the Marshall Plan, the dollar shortage never achieved the
severity anticipated by the authors of the scarce currency clause, and the

provision was never invoked.
If the "Joint Statement by Experts on the Establishment of an
International Monetary Fund," made public in April 1944, bore the imprint of

-28—

the U.S. delegation to Bretton Woods, to a surprising extent it also embodied
important elements of the British negotiating position, most notably on the

issues of parity adjustment and exchange control. It is curious from the
perspective of hegemonic stability theory that a war-battered economy,
Britain, heavily dependent on the dominant economic power, America, for
capital goods, financial capital and export markets was able to extract
significant concessions in the design of the international monetary system.42
Not only was Britain ably represented in negotiations, but the U.S., not just
Britain, required an international agreement and wished to secure it even
while hostilities in Europe prevented enemy nations from taking part in
negotiations and minimized the involvement of allies on whose territory the

war was fought. The U.S. therefore had little opportunity to play off
countries against one another or to brand as renegades any which disputed the

advisability of its design. Still the world's second largest economy, Britain
symbolized, if it did not actually represent, the other nations of the world
and was able to advance their case more effectively than if they had attempted

more actively to do so on their own.
What conclusions regarding the applicability of hegemonic stability
theory to the genesis of international monetary systems follow from this

evidence? In the two clearest instances of hegemony, the United Kingdom in
the second half of the 19th century and the United States following World War
II, the leading economic power significantly influenced the form of the
international monetary system, by example in the first instance, by

negotiation in the second. On these grounds, hegemonic stability theory

cannot be dismissed. But the evidence also underscores the fact that the

—29—

hegemon has been incapable of dictating the form of the monetary system. In
the first instance, British example did nothing to prevent significant

modifications in the form of the gold standard adopted abroad. In the second,
the exceptional dominance of the U.S. economy in the immediate
post-World-War-Il world was unable to eliminate the need to compromise with
other countries in the design of the monetary system.

III. Hegemonic Stability Theories of the Operation of Monetary Systems

A.

Adjustment

Adjustment under the classical gold standard has frequently been

characterized in terms compatible with hegemonic stability theory. The gold
standard is portrayed as a managed system whose preservation and smooth
operation were insured through its regulation by a hegemonic power, Great

Britian, and its agent, the Bank of England. In the words of Cohen (1977,
p. 71, emphasis in original), "The classical gold standard was a sterlin9

standard -— a hegemonic regime -—

in

the sense that Britain not only dominated

the international monetary order, establishing and maintaining the prevailing
rules of the game, but also gave monetary relations whatever degree of
inherent stability they possessed."
Prior to 1914, London was indisputably the world's leading financial

center. A large proportion of the world trade -- 60 per cent by one estimate
—— was settled through payment in sterling bills, with London functioning as a

clearing house for importers and exporters of other nations.43 British
discount houses bought bills from abroad, either directly or through the

-30-

London agencies of foreign banks. Foreigners maintained balances in London to
meet commitments on bills outstanding and to service British portfolio

investments overseas. Foreign governments and central banks held deposits in

London as interest-earning alternatives to gold reserves. Although the pound
was not the only reserve currency of the pre-1914 era, sterling reserves

matched the combined value of reserves denominated in other currencies. At
the same time, Britain possessed perhaps £350 million of short-term capital

overseas. Though it is unclear whether Britain was a net short-term debtor or
creditor before the war, it is certain that there existed a large volume of
short-term funds responsive to changes in domestic interest rates.44
Such changes in interest rates might be instigated by the Bank of

England. By altering the rates at which it discounted for its customers and
rediscounted for the discount houses, the Bank could affect rates prevailing

in the discount market.45 But the impact of Bank Rate was not limited to the
bill market. While in part this reflected the exceptional integration
characteristic of British financial markets, it was reinforced by
institutionalization. In London, banks automatically, fixed their deposit

rates half a percentage point above Bank Rate. Loan rates were similarly
indexed to Bank Rate but at a higher level. Though there were exceptions to
these rules, changes in Bank Rate were immediately reflected in a broad range
of British interest rates.
An increase in Bank Rate, by raising the general level of British
interest rates, induced foreign investors to accumulate additional funds in
London and to delay the repatriation or transfer of existing balances to other

centers. British balances abroad would be repatriated to earn the now higher

—31—

rate of return. Drawings of finance bills, which represented half of total
bills in 1913, were similarly sensitive to changes in -interest rates. Higher
interest rates would spread to the security market and delay the float-ion of

new issues for overseas borrowers.

In this way the Bank of England was able

to insulate its gold reserve from disturbances to the external accounts.46
Because of the size of the London market and the Bank of England's
leverage over the interest rates prevailing there, Bank Rate seemed to have "a
controlling influence on the British balance of payments, regardless of what

other central banks were doing."47 When Bank Rate was raised, Britain's
external position strengthened even when "other central banks raised or
lowered their discount rates along with Bank rate, as they normally did."48
Hence, the hegemonic center was rarely threatened by convertibility crises
under the classical gold standard.
But why did the Bank of England's exceptional leverage not threaten

convertibility abroad? The answer commonly offered is that the Britain's
unrivaled market power led to a de facto harmonization of national policies.
As the Report of the Macmillan Committee characterized the prewar situation,
Britain could "by the operation of her Bank Rate almost immediately adjust her

reserve position. Other countries had, therefore, in the main to adjust
conditions to hers."49 As Keynes wrote in the Treatise on Money, "during the
latter half of the nineteenth century, the influence of London on credit
conditions throughout the world was so predominant that the Bank of England
could almost have claimed to be the conductor of the international
orchestra. "50

Since fiscal harmonization requires no discussion in an era of balanced

—32—

budgets, explaining the stability of the classical gold standard reduces to
explaining the desire and ability of central banks to harmonize their monetary

policies in the interest of external balance. External balance, or
maintaining gold reserves adequate to defend the established gold parity, was
the foremost target of monetary policy in the period preceding World War I.
In the absence of a coherent theory of unemployment, much less a concensus on
its relationship to monetary policy, there was relatively little pressure for

central banks to accommodate domestic needs. This is not to say that external
balance was the sole target of policy, only that when internal and external
balance came into conflict, the latter took precedence.51 Viewed from an
international perspective, British leadership played a role in this process of
harmonization insofar as the market power and prominance of the Bank of
England served as a focal point for policy coordination.
But if the Bank of England could be sure of defeating its European
counterparts when they engaged in a tug of war over short-term capital, mere
harmonization of central bank policies, in the face of external disturbances,
would have been insufficient to prevent convertibility crises on the

Continent. The explanation for their absence would appear to be the greater
market power of European countries compared to their non-European

counterparts. Some observers such as Ford (1962) and Triffin (1968) have
distinguished the market power of capital-exporting countries from the
inability of capital importers to influence the direction of financial flows.
Others have suggested the existence of a hierarchical structure of financial

markets: below the London market were the less active markets of Berlin,
Paris, Vienna, Amsterdam, Brussels, Zurich and New York, followed by the still

—33—

less active markets of the Scandinavian countries, and finally the nascent

markets of Latin America and other parts of the non-European world.52 When
Bank Rate was raised in London, redistributing reserves to Britain from other
regions, compensatory discount rate increases on the Continent drew funds from
the non-European world or curtailed the normal volume of capital outflows.

Developing countries, whether due to the thinness of markets or absence of

relevant institutions, were unable to prevent these events. In times of
crisis, therefore, convertibility was threatened primarily outside Europe and

North America. If Britain and Europe managed the system, they did so "partly
at the expense of its weakest members."53
Thus, insofar as hegemony played some role in the efficiency of the
adjustment mechanism, it was not the British hegemony of which so much has
been written but the collective hegemony of the European center relative to

the non—European periphery. Not only does this case study force the
conception of the hegemon to be revised, therefore, but since the stability
of the classical gold standard was enjoyed exclusively by the countries of the
center, it supports only the weak form of hegemonic stability theory -—

that

the benefits of stability accrued exclusively to the powerful.54
The relationship between hegemonic power and the need for policy
harmonization is equally relevant to the interwar gold-exchange standard.

One interpretation of Nevin's (1955) argument that "the existence of more than
one center... [led] to the existence of more than one policy" is that in the

absence of a hegemon there was no focal point for policy, interfering with

efforts at coordination.55 But more important than a declining ability to
harmonize policies may have been a diminished desire to do so. Although the

-34—

advent of explicit stabilization policy was not to occur until the 1930s and
1940s, an important contrast between the 1920s and the prewar period was
nonetheless the extent to which central banks formulated monetary policy with

internal conditions in mind.56 The rise of socialism and the example of
Bolshevik revolution in particular provided a counterweight to central
bankers' instinctive wish to base policy solely on external conditions.
External adjustment was rendered difficult by policymakers' increasing
hesitancy to sacrifice other objectives on the altar of external balance.
Britain's balance—of-payments problems, for example, cannot be attributed to
"the existence of more than one policy" in the world economy without
considering also a domestic unemployment problem which placed pressure on the
Bank of England to resist restrictive measures that might strengthen the
external accounts at the expense of industry and trade.
Under Bretton Woods, the problem of adjustment was exacerbated by the
difficulty of utilizing exchange—rate changes to restore external balance.
Hesitancy to change their exchange rates posed few problems for countries in
surplus but confronted those in deficit with the choice between aggravating
unemployment and tolerating external deficits, where the latter was infeasible
in the long run and promoted an increase in the volume of short-term capital

that moved in response to anticipations of devaluation. Although the IMF
Charter did not encourage devaluation, the hesitancy of deficit countries to
employ this option is easier to ascribe to the tendency of governments to
attach their prestige to the stability of established exchange rates than to

U.S. hegemony, however defined. Where the singular role of the U.S. was
important was in precluding a dollar devaluation. A possible solution to the

—35—

problem of U.S. deficits that did not threaten other countries' ability to
accumulate reserves was an increase in the dollar price of gold, i.e. a dollar

devaluation. It is sometimes argued that the U.S. was incapable of adjusting
via exchange—rate changes since other countries would have devalued in

response to prevent any change in bilateral rates against the dollar. This,
however, ignores that raising the dollar price of gold would have increased
the dollar value of monetary gold, reducing the global excess demand for
reserves and encouraging other countries to increase domestic demand and cut

back on their balance-of-payments surpluses. But while a rise in the price of
gold, advocated by Gilbert (1968) and Harrod (1971) among others, might have
alleviated central banks' immediate dependence on dollars, it would have done
nothing to prevent the problem from recurring, and would have promoted
skepticism about the American government's commitment to the new gold price,
thereby encouraging other countries to increase their demands for gold and
bringing forward the date of future difficulties.
Does this evidence on adjustment support hegemonic theories of

international monetary stability? The contrast between the appearance of
smooth adjustment under both the classical gold standard and Bretton Woods and
the adjustment difficulties of the interwar years suggests that the policies
of a dominant power served as a sheet anchor for international adjustment
because other countries found a fixed target easier to hit than a moving one.
As in Luce and Raiffa's (1957) "battle of the sexes" game, what mattered was
not so much the particular stance of monetary policy but that the leading

players settled on the same stance. The argument, advanced by Snidel (1985b)
in a similar context, is that a dominant player is best placed to signal the

—36—

other players the nature of the most probable stance.57 But while the London
money market and the Bank of England played singular roles in the operation of
the classical gold standard, as did the New York market and the Federal

Reserve in the operation of Bretton Woods, the effectiveness of the adjustment
mechanism under the two regimes reflected not just British and American market
power but the existence of an international consensus on the objectives and
formulation of monetary policy which permitted central bank policies to be

harmonized. The essential role of Britain before 1914 and the U.S. after 1944
was not so much to force other countries to alter their policies as to provide
a focal point for policy harmonization.

B.

Liquidity

Under the classical gold standard, the principal source of liquidity was

newly mined gold. It is hard to see how British dominance of international
markets could have much influenced the changes in the world price level and

mining technology upon which these supplies depended. As argued above
(p. 19), where Britain's prominance mattered was in facilitating the provision
of supplementary liquidity in the form of sterling reserves, the stock of

which grew at an accelerating rate starting in the 1890s. It is conceivable,
therefore, that in the absence of British hegemony a reserve shortage would
have developed and the classical gold standard would have exhibited a
deflationary bias.
Liquidity was an issue of more concern under the interwar gold—exchange

standard. Between 1915 and 1925, prices rose worldwide due to the inflation
associated with wartime finance and postwar reconstruction and combined with

—37—

economic growth to increase the transactions demand for money. Yet under a
system of convertible currencies, world money supply was constrained by the

availability of reserves. Statutory restrictions required central banks to
back their money supplies with eligible reserves, while recent experience with
inflation deterred politicians from liberalizing the statutes in question.
The output of newly mined gold had been depressed since the beginning of World
War I, and experts offered pessimistic forecasts of future supplies.
Increasing the real value of world gold reserves by forcing a reduction in the
world price level would only add to the difficulties of an already troubled

world economy. Countries were encouraged, therefore, to stabilize on a
gold-exchange basis to prevent the development of a gold shortage.
There are difficulties with this explanation for interwar liquidity

problems that emphasizes a shortage of gold.58 For one, the danger of a gold
shortage constraining the volume of transactions was alleviated by the all but
complete withdrawal of gold coin from circulation, as a result of which the
percentage gold cover of short-term liabilities of all central banks was
little different in 1928 than it had been in 1913, while the volume of the

liabilities backed by that gold stock was considerably increased. It is hard
to see why a gold shortage, after having exhibited only weak effects in

previous years, should have had such a dramatic impact starting in 1929. It
is even less clear how the absence of a hegemon contributed to the purported

gold shortage. The obvious linkages between hegemony and the provision of
liquidity work in the wrong direction. The obvious method of increasing the
monetary value of reserves was a round of currency devaluation, which would
revalue gold reserves and, by raising the real price of gold, increase the

—38—

output of the mining industry. As demonstrated in 1931, when the pound's
depreciation set off a round of competitive devaluations, sterling remained
the linchpin of the international currency system; the only way a round of
currency devaluation could have taken place, therefore, was if Britain had

stabilized in 1925 at a lower level. But had her dominance of the
international economy not eroded to the same extent over the first quarter of
the 20th century, this would have increased rather than reducing the political
pressure for Britain to return to gold at the prewar parity.59

It seems

unlikely, therefore, that the more successful maintenance of British hegemony,
ceteris paribus, would have alleviated any gold shortage.
The alternative and, in my view, more appealing explanation for interwar
liquidity problems emphasizes mismanagement of gold reserves rather than their

overall insufficiency. It blames France and the U.S. for absorbing
disproportionate shares of global gold supplies and for imposing deflation on

the rest of the world.6° Between 1928 and 1932, French gold reserves rose from
$1247 million to $3257 million of constant gold content, or from 13 to 28 per

cent of the world total. Meanwhile, the U.S., which had released gold between
1924 and 1928, facilitating the reestablishment of convertibility in other
countries, reversed its position and imported $1486 million of gold between

1928 and 1930. By the end of 1932 the U.S. and France together possessed
nearly 63 per cent of the world's central monetary gold. The British
Macmillan Committee attributed to this maldistribution of gold "a large
measure of responsibility for the heavy fall in prices in recent years."61
The rualdistribution of reserves can be understood by focusing on the

systematic interaction of central banks. This approach builds on the

—39.-

literature that characterizes the interwar gold standard as a competitive
struggle for gold between countries which viewed the size of the gold reserve
as a measure of national prestige and as insurance against financial

instability.62 France and the United States in particular, but gold standard
countries generally, repeatedly raised their discount rates relative to one

another in efforts to attract gold from abroad. By leading to the
accumulation of excess reserves these restrictive policies exacerbated the
problem of inadequate liquidity, but by offsetting one another they failed to

achieve their objective of attracting gold from abroad. As Keynes explained,
• .what helps each [central bank] is not a high Bank rate but a higher rate

than the others. So that a raising of rates all round helps no one until,
after an interregnum during which the economic activity of the whole world has
been retarded, prices and wages have been forced to a lower level."63
The origins of this competitive struggle for gold are popularly

attributed to the absence of a hegemon. The competing financial centers,
London, Paris and New York, worked at "cross-purposes" because, in contrast to
the preceding period, no one central bank was sufficiently powerful to call

the tune.64 Before the war, the Bank of England had been sufficiently dominant
to act as a leader, setting its discount rate with the reaction of other

central banks in mind, while other central banks responded in the manner of a

competitive fringe. By using this power to defend the gold parity of sterling
despite the maintenance of slender reserves, it prevented the development of a

competitive scramble for gold. But after World War I, with the United States
unwilling to accept responsibility for leadership, no one central bank

formulated its monetary policy with foreign reactions and global conditions in

-40-

mind, and the noncooperative struggle for gold was the result.65 In this

interpretation of the interwar liquidity problem, hegemony precisely, its absence —-

plays

or,

more

a critical role.

In discussing the provision of liquidity under Bretton Woods, it is
critical to distinguish the decade ending in 1958, when the convertibility of
European currencies was restored and before which U.S. dominance of
international trade, foreign lending and industrial production was

unrivaled, from the decade that followed. In the first period, the most
important source of incremental liquidity was dollar reserves. Between 1949
and 1958, a period during which global reserves rose by 29 per cent, less than
a third of the increment took the form of gold and one—fifteenth quotas at the

IMF. Sterling's role as a reserve currency was limited almost entirely to
Commonwealth members and former British colonies that had traditionally held
reserves in London and whose trade was heavily directed toward Britain.

Consequently, the accumulation of dollar balances comprised roughly half of
incremental liquidity in the first decade of Bretton Woods.

In one sense, U.S. dominance of international markets facilitated the

provision of liquidity. Following the conclusion of World War II, the U.S.
had amassed 60 per cent of the world's gold stock, worth, at $35 an ounce, six
times the value of the official dollar claims accumulated by foreign

governments by 1949. There was little immediate question, given U.S.
dominance of global gold reserves, of the stability of the gold price of the
dollar and hence little hesitation to accumulate incremental liquidity in the

form of dollar claims. But in another sense, U.S. international economic
power in the immediate postwar years impeded the supply of liquidity to the

—41—

world economy. Wartime destruction of industry in Europe and Japan left U.S.
manufactured exports highly competitive in world markets and rendered Europe
dependent on U.S. capital goods f or industrial reconstruction. The persistent
excess demand for U.S. goods tended to push the U.S. balance of payments into
surplus, creating the famous "dollar shortage" of the immediate postwar years.
While U.S. hegemony left other countries happy to hold dollar claims, it
rendered them extremely difficult to obtain.
Various policies were initiated in response to the "dollar shortage,"
including discrimination against dollar area exports, special incentives for
European and Japanese exports to the United States, and a round of European

currency devaluations starting in September 1949. Ultimately the solution
took the form of two sharply contrasting actions by the hegemon: Marshall
Plan grants in the amount of $11.6 billion between mid-1948 and mid-1952, and

Korean war expenditures. Largely as a result of these two programs, U.S.
trade surpluses shrank from $10.1 billion in 1947 to $2.6 billion in 1952;
more importantly, U.S. government grants and private capital outflows exceeded

the surplus on current account. By 1950, the U.S. balance of payments was in
deficit and, after moving back into surplus in 1951-52, deficits returned to

stay. Insofar as its singular economic power encouraged the U.S. to undertake
both the Marshall Plan and the Korean War, hegemony played a significant role
in both the form and the adequacy of the liquidity provided in the first
decade of Bretton Woods.
Between 1958 and 1969, global reserves grew more rapidly, by 51 per cent,

than they had in the first decade of Bretton Woods. Again, gold comprised a
minor share of the increment, about one—twentieth, and IMF quotas one—eighth.

—42-

While foreign exchange reserves again provided roughly half, Eurodollars and
other foreign currencies grew in importance, their contribution actually

exceeding that of official claims on the United States.66 In part these trends
reflected economic recovery and rapid growth in Europe and Japan. More
importantly, they reflected the fact that, starting in 1965, the value of
foreign government claims on the United States exceeded U.S. gold reserves.
Prudence dictated that foreign governments diversify their reserve positions
out of dollars.

The role of U.S. hegemony in the provision of liquidity during this

second decade has been much debated. The growth of liquidity reflected both
supply and demand pressures --

both demands by other countries for additional

reserves which translated into balance of payments surpluses, and use by the
United States of its capacity to consume more than it produced by running
balance—of-payments deficits financed by the willingness of other countries to

accumulate dollar reserves. The U.S. was criticized sharply, mainly by the
French, for exporting inflation and for financing purchases of foreign
companies and pursuit of the Vietnam War via the balance of payments.67
Although these complaints cannot be dismissed, it is incorrect to conclude
that the dollar's singular position in the Bretton Woods System permitted the

U.S. to run whatever balance-of-payments deficit it wished.68 Moreover, it is
difficult to envisage an alternative scenario in which the U.S. balance of

payments was zero yet the world was not starved of liquidity. Owing to the
sheer size of the American economy, new claims on the U.S. continued to vastly
exceed the contribution of new claims on any other nation to incremental

liquidity. Moreover, U.S. economic, military and diplomatic influence did

—43-

much to encourage if not compel other countries to maintain their holdings of

dollar claims. Thus, U.S. dominance of international markets played a
critical role in resolving the liquidity crisis of the 19605.69
The distinguishing feature of Bretton Woods is not that other countries
continued to hold dollar reserves in the face of exchange rate uncertainty and
economic growth abroad, for neither development deterred them from holding
dollars under the flexible-exchange rate regime of the 1970s and 1980s.
Rather, it is that they continued to hold reserves in the face of a one—way
bet resulting from the fact of dollar convertibility at a fixed price when the

dollar price of gold seemed poised to rise. In part, the importance of
American foreign investments and the size of the U.S. market for European

exports caused other countries to hesitate before cashing in their chips. Yet
foreign governments also saw dollar convertibility as essential to the defense
of the gold—dollar system, and viewed the fixed exchange rates of that system

as an international public good worthy of defence. Not until 1965 did the
French government decide to convert into gold some $300 million of its dollar
holdings and to subsequently step up its monthly gold purchases from the U.S.
But when pressure on U.S. gold reserves mounted following the 1967 devaluation
of sterling, other countries, including France, instead of capitalizing on the

one way bet, sold gold instead. They joined the U.S. in the formation of a
gold pool whose purpose was to sell a sufficient quantity of gold to defend

the official price. Between sterling's devaluation in 1967 and closure of the
gold market on March 15, 1968, the pooi sold $3 billion of gold, of which U.S.

sales were $2.2. France purchased no gold in 1967 or 1968, presumably due in
part to foreign pressure.7° U.S. leverage undoubtedly contributed to their

-44--

decisions. But a plausible interpretation of these events is that foreign
governments, rather than simply being coerced into support of the dollar by
U.S. economic power, were willing to take limited steps to defend the
international public good of a fixed exchange rate system defined in terms of
the dollar price of gold.
What does this discussion imply for the role of hegemony in the provision

of international liquidity? The strongest evidence for the importance of a
hegemon -is negative evidence from the interwar years, when the absence of a
hegemon and the failure of competing financial centers to effectively

coordinate their policies contributed greatly to the liquidity shortage. In
other periods when a dominant economic power was present, it is difficult to
credit that power with exclusive responsibility for insuring the adequate

provision of liquidity. Under the gold standard, the principal source of
incremental liquidity was newly-mined gold, to which Britain contributed only
insofar as her financial stature encouraged other countries to augment their

specie holdings with sterling reserves. After World War II, U.S. economic
power similarly rendered dollars a desirable form in which to acquire liquid
reserves, but the same factors that made dollars desirable also rendered them
difficult to obtain.

C.

Lender—of-Last-Resort Function

If adjustment were always accomplished smoothly and liquidity were
consistently in adequate supply, there would be no need for an international

lender of last resort to stabilize the international monetary system. Yet
countries' capacity to adjust and the system's ability to provide liquidity

-45.-

may be inadequate to accomodate disturbances to confidence.

Like domestic

banking systems, an international financial system based on convertibility is
vulnerable to problems of confidence which threaten to ignite speculative

runs. Like depositors who rush to close their accounts upon receiving the
news of a neighboring bank failure, exchange—market participants, upon hearing
of a convertibility crisis abroad, may rush to liquidate their
foreign-exchange balances because of incomplete information about the

liabilities and intentions of particular governments. This analogy leads
Charles Kindleberger (1973, pp. 290—291; 1978, pp. 188—194), for example, to
adopt from the domestic central banking literature the notion that a lender of
last resort is needed to discount in times of crisis, provide countercyclical
long—term lending and maintain an open market for distress goods, and to

suggest that, in the absence of a supranational institution, only a hegemonic
power can carry out this international lender-of—last-resort function on the

requisite scale.
Of the episodes considered here, the early Bretton Woods era provides the
clearest illustration of the benefits of an international lender of last

resort. The large amount of credit provided Europe in the form of grants and
long—term loans and the willingness of the U.S. to accept European and
Japanese exports even when these had been promoted by the extention of special
incentives illustrate two of the lender-of-last-resort functions identified by
Kindleberger: countercyclical lending and provision of an open market for

distress goods. Traditional histories of the Marshall Plan characterize it in
terms consistent with the benevolent strand of hegemonic stability theory:
the United States was mainly interested in European prosperity and stood to

—46—

benefit only insofar as that prosperity promoted geopolitical stability.

Revisionist histories have more in common with the coercive strand of
hegemonic stability theory; they suggest that the U.S. used Marshall aid to
exact concessions from Europe on most-favored-nation status for Germany, IMF

exchange—rate oversight, and Swiss links with the OEEC.71 While it is certain
that the European countries could not have moved so quickly to relax capital
controls and quantitative trade restrictions without these forms of U.S.

assistance, it is not clear how far the argument can be generalized. The
Marshall Plan coincided with a very special era in the history of the
international monetary system, in which convertibility outside the U.S. had
not yet been restored and hence there was little role for the central function

of the lender of last resort: discounting freely when a convertibility crisis

threatens.72 Later, in the1960s, when convertibility was threatened, rescue
operations were mounted not by the United States but cooperatively by the
Group of Ten.

Kindleberger has argued that the 1929—31 financial crisis might have been

avoided by the intervention of an international lender of last resort. The
unwillingness of Britain and the United States to engage in countercyci-ical

long-term lending and to provide an open market for distress goods surely

exacerbated convertibility crises in the non—European world. Both the
curtailment of overseas lending and the imposition of restrictive trade

policies contributed greatly to the balance—of-payments difficulties which led

to the suspension of convertibility by primary producers as early as 1929.
Gold movements from the periphery to London and New York in 1930 heightened
the problem and hastened its spread to Central Europe.

—47-

But it is not obvious that additional U.S. loans to Britain and other

European countries attempting to fend off threats to convertibility would have
succeeded in significantly altering the course of the 1931 financial crisis in

Europe. Heading off the crisis would have required a successful defense of
the pound sterling, whose depreciation was followed almost immediately by

purposeful devaluation in some two dozen other countries. In the instance,
Britain succeeded in obtaining a substantial amount of short-term credit
abroad in support of the pound, raising $650 million in New York and Paris

after only minimal delay. Total short-term lending to countries under
pressure amounted to approximately $1 billion, or roughly 10 per cent of total
international short-term indebtedness and five per cent of world imports (more

than the ratio of total IMF quotas to world imports in the mid-1970s).74 It is
noteworthy that these credits were obtained not from a dominant power but from
a coalition of creditor countries.
Could additional short-term credits from an international lender of last

resort have prevented Britain's suspension of convertibility? If the run on
sterling reflected merely a temporary loss of confidence in the stability of
fixed parities, then additional loans from an international lender of last
resort, like central bank loans to temporarily illiquid banks, might have

permitted the crisis to be surmounted. But if the loss of confidence had a
basis in economic fundamentals, no amount of short-term lending would have
done more than delay the crisis in the absence of measures to eliminate the

underlying imbalance. The existence of an international lender of last resort
could have affected the timing but not the fact of collapse.

The fundamental disequilibrium that undermined confidence in sterling is

-48—

typically sought in the government budget. The argument is that Britain's
budget deficit, by stimulating absorption, in conjunction with the collapse of

foreign demand for British exports, weakened the balance of trade. Although
the Second Labour Government fell in 1931 precisely because of its failure to
agree on measures to reduce the size of the budget deficit, historians
disagree over whether the budget contributed significantly to the balance of

payments deficit.75 The trade balance, after all, was only one component of
the balance of payments. The impact on the balance of payments of shocks to
the trade balance appear to have been small compared to the Bank of England's

capacity to attract short-term capital. If this is correct and the 1931
financial crisis in Britain reflected mainly a temporary loss of confidence in
sterling rather than a fundamental disequilibrium, then additional short—term
loans from the United States or a group of creditor countries might have

succeeded in tiding Britain over the crisis. But the loans required would
have been extremely large by the standards of either the pre-1914 period of

British hegemony or the post-1944 period of U.S. dominance.
The international lender—of—last-resort argument is more difficult to

apply to the classical gold standard. Cohen (1977, pp. 81-82) asserts that
the three lender—of—last—resort functions identified by Kindleberger ——

maintaining

an open market, providing countercyclical foreign lending, and

discounting freely in times of crisis -— were practiced by Britain prior to
1913. But, according to Moggridge, Kindleberger argues the opposite: that
under the classical gold standard, certain international crises, like that of
1873, were rendered severe by the absence of an international lender of last

resort.76 By my reading, Kindleberger's views are more circumspect. He

-49-

examines whether international loans were solicited and whether their

extension might have moderated the 1873 crisis. But he notes that in 1873, as
in 1890 and 1907, the hegemonic monetary authority, the Bank of England, would

have been the "borrower of last resort' rather than the lender. These facts
might be reconciled with the theory of hegemonic stability if the lender,
Paris, -is elevated to the status of a hegemonic financial center, a

possibility to which Kindleberger is led to by his analysis of

iate-l9th—century financial crises. But elevating Paris to parity with London
would do much to undermine the view of the classical gold standard that
attributes its durability to management by a single financial center.
What does this historical analysis of the lender—of-last-resort function
imply for the validity of hegemonic theories of international monetary

stability? It confirms that there have been instances, notably the aftermath
of World War II, when the economic power of the leading country so greatly
surpassed that of all rivals that it succeeded in insuring the system's
stability -in times of crisis by discounting freely, providing countercyclical

lending and maintaining an open market. It suggests, at the same time, that
such instances are rare. For a leading economic power to effectively act in
this lender-of-last-resort capacity, not only must its market power exceed
that of all rivals but it must exceed that of its rivals by a very substantial

margin. British economic power in the 1870s and U.S. economic power in the
1960s were inadequate in this regard, and other economic powers -— France in
the first instance, the Group of Ten in the second -- were needed to cooperate
in provision of lender-of-last—resort facilities.

-50—

IV. The Dynamics of Hegemonic Decline

Might an international monetary system that depends for its smooth

operation on the dominance of a heemonic power be dynamically unstable?
There are two channels through which dynamic instability might operate: first,
the system itself might evolve in directions which attenuate the hegemon's
stabilizing capacity; second, while the system remains the same, its operation
might influence relative rates of economic growth in such a way as to
progressively reduce the economic power and, by implication, the stabilizing

capacity of the hegemon.77
The hypothesis that the Bretton Woods System was dynamically unstable was
mooted by Robert Triff in as early as 1947.78 Triff in focused on what he saw as

inevitable changes in the composition of reserves, arguing that the system's
viability hinged on the willingness of foreign governments to accumulate
dollars, a willingness that depended in turn on confidence in the maintenance

of dollar convertibility. Although gold dominated the dollar as a source of
international liquidity (in 1958, the value of gold reserves being four times
the value of dollar reserves when all countries were considered, two times
when the U.S. was excluded), dollars were the main source of liquidity on the

margin. Yet the willingness of foreign governments to accumulate dollars at
the required pace and hence the stability of the gold-dollar system were
predicated on America's commitment and capacity to maintain the convertibility

of dollars into gold at $35 an ounce. The threat to her ability to do so was
that, under a system in which reserves could take the form of either dollars
or gold, a scarce natural resource whose flow supply was insufficiently

—51—

elastic to keep pace with the demand for liquidity, the share of dollars in
total reserves could only increase, pyramiding an ever—growing volume of
foreign dollar liabilities on a fixed or even shrinking U.S. gold reserve.

Thus, the very structure of Bretton Woods -for gold -—

progressively

specifically,

the monetary role

undermined the hegemon's capacity to insure the

system's smooth operation through the provision of adequate liquidity.79
Dynamic instability also could have operated through the impact of the
international monetary system on the relative rates of growth of the U.S. and
foreign economies. If the dollar was systematically overvalued f or a
significant portion of the Bretton Woods era, this could have reduced the
competitiveness of U.S. exports, stimulating foreign penetration of U.S.

markets. Assuming that the dollar was overvalued due to some combination of
European devaluations at the beginning of the 1950s, subsequent devaluations
by developing countries, and to the inability of the U.S. to respond to
competitive difficulties by altering its exchange rate, how might this have
depressed the relative rate of growth of the U.S. economy, leading to

hegemonic decline? One can think of two arguments, one which proceeds along
Heckscher-Ohlin lines, another which draws on dynamic theories of
international trade.
The Heckscher-Ohlin hypothesis builds on the observation that the U.S.

was relatively abundant in capital (both human and physical). Since, under
Heckscher-Ohlin assumptions, U.S. exports were capital intensive, any measure

which depressed exports would have reduced its rate of return. Reducing the
rate of return would have discouraged investment, depressing the rate of
economic growth and accelerating the U.S. economy's relative decline.

—52—

The dynamic trade theory hypothesis builds on the existence of learning

by doing in the production of traded goods. If, as in Krugman (1984, 1985),
production costs fall with cumulative output and the benefits of learning are
external to the firm but internal to domestic industry, then exchange-rate
overvaluation, by depressing the competitiveness of exports, will inhibit

their production and reduce the benefits of learning. If overvaluation is
sufficiently large and persistent, it will shift comparative advantage in

their production to foreign competitors The weakness of this hypothesis is
that it is predicated on the unsubstantiated assumption that learning effects

are more important in the production of traded than nontraded goods. Its
strength lies in the extent to which it conforms with informal
characterizations of recent trends.
Precisely the same arguments have been applied to the downfall of the

interwar gold-exchange standard. The interwar system, which depended for
liquidity on gold, dollars and sterling, was if anything even more susceptible
than its post—World—War-Il analog to destabilization by the operation of

Gresham's Law. As noted above, the legacy of the Genoa Conference encouraged
central banks to accumulate foreign exchange. Promoting the use of exchange
reserves while at the same time attempting to maintain gold convertibility
threatened the system's stability for the same reasons as under Bretton Woods.

But because foreign exchange reserves were not concentrated in a single
currency to the same extent as after World War II, it was even easier under
the interwar system for central banks to liquidate foreign balances in
response to any event which undermined confidence in sterling or the dollar.
Instead of initiating the relatively costly and complex process of acquiring

—53—

gold from foreign monetary authorities in the face of, at the least, moral

suasion to refrain, central banks only needed to swap one reserve currency for

the other on the open market. Greshams Law operated even more powerfully
when gold coexisted with two reserve currencies than with one.8°
This instability manifested itself when the 1931 financial crisis, by
undermining faith in sterling convertibility, induced a large—scale shift out

of London balances. Once Britain was forced to devalue, faith in the
stability of the other major reserve currency was shaken, and speculative

pressure shifted to the dollar. The National Bank of Belgium, which had lost
25 per cent of the value of its £12 million sterling reserve as a result of

Britain's devaluation, moved to liquidate its dollar balances. The Eastern
European countries, including Poland, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria, then

liquidated their deposits in New York. Between the ends of 1930 and 1931, the
share of foreign exchange in the reserve portfolios of 23 European countries
fell from 35 to 19 per cent, signaling the demise of the exchange portion of
the gold-exchange standard.
The argument that structuring the international monetary system around a
reserve asset provided by the leading economic power led eventually to that
country's loss of preeminence has been applied even more frequently to Britain

after World War I than to the U.S. after World War II. Because the
gold—exchange standard created a foreign demand for sterling balances, Britain
was able run larger trade balance deficits than would have been permitted

otherwise. In a sense, Britain's reserve currency status was one of the
factors that facilitated the restoration of sterling's prewar parity. Despite
an enormous literature predicated on the view that the pound was overvalued at

-54-

$4.86, there remains skepticism that the extent of overvaluation was great or

the impact on the macroeconomy was significant.81 While it is not possible to
resolve this debate here, the point relevant to the theory of hegemonic
stability is that evidence of reserve-currency overvaluation is as substantial
in the earlier period when hegemony was threatened as in the later period
when it was triumphant.
Of the three monetary systems considered here, the classical gold
standard is the most difficult to analyze in terms of the dynamics of

hegemonic decline. It might be argued (following Matthews, et al., 1982,
p. 526) that the pound was overvalued for at least a decade prior to 1913; and
that Britain's failure to devalue resulted in sluggish growth which

accelerated the economy's hegemonic decline.82 The competitive difficulties of
older British industries, notably iron and steel, and the decelerating rate of
economic growth in the first decade of the 20th century are consistent with

this view.83 According to Matthews, et al. (1982, Table 8.1), the source of
the deceleration in the rate of British economic growth was both a decline in
productivity growth and a fall in the rate of domestic capital formation.
This fall in the rate of domestic capital formation, especially after 1900,
reflected not a decline in British savings rates but a surge of foreign

investment. Thus, for Britain's hegemonic position in the international
economy to have caused her relative decline, it would have had to be

responsible for her exceptionally high propensity to export capital. The
volume of British capital exports in the decades preceding World War I has
been attributed, alternatively, to the spread of industrialization and
associated investment opportunities to other countries and continents, and to

-55-

imperfections in the structure of British capital markets resulting in a bias
toward investment overseas.84 It -is impossible to resolve this debate here.
But the version of the market—imperfections argument that attributes the
London capital market's disinterest in domestic investment to Britain's
relatively early and relatively labor-intensive form of industrialization
implies that the same factors responsible for Britain's mid—l9th century

hegemony --

that

the industrial revolution occurred there first -— may also

have been responsible for the capital—market biases that accelerated her
hegemonic decline.
Although the classical gold standard experienced a number of serious
disruptions, such as the 1907 panic when a financial crisis threatened to
undermine its European core, the prewar system survived these disturbances

intact. Eventually, however, the same forces that led to the downfall of the
interwar gold-exchange standard would have undermined the stability of the

prewar system.85 As the rate of economic growth continued to outstrip the rate
of growth of gold, the supply of which was limited by the availability of ore,
countries would have grown increasingly dependent on foreign-exchange reserves
as a source of incremental liquidity. As -in the 1960s, growing reliance on
exchange reserves, in the face of relatively inelastic gold supplies, would
have eventually proven incompatible with the reserve center's ability to

maintain gold convertibility.
de Cecco argues that the situation was already beginning to unravel in

the first decade of the 20th century -—

that

the Boer War signaled the end of

the long peace of the 19th century, thereby undermining the willingness of
potential belligerents to hold their reserves as deposits in foreign

-56--

countries. "In the years following the Boer War, the international monetary
system once more showed a distinct tendency towards becoming a pure gold

standard. "86 More importantly for our purposes, he suggests that the system
was destabilized by the growth of U.S. economic power relative to that of the

U.K. Given the experimental nature of Treasury efforts to accomodate seasonal
variations in money demand, the U.S. relied heavily on gold imports whenever
economic conditions required an increase in money supply, notably during
harvest and planting seasons.87 When the demand for money increased, the U.S.
imported gold, mainly from the Bank of England, which was charged with pegging
the sterling price of gold on the London market with a gold reserve of only

£30 million. As the American economy grew, both its average demand for gold
from London and that demand's seasonal fluctuation increased re1ative to the
Bank of England's primary reserve and its capacity to attract supplementary

funds from other centers. To rephrase de Cecco's argument in terms of
hegemonic stability theory, the growth of the U.S. relative to the U.K.
undermined Britain's capacity to stabilize international financial markets -—

specifically,

its ability to simultaneously serve as the world's only free

gold market, providing however much gold was required by other countries, and
at the same time to maintain the stability of sterling, the reference point

for the global system of fixed exchange rates. In a sense, de Cecco sees
indications of the interwar stalemate -— a Britain incapable of stabilizing
the international system and a U.S. unwilling to do so -— emerging -in the

first decade of the 20th century. From this perspective, the process of
hegemon-ic decline which culminated in the international monetary difficulties

of the interwar years was at most accelerated by World War I. Even before the

—57—

war, the processes which led to the downfall of established monetary
arrangements were already underway.

V.

Conclusion

Much of the international relations literature concerned with prospects
for international monetary reform can be read as in search of an alternative

to hegemony as a basis for international monetary stability. Great play is
given to the contrast between earlier periods of hegemonic dominance, notably
1890—1914 and 1945—1971, and the nature of the task presently confronting
aspiring architects of international monetary institutions, who require an
alternative to hegemony as a basis for systemic stability in an increasingly

multipolar world. In this paper I have suggested that hegemonic stability
theories are helpful for understanding the relatively smooth operation of the
classical gold standard and the early Bretton Woods System as well as some of

the difficulties of the interwar years. At the same time, much of the
evidence is difficult to reconcile with the hegemonic stability view. Even
when individual countries occupied positions of exceptional prominance in the
world economy and even when that prominance found reflection in the form and
functioning of the international monetary system, that system was still

fundamentally predicated on international collaboration. Keohane's notion of
"hegemonic cooperation" ——

that

cooperation is required for systemic stability

even in periods of hegemonic dominance, although the presence of a hegemon may
be conducive to the evolution of cooperative behavior -- seems directly

applicable to international monetary relations. The importance of

-58-

collaboration is equally apparent whether one is concerned with the design of
the international monetary system, its operation under normal circumstances,

or the management of crises. Despite the usefulness of hegemonic stability
theory when applied to short periods and well-defined aspects of international
monetary relations, the international monetary system has always been "after

hegemony" in the sense that more than a dominant economic power was generally
required to insure the provision and maintenance of international monetary
stability.

Moreover, in precisely those periods when the existence of an
exceptionally important economic power most forcefully conditioned the form of
the international system, the potential for instability, in a dynamic sense,

was greatest. Above all, historical experience demonstrates the speed and
pervasiveness of changes in national economic power; since hegemony is
transitory, so must be any international monetary system which takes hegemony

as its basis. Given the costs of international monetary reform, it would seem
unwise to predicate a new system on such a transient basis.

—59—

Footnotes

1.

See also Olson and Zeckhauser (1966).

2.

See 611pm (1975), Krasner (1976) and, more recently, Cowhey and Long
(1983), Gowa (1984), Lipson (1982), Snidal (1985a), Stein (1984), and
Yarborough and Yarborough (1985). I refer to this as "the theory of hegemonic
stability," a phrase coined by Keohane (1980). In the words of Keohane (1980,
p. 132) the theory of hegemonic stability posits that "hegemonic structures of
power, dominated by a single country, are most conducive to the development of
strong international regimes whose rules are relatively precise and well
obeyed."
3.

Attempts to test the applicability of hegemonic stability theory have
considered international trade policy (Krasner, 1975; Conybeare, 1983; Lawson,
1983; McKeown, 1983), international investment (Gilpin, 1975), international
monetary arrangements (Keohane, 1982; Odell, 1982; Oye, 1986), and the
international administration of world oil prices (Keohane, 1980, 1984; Alt et
., 1986).
The theory's popularity was stimulated by Kindleberger's (1973)
argument, following Brown (1940), that the international financial system and
macroeconomic environment of the interwar years were destabilized by lack of
leadership by a dominant economic power willing to provide the public good of
international monetary stability by acting as international lender of last
resort.
4.

Alternatives to this definition are offered by Hart (1976).

The concept of regime was introduced into the international relations
literature by Ruggie (1975). For critical analyses of its uses, see Young
(1980, 1983) and Strange (1982). Keohane (1980, p. 132) defines a regime as
"the rules, norms and procedures that guide the behavior of states and other
important actors." Since my method of analysis does not hinge on a
particular definition of the international monetary regime, it is competitive
with a range of alternative definitions. I prefer to distinguish between the
monetary system, which is made up of a set of explicit rules and procedures
(pegging rules, intervention strategies, IMF statutes governing reserve
availability, for example), and the international monetary regime as a broader
framework that incorporates the explicit rules comprising the system but
embeds them within a set of implicit understandings about how economic
policymakers will behave (implicit promises to coordinate macroeconomic
policies or to provide loans in time of convertibility crisis, for example).
Thus, while the compass of the international monetary system is limited to
matters that impinge directly on monetary affairs, the international monetary
regime may involve issues that impinge indirectly, such as trade policy or
diplomatic action. In effect, I am distinguishing between the monetary
"system" and "regime" in the same way that Mundell (1972, p. 82) distinguishes
the monetary "system" and "order":
5.

"A system is an aggregation of diverse entities united by regular
interaction according to some form of control. When we speak of the

—60-

international monetary system we are concerned with the mechanisms
governing the interaction between trading nations, and in particular
between the money and credit instruments of national communities in
foreign exchange, capital, and commodity markets. The control is exerted
through policies at the national level interacting with one another in
that loose form of supervision that we call cooperation.
An order, as distinct from a system, represents the framework and
setting in which the system operates. It is a framework of laws,
conventions, regulations, and mores that establish the setting of the
system and the understanding of the environment by the participants in
it. A monetary order is to a monetary system somewhat like a
constitution is to a political or electoral system. We can think of the
monetary system as the modus operandi of the monetary order."
6.

See March (1966).

7.

For discussions of issue linkage, see Cooper (1972—3) and Haas (1980).

8.

Kindleberger (1973), p. 28; Keohane (1980), p. 136.

For example, Kindleberger (1973) is primarily concerned with the role of
hegemony in insuring the smooth operation of an extant system, while 611pm
(1975) and Krasner (1976) focus instead on the role of hegemony in system
design and formation. Similarly distinctions are emphasized by Stein (1984).
9.

10. Gilpin's (1975) characterization is a bit strong: "Economists do not
really believe in power; political scientists, for their part, do not really
believe in markets."
11. I identify the stability of the international monetary system with the
maintenance of a set of fixed exchange rates for simplicity alone. The two
should not be taken as synonymous. The system could as easily be defined as a
set of EMS-like rules for parity adjustment or rules of the game governing
open market operations.
12. Under the classical gold standard and the interwar gold—exchange
standard, this was the practice of most countries. As discussed below, under
the Bretton Woods System, the dollar was pegged to gold but other countries
had the choice of declaring parities against either gold or the dollar.
Alternatively, this formulation may be thought of as the problem of two
neighboring countries which depend heavily on one another but whose policies
are of little consequence to the rest of the world.
13. For a recent review of that literature, see Sachs (1986).
14. A minimal model generating such reaction functions might take the
following form. Each country maximizes an objective function V of the form:
(Fl)

V =

[y2

+

x2]

The two endogenous variables of concern x and y (for example, output and
prices) evolve according to:

—61-

(F2)

y = a0 +
a2e*
a1e

(F3)

x =

-

b1e

b2y

where all the parameters a > 0.
(Identical equations exist for the foreign
country with asterisks reversed.) A necessary condition for the reaction
function to be upward sloping IS:
(F4)

2a1a2 > 2b2a2(b1—b2a1)

15. In other words, if the equations for the reaction functions in Figure 1
are:

(F5)

e =

(F6)

e* =

+

f0

f1e*
+

g0

g1e

then the response, in the neighborhood of the initial Nash equilibrium, IS:

(F7)

(F8)

de =

de* =

{

f1 de*

if 1fde>c

0

iff1dec
g1de

ifg1de>0

0

ifg1de0

16. The shock can be thought of as an increase in the foreign counterpart to
a0 in equation F2. For that shift to induce a shift in the foreign reaction
function, the benefits of that shift again would have to exceed the costs.

17. Sufficiently small means that f1de* c as in equation F? above.
18. In other words, as the home country grows in size, a2 in equation F2
shrinks relative to the other parameters of the model.
19. A limited parallel is the International Monetary Conference of 1881,
which brought together the members of the Latin Monetary Union, discussed
below. Another candidate is the conference which resulted from the U.S.
Bland—Allison Act of 1878. This statute instructed the President to invite
members of the Latin Monetary Union and other European countries to a
conference intended to result in mutual adoption of a bimetallic system
based on a common ratio of silver to gold. See Hepburn (1924).
20. Although German politicians had previously perceived the country's silver
standard as beneficial to the development of its Eastern European trade, by
1870 most of that region had suspended convertibility. Germany used the
proceeds of the indemnity received as victor in the Franco-Prussian War to
purchase gold on the world market, thereby contributing to the ongoing rise in

-62-

its price. Silver inflation led to the suspension of silver coinage and
convertibility by Holland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, France and the countries
of the Latin Monetary Union (Belgium, Switzerland, Italy and Greece), making
gold the basis for the monetary standard in every European country except
those which retained inconvertible paper. In 1879 the U.S. ended the
Greenback Period and Russia and Japan restored gold convertibility. While
neither Italy nor the Habsburg Monarchy adopted formal convertibility, from
the turn of the century both pegged their currencies to gold. Further details
may be found in Eichengreen (1985a).

21. de Cecco (1985), p. 42 and Table 8.
22. A third option, maintaining bimetallism but raising the relative price of
gold, had been discredited by the difficulties of the Latin Monetary Union and
evoked little enthusiasm when advocated by the U.S. at the international
conference convened under the provisions of the Bland—Allison Act of 1878.
Contemporaries recognized that international cooperation was necessary for the
successful functioning of a bimetallic system. The more countries
participated in a bimetallic system, the greater the probability that their
common mint ratio would dominate the market ratio. But of the major
countries, only the U.S. and Italy favored immediate adoption of a global
bimetallic standard. While France, Holland and Austria also favored
bimetallism, they viewed its immediate implementation on a global basis as
impractical. Germany, Belgium and the Scandinavian states favored immediate
adoption the gold standard, Germany so strongly as to boycott the conference.
The record of conference proceedings is U.S. Senate (1879). See Russell
(1898), Chapter V.
23. In 1850 Belgian and Swiss silver coins were new and full bodied, in
contrast to French coins which had lost up to 8 per cent of their silver
content through wear. Hence French coins were exported to Belgium and
Switzerland, while Belgian heavy coins were exported to Germany and the
Netherlands. In 1862, Italy adopted a bimetallic standard, but her silver
coins were only 0.835 per cent pure and hence ended up being shipped to
France. The confusion which resulted convinced the countries involved to
adopt a common standard which entailed the French parity of 15 1/2 ounces of
silver per ounce of gold and silver coins 0.835 per cent pure. See Willis
(1900).

24. White (1933), pp. 182—200.
25. Bloomfield (1959), pp. 13—15 and passim.
26. These are reviewed by Traynor (1949).
27. A more politically oriented assessment of policymakers' objectives is
provided by Costigliola (1984).
28. For further discussion of Strong and the American position, see Clarke
(1973).

-63-

29. Costigliola (1977), p. 916; Traynor (1949), p. 72.
30. For the text of the resolutions and related correspondence, see United
Kingdom (1924).
31. Details are provided in Eichengreen (1985b), pp. 151-152.
32. The significance of the Genoa resolutions is discussed at greater length
in Eichengreen (1986a).
33. This is the conclusion of Keohane (1984), p. 37, for example.
34. In the immediate post-World-War—LI period, the United States produced a
majority of global industrial output of the capital goods and equipment needed
for economic reconstruction abroad. It was the largest holder of gold and the
major creditor on long-term capital account. Observers anticipated that its
creditor position would strengthen yet further as the U.S. continued to
finance deficit spending for European reconstruction. Such observations lead
Keohane (1984, pp. 36—37) to conclude that the extent of American predominance
after World War II was unprecedented, unmatched even by Britain prior to World
War I.
35. See Sayers (1956), pp. 438-440 and Cairncross and Eichengreen (1983),
chapter 4.

36. See in particular Horsefield (1969) and Gardner (1956).

37. Horsefield (1969), 3:3, para. 1.

38. See for example Cohen (1982).

39. Dam (1982), P. 92.
40. Tew (1977), p. 109.
41. Fund procedures also represented a compromise between the British
preference for free access to Fund resources and the American preference for
conditionality. The Articles of Agreement flatly stated that a country "shall
be entitledt' to buy currency from the IMF providing only that currency was
needed for purposes consistent with the Fund agreement. Initially it was
unclear whether the Fund had legal authority to make borrowing subject to
conditions. But in 1948 the IMF's Board of Executive Directors asserted its
right to limit access to Fund reserves if the member was using its resources
in a manner contrary to the purposes of the organization and to make that
access subject to conditions. The conditionality that evolved treated access
to successive credit tranches in different ways. While attempts to borrow in
the gold tranche would receive "the overwhelming benefit of any doubt," access
to higher tranches would be subject to increasingly stringent conditions.
Horsefield (1967), 3, p. 228.
42. This portrayal of Bretton Woods as neither an American triumph nor a

-64-

defeat is at variance with characterizations of Bretton Woods as a construct
of the American hegemon. But it is not inconsistent with the view that, as a
compromise between the Keynes and White Plans, "the compromise contained less
of the Keynes and more of the White Plans." Rolfe (1966), p. 78.

43. Williams (1968), p. 268.
44. Lindert (1969), pp. 56—57.
45. Of course, the Bank might have to intervene with purchases or sales of
bills and bonds to render its rate effective. Sayers (1936), Chapter II.

46. This brief account draws on Moggridge (1972), pp. 8—9.

47. Cleveland (1976), p. 17.
48. Cleveland (1976), p. 17.
49. Committee on Finance and Industry (1931), p. 125.

50. Keynes (1930), vol. II, pp. 306-307. Evidence to this effect is
presented by Eichengreen (1986b). Regression results reported there reveal
that, while the Bank of England's discount rate was responsive to changes in
French and German rates, the influence of the Bank of England rate over
foreign rates was stronger and more systematic.
51. As Sayers (1957, p. 61) described the British case, while the Bank of
England was "a little sensitive to the state of trade," in deciding whether
to change Bank Rate it "looked almost exclusively at the size of its reserve."
An extensive literature analyzes the extent to which central banks of the
classical gold standard era adhered to the "rules of the game," which dictated
that they should adjust their policies in order to bring about external
balance. The classic study, Bloomfield (1959), revealed that external
considerations were by no means the sole determinant of monetary policies
prior to 1913. But if central banks were in fact responsive to internal
considerations, this raises the question of how they managed to successfully
defend their gold standard parities. A recent reexamination of the evidence
for this period by Pippinger (1984) emphasizes the distinction between
short—run and long-run policy responses. Pippinger concludes that in the
short run the Bank of England may have hesitated to take the steps needed to
restore external balance and neutralized gold outflows, but in the long run
the goal of maintaining the gold standard dominated, leading the Bank to
reverse its initial sterilization of gold flows to insure that external
balance would be restored.

52. See for example Cohen (1971).

53. Hirsch (1967), p. 28.
54. I define the strong form of hegemonic stability theory as that advanced
by Snidel (1985): that the benefits of stability accrue to both the hegemon

—65—

and other countries. As on p. 2 above, I define the weak form as versions in
which benefits accrue only to the hegemon. It is tempting to suggest a
parallel between this "collective hegemony of the center countries" and Gowa's
(1984) argument, which she attributes to Keohane and Snidel, that even in the
absence of a hegemon the public good of collective stability might still be
provided so long as the number of countries is sufficiently small for them to
solve the free-rider problem. But the case considered here differs in that
the instability, rather than being eliminated, is shifted onto countries that
are not members of the hegemonic cartel.

55. Nevin (1955), p. 12.
56. On the U.S. see Wicker (1966), and on the U.K. Eichengreen, Watson and
Grossman (1985). A general discussion of the growing conflict between the
needs of internal and external balance is provided by Beyen (1949),
Chapter II.
57. Srridel (1985b) refers to this problem as a "coordination game."

58. The leading exponent of the gold shortage theory was Gustav Cassel. For
a summary of his views, see Cassel (1932), and, for a critical perspective,
Hardy (1936). The argument presented here draws on Eichengreen (1986a).
59. The most compelling argument for returning to gold cited the importance
of the prewar parity for the maintenance of Britain's position in
international transactions —- specifically, its importance for maintaining
London's preeminent position in international finance. See Moggridge (1969).
60. Gold inflows into France can be attributed to stabilization of the franc
at an undervalued rate in 1926 in conjunction with statutory limitations which
prevented the Banque de France from expanding the domestic credit component of
the money supply through open market operations. Inf lows into the United
States can be attributed to the misguided policies of the Federal Reserve:
initially, its failure to moderate the Wall Street boom responsible for
curtailing U.S. foreign investment and for inducing capital inflows into the
United States; subsequently, its failure to prevent the contraction of the
money supply, which created an excess demand for money which could be met only
by gold inf lows. On French policy see Eichengreen (1986c). On the controversy
over U.S. policy see Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Wicker (1966).

61. Committee on Finance and Industry (1931).

62. See Eichengreen (1984a, 1985b).
63. Keynes (1928), pp. 778-779.
64. Viner (1932), p. 28; Gayer (1937), p. 29.
65. As one Bank of England official put it, "such leadership as we possessed
has certainly been affected by the position which America has gained."
Macmillan Committee evidence of Sir Ernest Harvey, Q7515, 2 July 1930,

-66-

reprinted in Sayers (1976), vol. 3, p. 205.

66. Statistics are drawn from IMF publications,, notably the Annual Reports.

67. The evidence typically invoked is that the Johnson Administration
financed the Vietnam War without a tax increase until 1968, and that, except
for 1969, monetary policy was expansionary over much of the period.
68. The size of the deficit, if not its existence, served as a non-negligible
constraint on policy. When, for example, in 1960 the dollar price of gold on
the London market rose above the U.S. Treasury's selling price, inducing
foreign monetary authorities to purchase substantial amounts of U.S. gold,
these events so alarmed the Eisenhower Administration that it responded by
reducing the number of military dependents abroad, cutting back foreign
Defense Department procurement, and tying U.S. development assistance to
American exports. Restrictions on capital outflows, including the interest
equalization tax, the Voluntary Foreign Credit Restraint Program and the
Foreign Direct Investment Program, were imposed from 1963. As Tew (1977, p.
79) puts it, U.S. authorities "were not conspicuously less ready than those
of other deficit countries to adopt measures to prevent [the deficit] from
getting worse."
69. The most
illustration
1967 Germany
U.S. gold in
See Bergsten

notable instance of the use of U.S. power -- clearly an
of the stick variant of hegemonic stability theory -— was when in
explicitly agreed to forego any future conversions of dollars mt
response to American threats to reduce troop levels in Europe.
(1975), ch. 4.

70. When in 1967 Algeria purchased $150 million of gold from the U.S.,
"presumably at French instigation" (Solomon, 1977, p. 115), the world was
provided a reminder of the difficulties posed by the free rider problem
confronting efforts to supply a public good.
71. See the discussion in Milward (1984), pp. 114—125.
72. The notable exception to this generalization is the abortive attempt to
restore sterling convertibility in 1947, which was in fact taken at the
hegemon's insistance and failed in part because the U.S. was unwilling to
supply the funds needed to defend sterling. See Cairncross and Eichengreen
(1983), ch. 4, and Milward (1984), ch. 1.
73. The links between foreign lending, foreign trade and currency
convertibility in this period are analyzed by Eichengreen and Portes (1987).

74. These are the calculations Moggridge (1981), p. 66.
75. Moggridge (1970) argues yes, while in Cairncross and Eichengreen (1983),
largely on the basis of econometric simulations, I argue no.
76. Moggridge (1981), p. 49, citing Kindleberger (1978), p. 188.

—67—

77. After writing this section, I discovered its resemblance, both in general
and in its particular emphasis on the role of foreign investment, to Gilpin
(1975).

78. See Triffin (1947), Triffin (1960) and Kenen (1960).
79. See Triff in (1960). For conventional views of the dollar shortage/glut,
see McDougall (1960). Ironically, it was the hegemonic power
the United
States -— which had insisted on retaining a monetary role for gold at Bretton
Woods. The British would have preferred to free themselves from dependence on
yellow metal, so long as the clearing union rather than the United States
regulated the creation of reserves. But the U.S. was suspicious that the
clearing union might be an engine of inflation and hesitant to demonetize gold
just when it had accumulated a majority of world stocks. Given U.S.
opposition to British plans for the large—scale creation of liquidity by the
clearing union, restraints on U.S. ability to unilaterally determine global
liquidity in the form of a monetary role for gold were a second—best solution
for the British.
80. This same argument is advanced by Bergsten (1975), ch. 4, although he
suggests that the existnce of a well-defined institutional framework can
minimize this source of instability.
81. On April 4th and 18th, 1925, Keynes published an analysis under the title
"Is Sterling Over-Valued?" Keynes (1925a). See also Keynes (1925b). A
reassessment of Keynes's evidence is in Moggridge (1969).
82. Crafts (1985), following Foreman-Peck (1979), suggests that learning—by—
doing and its associated externalities were particularly important in the new
traded—goods industries of the turn of the century, such as motor cars,
implying that the dynamic effects emphasized by new trade theory may have also
come into play.
83. McCloskey (1970), Table 2, pinpoints the deceleration in the rate of
British economic growth as taking place in the first decade of the 20th
century. The traditional view of the British climacteric is also criticized
in Coppock (1969) but subsequently defended in Kennedy (1974).
84. For the traditional view which emphasizes capital market imperfections,
see Macmillan Committee (1931), Kindleberger (1964), or Landes (1969). The
revisionist view is represented by McCloskey (1970).
85. In Kindleberger's (1970, p. 213) words, "The problem posed by Gresham's
Law exists not only on the gold-exchange standard, but on the gold standard
itself."

86. de Cecco (1984), p. 125.
87. At the beginning of the century, Treasury Secretary Shaw began managing
public deposits in such a way as to provide some seasonal elasticity of money
supply but, as the text notes, these early efforts were modest and

-68—

experimental. On the seasonality of U.S. money demand, see Eichengreen
(1984b).

—69-

References
Alt, James E., Randall L. Calvert and Brian D. Humes (1986), "Game Theory and
Hegemonic Stability: The Role of Reputation and Uncertainty,"
unpublished, Harvard University.

Bergsten, C. Fred (1975), Toward a New International Economic Order: Selected
Papers of C. Fred Bergsten, 1972-1974. Lexington: Lexington Books.
Beyen, J.W. (1949), Money in a Maelstrom, New York: Macmillan.
Bloomfield, Arthur I. (1959), Monetary Policy Under the International Gold
Standard, New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Brown, William Adams (1940), The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted,
1913—1934, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cairncross, Alec and Barry Eichengreen (1983), Sterling in Decline, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Cassel, Gustav (1932), The Crisis in the World's Monetary System, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Clarke, S.V.O. (1973), "The Reconstruction of the International Monetary
System: The Attempts of 1922 and 1933," Princeton Studies in
International Finance No. 33.
Cleveland, Harold van 8. (1976), "The International Monetary System in the
Interwar Period," in B.M. Rowland, ed., Balance of Power or Hegemony:
The Interwar Monetary System, New York, NYU Press, pp. 1-60.
Cohen, Benjamin (1971), The Future of Sterling as an International Currency,

London: Macmillan.
Cohen, Benjamin (1977), Organizing the World's Money, New York: Basic Books.
Cohen, Benjamin (1982), "Balance-of—Payments Financing: Evolution of a
Regime," in Stephen Krasner, ed., International Regimes, Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, pp. 315—336.
Committee on Finance and Industry (1931), Report, London: HMSO.
Conybeare, John (1983), "Tariff Protection in Developed and Developing
Countries: A Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Analaysis," International
Organization 37, pp. 441-468.
Cooper, Richard (1972-3), "Trade Policy is Foreign Policy," Foreign Policy 9,
pp. 18—36.
Costigliola, Frank (1977), "Anglo—American Financial Rivalry in the 1920s,"
Journal of Economic History 37, pp. 911—934.

-70-

Costigliola, Frank (1984), Awkward Dominion: American Political, Economic
and Cultural Relations with Europe, 1919-1933, Ithaca: Cornell.
Cowhey, Peter and Edward Long (1983), "Testing Theories of Regime Change:
Hegemonic Decline or Surplus Capacity?" International Organization 37,
pp. 157—183.
Coppock, D.J. (1956), "The Climacter-ic of the 1890s: A Critical Note,"
Manchester School XXIV.

Crafts, N.F.R. (1985), British Economic Growth During the Industrial
Revolution, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Dam, Kenneth (1982), The Rules of the Game, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

de Cecco, Marcello (1985), The International Gold Standard: Money and Empire,
London: Francis Pinter (second edn).
Eichengreen, Barry (1984a), "Central Bank Cooperation Under the Interwar Gold
Standard," Explorations -in Economic History 21, pp. 64—87.
Eichengreen, Barry (1984b), "Currency and Credit in the Gilded Age," in Gary
Saxonhouse and Gavin Wright, eds, Technique, Spirit and Form in the
Making of the Modern Economies, New York: JAI Press, pp. 87—114.
Eichengreen, Barry, ed. (1985a), The Gold Standard in Theory and History,

London: Methuen.
Eichengreen, Barry (1985b), "International Policy Coordination in Historical
Perspective: A View from the Interwar Years," in W-illem Buiter and
Richard Marston, eds, International Economic Policy Coordination,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 139-177.
Eichengreen, Barry (1986a), "The Gold-Exchange Standard and the Great
Depression," unpublished manuscript.

Eichengreen, Barry (1986b), "Conducting the International Orchestra: The Bank
of England and the Classical Gold Standard, 1880-1914," Journal of
International Money and Finance (forthcoming).
Eichengreen, Barry (1986c), "The Bank of France and the Sterilization of
Gold, 1926—1932," Explorations in Economic History 23, pp. 56—83.
E-ichengreen, Barry and Richard Portes (1987), "The Anatomy of Financial
Crises," in Richard Portes and Alexander Swoboda, eds., Threats to
International Financial Stability (forthcoming).

—71—

Eichengreen, Barry, Mark Watson and Richard Grossman (1985), "Bank Rate
Policy Under the Interwar Gold Standard: A Dynamic Prob-it Model,"
Economic Journal 95, pp. 725—745.

Ford, A.G. (1962), The Gold Standard, 1880-1914: Britain and Argentina,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Foreman—Peck, James (1979), "Tariff Protection and Economies of Scale:
The British Motor Car Industry Before 1939," Oxford Economic Papers 31,
pp. 237—257.
Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867—1960, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gardner, Richard (1956), Sterling-Dollar Diplomacy, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Gayer, A.D. (1937), Monetary Policy and Economic Stabilization, London:
61 ack.

Gilbert, Milton (1968), "The Gold—Dollar System: Conditions of Equilibrium
and the Price of Gold," reprinted in Barry Eichengreen, ed. (1985),
The Gold Standard in Theory and History, London: Methuen.
Gilpin, Robert G. (1975), U.S. Power and the Multinational Corporation,
New York: Basic Books.
Gowa, Joanne (1984), "Hegemons, lOs and Markets: The Case of the Substitution
Account," International Organization 38, 661-684.

Haas, Ernst B. (1980), "Why Collaborate? Issue—linkage and International
Regimes," World Politics, pp. 357—405.
Hardy, Charles 0. (1936), Is There Enough Gold?, Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution.
Harrod, Roy (1971), "Triple the Dollar Price of Gold," reprinted in G.H. Meier
(1974), Problems of a World Monetary Order, New York: Oxford University
Press, pp. 158—160.
Hart, Jeffrey (1976), "Three Approaches to the Measurement of Power in
International Relations," International Organization 30, pp. 289-308.
Hepburn, A. B. (1924), A History of Currency in the United States, revised
edn., New York: Macmillan.

Hirsch, Fred (1967), Money International, London: Penguin.
Horse-field, J.K. (1969), The International Monetary Fund, 1945-65, Washington,

D.C.: IMF, three volumes.

—72—

Kenen, Peter (1960), British Monetary Policy and the Balance of Payments,
1951-1957, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Kennedy, William (1984), "Foreign Investment, Trade and Growth in the United
Kingdom, 1870—1913," Explorations in Economic History XI, pp. 415—444.
Keoharie, Robert (1980), "The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and Changes in
International Economic Regimes, 1967-1977," in Ole R. Hoisti, Randolph M.
Siverson and Alexander L. George, eds, Change in the International
System, Boulder: Westview, pp. 131-162.

Keohane, Robert (1982), "Inflation and the Decline of American Power," in
Raymond Lombra and Willard Witte, eds, The Political Economy of
International and Domestic Monetary Relations, Ames: Iowa State.

Keohane, Robert (1984), After Hegemony, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Keynes, John Maynard (1925a), "Is Sterling Over-Valued?" The Nation and
Athenaeum, 4 and 18 April 1925, reprinted -in The Collected Writings of
John Maynard Keynes: Activities, 1922—1929: The Return to Gold and
Industrial Policy, ed. Donald Moggridge, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 349—354.
Keynes, John Maynard (1925b), The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill,
New York: Harcourt-Brace.
Keynes, John Maynard (1928), in The Collected Writings of John Maynard
Keynes, ed. Donald Moggridge, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 778—779.

Keynes, John Maynard (1929), "Is There Enough Gold? The League of Nations
Inquiry," The Nation and Athenaeum, 19 January, reprinted in The
Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes: Activities, 1922-1929:
The Return to Gold and Industrial Policy, ed. Donald Moggridge,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 775-780.
Keynes, John Maynard (1930), A Treatise on Money, London: Macmillan.
Kindleberger, Charles (1964), Economic Growth in France and Britain,
1851-1950, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Kindleberger, Charles (1970), Power and Money, New York: Basic Books.
Kindleberger, Charles (1973), The World in Depression, 1929-1939, Berkeley:
University of California.

Kindleberger, Charles (1978), Manias, Panics and Crashes, New York: Basic
Books.

Krasner, Stephen 0. (1976), "State Power and the Structure of International
Trade," World Politics 28, pp. 317-347.

—73—

Krugman, Paul (1984), "The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the
Competitive Consequences of Mrs. Thatcher: Notes on Trade in the Presence
of Dynamic Scale Economies," unpublished manuscript, MIT.
Krugman, Paul (1985), "Market Access and International Competition in High
Technology: A Simulation Exercise," unpublished manuscript, MIT.

Landes, David S. (1969), The Unbound Prometheus, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Lawson, Fred (1983), "Hegemony and the Structure of International Trade
Reassessed: A View from Arabia," International Organization 37, pp.
317—338.

Lipson, Charles (1982), "The Transformation of Trade: The Sources and
Effects of Regime Changes," International Organization 36, pp. 417-456.
Luce, R. Duncan and Howard Raiffa (1957), Games and Decisions, New York: Wiley.
McCloskey, Donald N. (1970), "Did Victorian Britain Fail?" Economic History
Review.

McDougall, Donald (1960), "The Dollar Problem: A Reappraisal," Princeton
Essays in International Finance, no. 35 (November).
McKeown, Timothy (1983), "Hegemonic Stability Theory and 19th Century Tariff
Levels in Europe," International Organization 37, pp. 73—92.
March, James (1966), "The Power of Power," in David Easton, ed., Varieties of
Political Theory, Englewood-Cliffs: Prentice Hall, pp. 39-70.
Matthews, R.C.0., C.H. Feinstein and J. Odling-Smee (1982), British Economic
Growth, 1856-1973, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Milward, Alan (1984), The Reconstruction of Western Europe, 1945—51, London:
Met huen.

Moggridge, Donald E. (1969), The Return to Gold, 1925, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Moggridge, Donald E. (1970), "The 1931 Financial Crisis — A New View," The
Banker, pp. 832-839.
Moggridge, Donald E. (1972), British Monetary Policy, 1924-1931, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Moggridge, Donald E. (1981), "Financial Crises and Lenders of Last Resort:
Policy in the Crises of 1920 and 1929," Journal of European Economic
History 10, pp. 47—69.

Mundell, Robert (1972), "The Future of the International Monetary System,"
in A.L.K. Acheson, et al., Bretton Woods Revisited.

-74-

Nevin, Edward (1955), The Mechanism of Cheap Money, Cardiff: University of
Wales.
Odell, John (1982), "Bretton Woods and International Political Disintegration:
Implications for Monetary Diplomacy," in Raymond Lombra and Willard
Witte, eds, The Political Economy of International and Domestic Monetary
Relations, Ames: Iowa State.
Olson, Mancor and Richard Zeckhauser (1966), "An Economic Theory of
Alliances," Review of Economics and Statistics 48, PP. 266—279.

Oye, Kenneth (1986), "The Sterling-Dollar-Franc Triangle: Monetary
Diplomacy 1929-1937," in Kenneth Oye, ed., Cooperation Under Anarchy,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 173—199.
Pippinger, John (1984), "Bank of England Operations, 1893-1913," in Michael
Bordo and Anna Schwartz, eds, A Retrospective on the Classical Gold
Standard, 1821-1931, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 203—222.

Rolfe, Sidney (1966), Gold and World Power, New York: Harper & Row.
Ruggie, John G. (1975), "International Responses to Technology: Concepts and
Trends," International Organization 29, pp. 557—584.
Russell, Henry B. (1898), International Monetary Conferences, New York:
Harper and Brothers.
Sachs, Jeffrey (1986), "The Uneasy Case for Greater Exchange Rate Coordination,"
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 76, pp. 336-341.

Sayers, R.S. (1936), Bank of England Operations, London: P.S. King.
Sayers, R.S. (1956), Financial Policy, 1939-1945,

Sayers, R.S. (1957), Central Banking After Bagehot, Oxford: Clarendon.
Sayers, R.S. (1976), The Bank of England, 1891-1944, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Snidel, Duncan (1985a), "The Limits of Hegemonic Stability Theory,"
International Organization 39, 579-614.

Snidel, Duncan (1985b), "Coordination versus Prisoners' Dilemma: Implications
for International Cooperation and Regimes," American Political Science
Review 79, pp. 923-42.
Solomon, Robert (1977), The International Monetary System, 1945—1976, New
York: Harper and Row.

Stein, Arthur (1984), "The Hegemon's Dilemma: Great Britain, the United
States, and the International Economic Order," International Organization
38, pp. 355—386.

—75—

Strange, Susan (1982), "Still An Extraordinary Power: America's Role -in a
Global Monetary System," in Raymond Lombra and Willard Witte, eds.,
Political Economy of International and Domestic Monetary Relations, Ames:
University of Iowa, pp. 73-93.

Strange, Susan (1982b), "Cave! hic dragones: A Critique of Regime Analysis,"
in Stephen D. Krasner, ed., International Regimes, Ithaca: Cornell, pp.
337—354.
Tew, Brian (1977), The Evolution of the International Monetary System, 1945—77,
London: Hutchinson.
Traynor, Dean (1949), International Monetary and Financial Conferences in
the Interwar Period, Washington, D.C.: Catholic University.
Tr-iffin, Robert (1947), "National Central Banking and the International
Economy," Postwar Economic Studies 7, Washington, D.C.: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Triff in, Robert (1960), Gold and the Dollar Crisis, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Triff in, Robert (1968), "The Myth and Realities of the So—called Gold
Standard," reprinted in Barry Eichengreen, ed. (1985), The Gold Standard
in Theory and History, London: Methuen, pp. 121-140.

United Kingdom (1924), Papers Relating to International Economic Conference,
Genoa, April-May 1922, Cmd. 1667, London: HMSO.
United States Senate (1979), International Monetary Conferences held... .in
Paris, in August, 1878, Senate Executive Document No. 58, 45th Congress,
Third Session, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Viner, Jacob (1932), "International Aspects of the Gold Standard," in Quincy
Wright, ed., Gold and Monetary Stabilization, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
White, Harry D. (1933), The French International Accounts, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wicker, Elmus (1966), Federal Reserve Monetary Policy, 1917-1933, New York:
Random House.
Williams, David (1968), "The Evolution of the Sterling System," in C.R.
Whittlesey and J.S.G. Wilson, Essays in Money and Banking in Honour of
R.S. Sayers.
Willis, H. Parker (1900), The Latin Monetary Union, Chicago:
Yarborough, B.V. and R.M. Yarborough (1985), "Free Trade, Hegemony and the
Theory of Agency." Kyklos 38, pp. 348-364.

—76-

Young, Oran R. (1980), "International Regimes: Problems of Concept
Formation," World Politics 32, pp. 93—114.
Young, Oran B. (1983), "Regime Dynamics: The Rise and Fall of International
Regimes," in Stephen 0. Krasner, ed., International Regimes, Ithaca:
Cornell, pp. 93-114.

