NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF SMOKING ON OBESITY:
EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED TRIAL
Charles Courtemanche
Rusty Tchernis
Benjamin Ukert
Working Paper 21937
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21937

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016

We thank Katherine Flegal, Jason Fletcher, Sara Markowitz, Tom Mroz, and audiences at
Georgia State University, Indiana University-Purdue University-Indianapolis, the University of
Alabama at Birmingham, the National Bureau of Economic Research Health Economics Spring
Meeting, and the Southern Economic Association Annual Meeting for helpful feedback. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Charles Courtemanche, Rusty Tchernis, and Benjamin Ukert. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Smoking on Obesity: Evidence from a Randomized Trial
Charles Courtemanche, Rusty Tchernis, and Benjamin Ukert
NBER Working Paper No. 21937
January 2016, Revised June 2016
JEL No. I12
ABSTRACT
This paper aims to identify the causal effect of smoking on body mass index (BMI) using data
from the Lung Health Study, a randomized trial of smoking cessation treatments. Since nicotine
is a metabolic stimulant and appetite suppressant, quitting or reducing smoking could lead to
weight gain. Using randomized treatment assignment to instrument for smoking, we estimate that
quitting smoking leads to an average long- run weight gain of 1.8-1.9 BMI units, or 11-12 pounds
at the average height. These results imply that the drop in smoking in recent decades explains
14% of the concurrent rise in obesity. Semi-parametric models provide evidence of a diminishing
marginal effect of smoking on BMI, while subsample regressions show that the impact is largest
for younger individuals, females, those with no college degree, and those in the lowest quartile of
baseline BMI.

Charles Courtemanche
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu
Rusty Tchernis
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
rtchernis@gsu.edu

Benjamin Ukert
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
bukert1@student.gsu.edu

1

Introduction

The obesity rate1 has steadily increased in the United States (US) over the past half-century,
rising from 13% in the early 1960s to 35% in 2011-2012 (Flegal et al., 1998, Ogden et al.,
2014). This rise in obesity has contributed significantly to increasing rates of diabetes, heart
disease, and stroke (Mokdad et al. 2001, Manson et al. 1990, Rexrode et al. 1997), with
Flegal et al. (2005) finding that obesity-related diseases lead to 112,000 deaths per year.
Wang et al. (2011) project that by 2030 the number of obese adults in the US will grow
by another 65 million. Cawley and Meyerhoefer (2012) estimate that obesity leads to $190
billion per year in medical expenses, while Wang et al. (2011) project that this number
will increase by $48 to $66 billion by 2030. The public programs Medicare and Medicaid are
responsible for approximately half of obesity-related expenditures, making the rise in obesity
a public finance concern in addition to a public health problem (Finkelstein et al., 2003).
The dramatic rise in obesity has led to a large economics literature attempting to identify the underlying changes in incentives responsible for the trend. This literature generally
characterizes the rising obesity rate as a consequence of otherwise-welfare-enhancing aspects
of technological and societal progress. Specific causes may include falling monetary and
time costs of food consumption attributable to technological innovations in food production,
preservation, and distribution (Cutler et al., 2003; Lakdawalla et al., 2005; Courtemanche
and Carden, 2011) as well as a rising opportunity cost of physical activity due to the increasingly sedentary nature of employment and the improvements in transportation infrastructure
that enabled suburbanization (Lakdawalla et al., 2005; Zhao and Kaestner, 2010).
Another possible advancement that could have had the side effect of increasing obesity
is improved information about the health consequences of smoking. The 1964 Surgeon General’s Report concluded that smoking leads to adverse health conditions such as lung cancer
and heart disease and raises mortality risk (US Department of Health and Human Services,
1
Obesity is defined as having a body mass index (BMI) greater than 30, where BMI is equal to weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared.

2

1964). Subsequently, federal and state governments launched an aggressive tobacco control
campaign featuring advertising restrictions, warning labels, information-spreading programs,
cigarette taxes, and smoking bans in public places. Ultimately, the percentage of adults who
use tobacco in the US declined from 42% to 19% between 1965 and 2010 (U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, 2012). Nonetheless, tobacco is still responsible for one out of
every five deaths in the United States and at least $130 billion per year in medical expenses
(US Department of Health and Human Services, 2014).
The drop in smoking could have causally contributed to the rise in obesity because nicotine can act as an appetite suppressant and metabolic stimulant (Pinkowish, 1999). In
standard economic models of body weight (e.g. Philipson and Posner, 1999), nicotine’s
appetite-suppressing properties could be seen as decreasing the marginal utility of food consumption, leading to less eating and therefore lower body weight. Stimulating the metabolism
would mean more calories burned holding physical activity constant, again reducing weight.
On the other hand, smoking reduces lung capacity (Hedenstrom et al., 1986), which could
lead to weight gain by increasing the marginal disutility from exercise.
A large public health literature documents that individuals tend to gain weight following
smoking cessation. A meta-analysis of 15 studies found that individuals who quit smoking
gain an average of four pounds more than a comparison group of continued smokers (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 1990). Another meta-analysis, which included
a larger number of studies (62) but no comparison group, found that weight gain steadily
increases in the year after smoking cessation, ultimately reaching 4.67 kg (10.3 lbs) (Aubin
et al., 2012). Evidence regarding longer-run effects is mixed. Some studies have found that
much of the weight gain after quitting smoking is temporary (Chen et al., 1993; Mizoue
et al., 1998), but others conclude that the effect remains sizeable five to ten years after
cessation (Flegal et al., 1995; Travier et al., 2012; Williamson et al., 1991). These associational estimates could be susceptible to bias from unobservable characteristics, such as
time preference and level of interest in one’s health, that likely influence both the proba-

3

bility of smoking cessation and weight trajectory. Additionally, studies that simply track
changes in weight without utilizing a comparison group of continued smokers are susceptible
to additional confounding from the tendency to gain weight with age.
The economics literature has attempted to move closer toward causality by examining
the effects of plausibly exogenous sources of variation in economic factors that influence
smoking on BMI. The results from this literature are mixed. Chou et al. (2004), Rashad
et al. (2006), and Baum (2009) estimate positive relationships between cigarette costs and
BMI. Since higher cigarette prices have been shown to reduce smoking, these results are
consistent with reduced smoking leading to weight gain. However, Gruber and Frakes (2006),
Courtemanche (2009), and Wehby and Courtemanche (2012) estimate the effect of cigarette
costs on BMI to actually be negative, while Nonnemaker et al. (2009) and Courtemanche
et al. (forthcoming) find little evidence of an effect in either direction. The discrepancies in
observed results in the literature hinge on methodological issues such as whether cigarette
prices or tax rates are used as the measure of cigarette costs, whether time is modeled using
a quadratic trend or time period dummies, and whether the difference between short-run
and long-run effects is considered. A particularly controversial issue is whether cigarette
costs can actually be considered exogenous. Cigarette prices may depend on the demand
for cigarettes, while high cigarette taxes may be more politically palatable in states where
a relatively small percentage of the population smokes. Fletcher (2014) considers a different
tobacco-control policy – workplace smoking bans – and finds evidence that smoking cessation
induced by these bans increases BMI.
To our knowledge, the only paper that uses a randomized smoking cessation intervention
to estimate the causal effect of smoking on weight is Eisenberg and Quinn (2006; hereafter
EQ). EQ use summary statistics reported by O’Hara et al. (1998) on treatment and control
groups’ average changes in weight and smoking status during the Lung Health Study to
compute a Wald instrumental variables (IV) estimate. They find that sustained smoking
cessation over a five-year period leads to a very large average weight gain of 9.7 kg (21.4

4

pounds), about two to five times the magnitude typically found in the associational literature. However, there is reason to suspect that EQ’s estimate is overstated. Their approach
attributes the entire difference in weight changes between the treatment and control groups
to sustained quitters, whereas the intervention could plausibly have also led to weight gains
among those who quit smoking in some but not all follow-up periods or who reduced smoking
intensity but never quit entirely. (We return to this point in Section 3.5.)
We contribute to the literature on the effect of smoking on weight in several ways. First,
we provide, in our view, the most reliable estimates to date of the average causal effect of
quitting smoking on weight. By using the LHS microdata instead of relying on previously
published summary statistics, we are able to exploit the randomized nature of the study
while also constructing detailed smoking measures – such as average cigarettes smoked per
day and carbon monoxide (CO) level over the five years of the study – that account for
delayed or temporary quitting as well as smoking intensity. Our preferred estimates imply
that quitting smoking leads to an average weight gain of 1.5-1.7 BMI units (10-11 pounds
at the average height) at the end of the first year. The effect persists over time, reaching
1.8-1.9 BMI units (11-12 pounds) by the end of the fifth year – a magnitude that implies
that the fall in smoking explains around 14% of the rise in BMI in recent decades.
Our paper also contributes by providing new information related to the heterogeneity of
the effect across the smoking and weight distributions as well as by demographic characteristics. We estimate a semi-parametric instrumental variables model that allows the data to
determine the functional form of the relationship between smoking and BMI. The results
suggest a diminishing marginal effect, with additional smoking having little long-run impact
on BMI beyond about a pack of cigarettes per day or a CO level of about 20 parts per million
(ppm). We also conduct subsample analyses by age, gender, education, marital status, and
baseline BMI and find that on average younger individuals, females, those with no college
degree, and those with baseline BMI levels in the lowest quartile of the distribution gain the
most weight in response to smoking cessation.

5

2

Data

This section provides a brief introduction to the LHS, with an emphasis on the information
most relevant for our paper. O’Hara et al. (1993, 1998) provide a more detailed discussion of
the LHS, and further information is also available online at https://www.clinicaltrials.gov.
The purpose of the LHS was to observe changes in the severity of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) among smokers. The study consisted of 5,887 smokers with
initial ages between 35 and 59. Recruitment started in 1986 and ended in 1989. The clinical
trial ended in 1994. To be eligible for selection, potential participants had to show signs of
mild lung function impairment, have no history of certain medications, consume less than
25 drinks per week, and have no severe illnesses or chronic medical conditions. Each year all
participants were extensively interviewed individually at a medical clinic near the residence
of the participant (no more than 75 miles away from the participant’s permanent residence).
The data therefore consist of the baseline period (1989) plus five annual follow-up periods
(1990 through 1994). Attrition was relatively low, as 5,297 individuals remained in the
sample in the final wave. The attriters included 315 participants who died during the study
period.
Participants were randomly assigned into three different groups: two treatment groups
and one control group. Both treatment groups received a special intervention (SI) consisting
of free nicotine gum, an intensive quit week, and frequent contact with support personnel with
invitations to bring a spouse or relative to the meetings. The only difference between the two
treatment groups is that, in addition to the SI, one group received an inhaled bronchodilator
(SI-A) while the other received an inhaled placebo (SI-P). Most of the intensive intervention
treatments were completed within the first 4 months of the study. The control group referred
to as the usual care (UC) group received no intervention and members continued to use their
own private sources for medical care.
The LHS collected information about weight, height, smoking behavior, family smoking
habits, health status, and demographic characteristics. Weight and height were measured by
6

medical staff at the participants’ clinic visits, so our BMI measure is not susceptible to the
concern about measurement error that is common in the economics of obesity literature.2
The data contain self-reported smoking information as well as CO test results. We consider
three different measures of smoking: a dummy variable for whether the respondent currently
smokes (clinically measured through the CO test), number of cigarettes typically smoked per
day (self reported), and CO level in ppm. We also utilize the LHS’ information on education
(dummies for high school graduate, some college, and college graduate), gender (dummy for
male), age (years), and marital status (dummy for married) as controls. Note that we do
not control for race/ethnicity because 97% of LHS participants were white. Our sample is
therefore not representative of the overall population of US smokers along this dimension.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the three groups at the time of randomization.
Average cigarette consumption was roughly 30 cigarettes per day, average CO level was
about 26, and the average respondent was just slightly overweight. The summary statistics
for all variables are very similar across the three groups, indicating the randomization was
successful.
Figure 1 displays changes throughout the sample period in the average number of cigarettes
smoked per day, objectively-verified smoking status, CO level, and BMI for each group.
Sharp decreases in cigarette smoking, smoking status and CO level are evident for both
treatment groups in the first year after the intervention. Smoking also declines for the control group during the sample period, but the reduction is much more modest and gradual
than those of the treatment groups. The fact that we observe some drop in smoking for
the control group is not surprising since all participants desired to quit smoking at the start
of the study. Average BMI is trending upward for all three groups, but the two treatment
groups experience much sharper increases in BMI than the control group in the first year.
The graph therefore suggests both that the intervention was effective in reducing smoking
and that smoking reduces BMI. We next use econometric methods to estimate the magnitude
2

See Courtemanche et al. (2015) for an overview of the challenges involved with using self-reported weight
and height.

7

of these effects.

3

Econometric Analyses

Our econometric objectives are to identify 1) the average short- and long-run causal effects
of quitting smoking on weight gain, 2) how the effect of smoking on weight changes across
the smoking distribution, and 3) how the effect of smoking on weight varies by demographic
characteristics and baseline BMI. We begin by using parametric regressions to answer the
first question and running falsification tests to evaluate the validity of the models. We then
conduct semiparametric estimation allowing for a flexible relationship between smoking and
weight to address the second question. Next, we answer the third question with subsample
analyses. Finally, we address issues related to the generalizability of the results and show
why our results differ from those of EQ.

3.1
3.1.1

Average Effects
Short Run

We begin by aiming to identify the average causal effect of quitting smoking on weight gain
with a series of parametric regressions. Economists typically consider body weight to be a
capital stock. Individuals start with an exogenous endowment of weight that changes over
time due to depreciation as well as “investments” that take the form of caloric intake or
expenditure. In the LHS, weight at the end of the first follow-up year can therefore be
modeled as a function of weight at baseline and investments – such as smoking – in year one.
This leads to the model

bmii1 = β0 + β1 bmii0 + β2 Si1 + β3t Xi + εi1

8

(1)

where bmii1 is individual i’s BMI at the end of year 1, bmii0 is BMI at the beginning of
the study (year 0), Si1 is smoking in year 1, Xi is a vector of demographic controls that are
assumed to be constant over time since they are only available for the baseline wave, and
εi1 is period 1’s error term.3 β2 , the coefficient of interest, gives the short-run association
between smoking and weight. We estimate the OLS model given by (1) as well as an IV
model that uses the randomized treatment assignment to instrument for Si . The first stage
of the IV model is given by

Si1 = γ0 + γ1 wi0 + γ2 si ai + γ3 si pi + γ4 Xi + µi1

(2)

where si ai and si pi reflect whether the individual was assigned into the SI-A or SI-P
treatment group, respectively. The second stage of the IV model is identical to (1) except it
replaces Si1 with the predicted value generated by (2). In the IV model, β2 can be interpreted
as the short-run local average treatment effect (LATE) of intervention-induced changes in
smoking on BMI. We estimate linear models in both stages due to their relative ease of
interpretation, their ability to produce reliable average effects (e.g. Angrist and Pischke,
2009), and the inherent difficulties with non-linear IV estimation (e.g. Terza et al., 2008).
We define Si1 three different ways: a dummy for smoking cessation, number of cigarettes
smoked per day, and CO level. We next discuss these three smoking variables.
The first smoking measure is a dummy equal to one if and only if individual i was a
medically validated non-smoker at the end of year one. We consider this to be a naive
measure of smoking because it ignores variation in smoking intensity among smokers. This
could lead to an overstatement of the average weight gain from quitting smoking estimated
by IV models. When a quit dummy is used as the smoking measure, the IV estimator
effectively scales the difference in BMI between the treatment and control groups by the
difference in smoking cessation rates between the two groups. The validity of this estimator
3

We have also estimated an alternate model in which both the BMI and smoking variables represent
changes from the baseline year rather than levels. All results lead to similar conclusions to those from the
specification estimated in equation (1).

9

therefore hinges on the assumption that the randomized intervention only affected the BMIs
of people who fully quit smoking. To the extent that the intervention also affected the BMIs
of those who cut back on smoking but did not quit entirely, the difference in BMI will be
scaled by too small a number and the resulting IV estimate will be too large. (This point is
central to our critique of EQ, and we will discuss it in more detail in Section 3.5.)
Our second smoking measure is therefore self-reported number of cigarettes smoked per
day, with a value of zero assigned to those who reported quitting. This measure incorporates
both reducing smoking and quitting entirely and therefore is not susceptible to the above
criticism. In order to make the results using cigarettes per day comparable to βb2 from
the regressions using the smoking cessation dummy, we need to compute an implied average
weight gain from quitting smoking. Since the best way to do this is not immediately obvious,
we consider several possibilities. First, we use the average weight that would be gained if
all individuals in the sample switch from their baseline number of cigarettes to none. We
do this by multiplying the coefficient estimate on the cigarettes smoked per day variable
by each individual’s number of cigarettes smoked at baseline, and then taking the average
N

P
across all individuals. Formally, this means we compute
β2 cigdayi0 /N , where cigday
i=1

is cigarettes smoked per day and i indexes the N observations. Second, we use the same
formula but average over only those individuals who actually quit smoking. Third, we only
average over quitters from the treatment groups. Fourth, we compute the effect of quitting
smoking from the sample mean baseline smoking level, i.e. β2 cigday i0 . Fifth and sixth, we
again compute β2 cigday i0 but using only quitters, and quitters from the treatment group,
respectively. The estimated average weight gain from quitting smoking is similar using all
six approaches, so we only report the results using the first method: averaging the predicted
effects across all individuals. Results from the other approaches are available upon request.
A key limitation with cigarettes per day is its self-reported nature. At issue for the
validity of our IV estimates is not whether cigarettes per day are reported with error, but
whether this error is correlated with treatment status. It is not obvious that this is the case,

10

but it is possible that, for instance, being assigned into the treatment group creates more
pressure to report progress toward smoking cessation, leading to differentially large reporting
error among the treatment group. Alternatively, perhaps reporting error simply rises with
number of cigarettes smoked per day, in which case we would expect the amount of error in
the follow-up periods to be highest among the control group.
We therefore also utilize a third smoking variable that is both clinically measured and
incorporates both the intensive and extensive margins of smoking: CO level from a test
conducted during the follow-up interview. Using the CO regression estimates to compute
the average weight gain from quitting smoking is somewhat more complicated than using
cigarettes smoked per day since even non-smokers generally have a positive CO level. We
therefore compute each individual’s predicted effect of quitting smoking as the effect of
switching from her baseline CO level to the mean CO level for non-smokers, rather than to
a CO level of zero. For the mean CO level of non-smokers, we use Deveci et al.’s (2004)
estimate of 3.61 ppm; this is similar to the mean CO level of verified non-smokers in the
follow-up waves of the LHS. The average effect of quitting smoking on weight across the
N

P
entire sample is therefore given by
β2 (COi0 − 3.61) /N where CO is CO level in ppm.
i=1

Note that CO levels are only available at baseline for 922 individuals, so our average effect
is computed using only this portion of the sample (though our regressions still utilize the
full sample). We doubt that this limitation is of consequence since reported numbers of
cigarettes smoked per day at baseline are virtually identical for those with missing baseline
CO levels and those with non-missing levels. We have also considered analogs of the other
five approaches to computing the average effects of quitting smoking discussed above and
verified that, as with cigarettes per day, the results are robust.
While using CO levels solves the probability of reporting error, it should be noted that
it is not immune to all sources of measurement error. In particular, it only reflects smoking
in the past couple of days. Therefore, for some people self-reported number of cigarettes
smoked per day could actually be more indicative of typical smoking behavior than clinically

11

measured CO. Consequently, we take an agnostic view about which measure is preferred and
present the results for both alongside each other throughout the paper.4

3.1.2

Long Run

The above specifications estimate the short-run causal effect of smoking on BMI. We also
aim to identify the long-run effect by asking how smoking across all five follow-up waves
affects BMI at the end of the study (year five). Comparing the short- and long-run effects is
important since, as discussed in Section 1, the evidence from the associational literature is
mixed as to whether at least some of the weight gained after quitting smoking is temporary.
Ideally, we would like to estimate

bmii5 = β0 + β1 bmii0 +

5
X

β2t Sit + β3 Xi + εi5

(3)

t=1

where bmii5 is individual i’s BMI at the end of year 5 and Sit is smoking in year t. However,
the need to utilize IV estimation prevents us from allowing separate coefficients for each of
the five smoking variables, as this would require five instruments. In other words, in order
to operationalize an IV model we need to compress the five years of smoking information
into a single variable Si . The easiest way to do this is to take a simple average across the
five years:
Si =

Si1 + Si2 + Si3 + Si4 + Si5
.
5

(4)

However, this approach assumes that smoking in each of the five periods has the same
effect on weight. To the extent that weight is a depreciating capital stock, we might expect
smoking in more recent years to have a larger effect on BMI than smoking in more distant
years. We therefore also estimate models defining S as a weighted rather than simple average
4

If we regress CO level in the first follow-up year on cigarettes smoked per day as well as the interaction
of cigarettes with the two treatment dummies, the R-squared is 0.48. This suggests that, while cigarettes
smoked per day and CO are highly correlated, they do convey different information. Additionally, the
coefficients on the interaction terms are positive and significant, though small. In other words, measurement
error does appear to be slightly correlated with treatment status. Both of these results underscore the
importance of verifying that the results are similar using the two different measures.

12

of quit status in the five follow-up years:

Si =

Si1 + (1 − δ)Si2 + (1 − δ)2 Si3 + (1 − δ)3 Si4 + (1 − δ)4 Si5
.
1 + (1 − δ) + (1 − δ)2 + (1 − δ)3 + (1 − δ)4

(5)

Since we do not have a sufficient number of instruments to credibly estimate the depreciation
rate δ, we simply try several plausible values: 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, and 0.3. In all our
regressions, the coefficient estimate on the baseline BMI variable will barely be below one,
so we consider it probable that the “true” value of δ is toward the low end of this range; i.e.
there is little reason to consider values of δ above 0.3.
We estimate equation (3) using both OLS and IV, with si ai and si pi again serving
as the instruments. We again use the three different measures of Sit : smoking cessation,
cigarettes smoked per day, and CO level. For the cigarettes per day and CO regressions, we
compute implied average effects of quitting smoking in the same manner as the short-run
specifications.

3.1.3

Results

Table 2 reports the results of interest from the parametric regressions. Panel A presents
the OLS and IV estimates of the effects of the different smoking measures on BMI. Panel
B shows the estimated effects of the treatment dummies on the smoking variables from the
first stage of the IV models, along with the F-statistic from a test of their joint significance.
The first three columns show the effect of year 1 smoking on year 1 BMI (short-run effect),
with the first column using the binary quitting variable as the smoking measure, the second
using cigarettes smoked per day, and the third using CO. The last three columns present
the effects of the simple averages of these three smoking measures across years 1-5 on BMI
in year 5 (long-run effect). The results using the weighted averages, available in Appendix
Table A1, are similar to those obtained using simple averages.
Coefficient estimates are shown in the table, with heteroskedasticity-robust standard

13

errors in parentheses. The stars represent 0.1%, 1%, and 5% significance levels. For the
regressions with the non-binary smoking measures cigarettes per day and CO, the implied
average effects of quitting smoking on BMI are presented in brackets. In other words, the
numbers in brackets from the cigarettes and CO regressions are comparable to the coefficient
estimates from the quit status regressions. The row labeled “Hausman” gives the p-values
from Hausman tests of the consistency of the OLS estimator compared to IV. The sample
sizes, provided in the row labeled “N”, vary somewhat across specifications due to differing
amounts of missing information. In unreported regressions (available upon request), we
re-estimated the models using only observations with no missing smoking information and
verified that any meaningful differences between the results cannot simply be attributed to
the difference in samples.
The first column presents the short-run estimates using the quit dummy. The OLS
regression estimates that quitting smoking increases BMI by 1.295 units, or 8.2 pounds at
the US average height of 66.55 inches.5 This is well within the range of estimates from the
associational literature discussed in Section 1. The IV estimate is a larger 2.202 BMI units,
and the Hausman test strongly rejects the consistency of OLS. This IV estimate equates to
13.9 pounds, which is larger than most estimates of the average short-run weight gain from
quitting smoking from the associational literature.
The next two columns use the smoking measures that incorporate intensity: cigarettes per
day and CO. In the IV specifications, we estimate that in the short run an additional cigarette
smoked per day reduces BMI by 0.052 units while an additional ppm of CO reduces BMI
by 0.077 units. The average effects of quitting smoking implied by these two regressions are
1.52 and 1.71 BMI units, which translate to 9.6 and 10.8 pounds at the mean height. These
estimates are 31% and 22% smaller than the 13.9 pounds we obtained using the quit dummy.
This is consistent with our prediction that neglecting to account for smoking intensity leads
to an exaggerated IV estimate of the average weight gain from quitting smoking.
5

Average height is computed by taking a simple average of the male and female heights given by
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/body-measurements.htm.

14

The last three columns turn to the long-run estimates. The key result is that the longrun effects are slightly stronger than the short-run effects. This is an important result, as
the issue of whether the effect diminishes over time has been a point of contention in the
associational literature, as discussed in Section 1. In the IV specification using average quit
status, quitting for all five follow-up years is estimated to increase BMI by 2.646 units, or
16.7 pounds. An additional cigarette smoked per day over the five years reduces BMI by
0.065 units, while an additional ppm of average CO reduces BMI by 0.082 units. These
latter two estimates imply average weight gains from quitting smoking of 1.91 and 1.81 units
of BMI, or 12.0 and 11.4 pounds. As with the short-run estimates, these results suggest
that incorporating smoking intensity is necessary to avoid overstating the magnitude of the
weight gain from smoking cessation.
We can use these long-run results to estimate the percentage of the rise in BMI that can
be attributed to falling smoking, under the admittedly strong assumption that the results
generalize. This percentage is given by

dbmi ∆cigday
dcigday ∆bmi

∗ 100%. For

dbmi
,
dcigday

we use the long-run

IV estimate for cigarettes smoked per day: -0.065. ∆cigday and ∆bmi are the changes in
the population means of cigarettes smoked per day and BMI among those at least eighteen
years old. We compute these using the oldest and newest waves of the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) that contain data on both smoking (self-reported)
and BMI (medically measured): 1971-1974 (NHANES I) and 2011-2012. This period spans
the entirety of the sharp rise in obesity, which did not begin until the late 1970s. During this
time frame, average cigarettes smoked per day fell from 9.165 to 2.188, so ∆cigday = 6.977.
Average BMI rose from 25.425 to 28.617, so ∆bmi = 3.192. Plugging in these numbers
suggests that the drop in smoking explains 14.2% of the rise in BMI. We view this as a
relatively substantial contribution to the trend. Courtemanche et al. (2015) examine the
extent to which 27 different economic factors contributed to the rise in BMI, finding that the
increased prevalence of big box grocers and restaurants explain 17% and 12%, respectively,
while no other factors explain more than 4%.

15

Finally, the first-stage estimates in Panel B of Table 2 show that the treatment was effective in reducing smoking. In the short run, being assigned into the SI-A or SI-P groups
increased the probability of quitting by 27-28 percentage points while decreasing cigarettes
smoked per day by 11-12 and CO level by 8 ppm. In the long run, SI-A or SI-P assignment increased the fraction of the five follow-up years quit by 0.21 while decreasing average cigarettes
per day by 9 and average CO by 6-7 ppm. The treatment variables are all highly significant
in the first stage and the F-statistics from the test of their joint significance are easily large
enough to conclude that they are sufficiently strong instruments. Also noteworthy is the
fact that there is essentially no difference in the coefficient estimates for the two treatment
variables; in other words, the inhaled bronchodilator given to the SI-A group did not influence smoking. This also means that, though our IV model is technically overidentified, the
instruments are not sufficiently distinct to make an overidentification test informative or to
consider instrumenting for two endogenous variables.

3.1.4

Falsification Tests

We next conduct falsification tests to support our contention that the IV results using
cigarettes per day and CO are more credible than those using the quit dummy. In our IV
models, the identifying assumption is that the randomized treatment only influences BMI
via the smoking variable. Our falsification tests evaluate this assumption by asking whether
the instruments influence the BMIs of individuals who did not change their smoking habits
during the sample period, according to each smoking measure. A significant association
would provide evidence that the randomized intervention influenced BMI through pathways
other than the particular smoking measure, invalidating the causal interpretation of the
corresponding IV estimate.
For the quit measure, we restrict the sample to those with values of 0, meaning those who
smoked in the first follow-up wave for the short-run analysis and those who smoked in all five
follow-up waves for the long-run analysis. For the continuous smoking measures, there are

16

obviously very few individuals with literally no change in smoking across the sample period
(i.e. the exact same number of cigarettes smoked per day/CO level in the baseline period
as in the follow-up waves), so a judgment call is required as to what magnitude change in
smoking should be considered “meaningful”. We report results restricting the sample to
those whose post-treatment level of smoking is within 25% of their baseline level; results
using neighboring cutoffs are similar. Using these subsamples, we estimate the reduced-form
version of the short- and long-run IV models; i.e. we regress BMI on the two treatment
variables plus the controls.
Ex ante, our prediction is that the binary quit measure will perform the worst in the
falsification tests since it leaves people in the sample who did actually experience a meaningful change in smoking but did not quit entirely. Note that it is not obvious that the
falsification tests will produce null results even for the smoking measures that incorporate
intensity, though, since it is conceivable that the treatment could affect BMI through pathways other than smoking. For instance, perhaps being exposed to an intensive health-related
intervention might increase some people’s level of general health consciousness, which could
lead to improved health behaviors along other dimensions besides smoking. The falsification
tests are therefore important in assessing whether even our most conservative estimates of
the effect of smoking on weight can be given a causal interpretation.
One concern with these falsification tests is that, by selecting the sample based on changes
in smoking that are endogenous to the treatment, we lose the ability to claim that unobservables are balanced across treatment and control groups. However, Appendix Tables 2-7
present summary statistics by treatment group status for the baseline values of the variables used in each subsample regression. We test for differences in means between treatment
and control groups and rarely reject the hypothesis that the means are the same. The fact
that observable characteristics (particularly baseline BMI) are still reasonably well balanced
across groups gives us confidence that any imbalance in unobservables that occurs as a result
of the stratification is not meaningfully affecting our conclusions from the section.

17

Table 3 reports the results. The left half of the table presents the results from the shortrun falsification tests (“effects” of the treatment dummies on year 1 BMI for those with
unchanged smoking status) while the right half shows the long-run results (year 5 BMI).
For comparison purposes, the first column of each half of the table presents the reducedform results for the full sample. The remaining three columns of each half include those
with no meaningful changes in the quit, cigarettes per day, and CO variables, respectively.
The sample sizes in the tests based on cigarettes per day are smaller than those using quit
status simply because more individuals are excluded as the measure of smoking becomes
more comprehensive. The sample sizes in the two columns using CO are very small because,
as discussed previously, much of the sample is missing baseline CO information, preventing
the calculation of the percentage change. The falsification tests using cigarettes per day are
therefore much more highly powered – and consequently more informative – than those using
CO.
The columns labeled “full sample” show that, in both the short and long run, the reducedform effects of the two treatment variables on BMI are between 0.54 and 0.61 before excluding
any observations. Dropping those who quit smoking reduces the magnitude of these effects
by about half, but significant effects of 0.21-0.28 remain. There is therefore clear evidence
that the intervention affected BMI through a pathway besides quitting smoking, implying
that the IV estimates using quitting smoking are too large. The falsification test results are
much more favorable if we also exclude those with meaningful (>25%) changes in smoking
intensity. In the two regressions that use cigarettes per day, the coefficient estimates for the
treatment variables are small (between -0.014 and 0.038) and highly statistically insignificant.
There is therefore no evidence that the exclusion restriction in the IV model is violated if
cigday is used as the smoking measure. Excluding on the basis of changes in CO also leads
to highly insignificant effects, with three being negative (the opposite direction of the fullsample relationship) and one positive. The estimates are imprecise due to the small sample
size, so these results are not as compelling as those using cigday, but the lack of a clear

18

pattern is at least somewhat reassuring. To summarize, the results in this section suggest
that while the IV results using the quitting indicator are contaminated by an alternative
effect, the results using both number of cigarettes and CO levels are more reliable.

3.2

Semi-Parametric Estimation

An issue with the parametric regressions for cigday and CO is that they assume that smoking
intensity affects BMI linearly. This is a strong assumption, as it seems likely that there is
either a non-linear dose-response effect of nicotine on metabolism/appetite or a non-linear
effect of metabolism/appetite on weight-related behaviors. While it is not clear that this will
bias estimates of the average weight gain from quitting smoking, such a restrictive functional
form is likely to lead to systematically inappropriate predictions for at least some individuals.
Moreover, given the complicated chain of biological and behavioral pathways through which
smoking influences BMI, the nature of the non-linearity is not clear ex ante. In other words,
it is not obvious that the non-linearity could be captured through simple approaches such
as logarithmic or quadratic specifications. We therefore next estimate a semi-parametric
model that allows the data to determine the functional form of the relationship between
smoking and BMI. Specifically, we implement Robinson’s (1988) semi-parametric double
residual estimator with local smoothing. This approach allows us to model the expectation
of the dependent variable at every point on the distribution of the independent variable,
thereby enabling the prediction of the weight gained (or lost) from switching from any level
of smoking to any other level.6
Semi-parametric IV models can be estimated using a control function approach (Blundell
and Powell, 2004; Lee, 2007). The first stage takes the same form as equation (2). The second
stage differs from equation (1) in two ways. First, it does not specify the functional form for
the smoking measure. Second, rather than using the predicted value of the smoking variable
from the first-stage regression, the second stage includes the residual from the first stage as
6

For simplicity, we round smoking values to the nearest integer; e.g. if someone averaged 21.2 cigarettes
per day over the five follow-up waves we round this to 21.

19

a regressor.7 The second stage short-run regression can therefore be expressed as

bmii1 = β0 + β1 bmii0 + f (Si ) + β2 Xi + β3 µ
bi + εi

(6)

where S is either cigday or CO and µ
b is the first-stage residual. The second stage long-run
regression is similar but replaces bmii1 with bmii5 and Si with the average smoking measures
discussed previously.
The estimation was conducted using the Stata program “semipar” by Deparsy and Verardi (2012). The first step is to estimate E(bmi|S), E(µ|S) and E(X|S), which are apd µ
b by a kernel weighted local polynomial
proximated by the predicted values bmi,
b, and X
d µ
b µ
regression. The second step is to form the residuals µ
b1 = bmi− bmi,
b2 = X− X,
b3 = µ− µ
b.
Then the coefficients βb0 , βb1 , βb2 , and βb3 , representing the relationships between the independent variables and BMI, are estimated by regressing µ
b1 on µ
b2 and µ
b3 . Thus, all parameters in
equation (6) are identified except the relationship between cigarette consumption and BMI.
The last step is, therefore, to identify this relationship with a non-parametric regression of
ˆ i1 − βb0 − βb1 bmii0 − βb2 Xi − βb3 µ
cigarette consumption on the predicted BMI residual, bmi
bi . This
relationship is estimated at every level of cigarette smoking, allowing independent marginal
effects. The idea behind this strategy is to estimate the non-parametric cigarette function
by the residual variation that is unrelated to the parametric independent variables.
We calculate the average effect of quitting smoking on BMI using the semi-parametric
estimates as follows. When using the cigarettes smoked per day variable, we first calculate
the change in predicted weight from switching from the number of cigarettes smoked at
baseline to zero. We then take the average of these predicted changes across all individuals
in the sample. The process for the CO variable is similar; the only difference is that we
compute the predicted effect of switching to the average CO level for non-smokers of 3.61
ppm, as opposed to zero.
7

For an overview of the control function approach to dealing with endogeneity, see Heckman (1979) and
Heckman and Robb (1986).

20

In semi-parametric estimation, the confidence interval becomes very wide at extreme
values where there are very few observations. We therefore drop the top 1% of the smoking
distribution, which means those who smoke more than 50 cigarettes per day on average
across the five follow up years and those with average CO levels of over 50 ppm. We doubt
that this restriction is consequential, since if we drop the same individuals in the parametric
regressions the results (available upon request) remain similar.
Figures 2 and 3 present the short-run semi-parametric IV results for cigday and CO,
respectively. The graphs display both the point estimates for each integer level of smoking
and the 95% confidence intervals. Figure 2 shows that the short-run relationship between
cigarettes smoked per day and BMI is highly nonlinear. Specifically, smoking has a diminishing marginal effect on BMI throughout most of the distribution, with the shape of the
curve being approximately quadratic. Quitting smoking from levels of 10, 20, 30, and 40
cigarettes per day is predicted to lead to weight gains of 1.22, 1.58, 1.66, and 1.94 BMI units,
respectively. Most of the effect of smoking on weight therefore appears to occur at levels
below 20 cigarettes per day. Taken literally, this would suggest that heavy smokers could
cut back to a pack a day without fear of substantial weight gain. Figure 3 shows that the
short-run effect of CO on BMI is less obviously non-linear than the effect of cigarettes per
day. The curve is somewhat flat at very low levels of CO – specifically two to five ppm – but
recall that even non-smokers often have non-zero CO so changes at such low levels probably
do not reflect changes in smoking behavior. Starting at five ppm, the graph begins to take
a quadratic shape, but unlike the graph for cigarettes per day we do not observe a complete
leveling off until the far right tail of the distribution.
Figures 4 and 5 turn to the long-run results using simple averages of the smoking measures; the graphs using weighted averages are very similar and are available upon request.
Figure 4 shows that the shape of the long-run relationship between cigarettes per day and
BMI is roughly similar to the shape of the short-run relationship, as it is approximately
quadratic and levels off at around 20 cigarettes per day. Figure 5 displays a similar pat-

21

tern of results for CO level. CO has a diminishing marginal effect on BMI, and most of the
weight gain from reduced CO comes at levels below about 20 ppm. The long-run relationship
between CO and BMI therefore flattens out more quickly than the short-run relationship.8
The average effects of quitting smoking on BMI implied by these semi-parametric graphs
are generally similar to those from the parametric specifications. Using cigarettes per day,
the average effect of quitting is 1.67 BMI units in the short run and 1.93 in the long run,
compared to 1.52 and 1.91 from the corresponding parametric regressions. For CO, the
average effect is 1.80 in the short run and 1.99 in the long run, compared to the parametric
regressions’ estimates of 1.33 and 1.81. The results presented in this section suggest that
the marginal effect of smoking on weight is likely to be modest for levels of smoking above
20 cigarettes a day, which would be impossible to detect using linear specifications.

3.3

Subsample Analyses

We next conduct subsample analyses to evaluate whether the effect of smoking on BMI differs
by age, gender, education, marital status, or baseline BMI. Heterogeneous effects could occur
because of differences in either the biological effects of nicotine on appetite or metabolism or
the behavioral responses to these biological effects. Given the complicated nature of these
relationships, we make no ex ante predictions about the patterns of heterogeneity.
For age, we split the sample into three groups: those under 45, 45-54, and 55 and over
at baseline. We use these splits because there are no individuals under 35 or over 64 in
the LHS. For education, we consider subsamples of those with no college education, some
college, and a four-year college degree or greater. There are not enough individuals with less
than a high school degree or greater than a college degree to enable further stratification.
For marital status, we estimate separate regressions for married and unmarried participants.
For baseline BMI, we split the sample into BMI quartiles: those with a baseline BMI of 22.7
8

Note that there is some evidence that additional CO actually leads to higher BMI at the far right tail
of the distribution: CO levels of around 47-50 ppm. However, this should be interpreted with caution as it
is based on a very small number of individuals. Accordingly, the confidence intervals in this portion of the
distribution are quite large.

22

BMI units or less, 22.7-25.2, 25.2-27.9, and 27.9 and above. Weight gain presents greater
health risks in the higher categories. All of our subsamples exhibit good covariate balance
between treatment and control groups; summary statistics are available upon request.
Tables 4 through 6 display the results for cigarettes per day (Panel A) and CO (Panel B).
For brevity, all tables contain only the results from long-run parametric IV regressions using
simple averages of the smoking measures. Semi-parametric graphs for each subsample are
available in Appendix Tables A1-A6. Short-run estimates and those using weighted rather
than simple averages lead to broadly similar conclusions and are available upon request.
The results suggest that the effect of smoking on weight is strongest for younger individuals, women, those without a college degree, and those with baseline BMIs below 22.7
BMI units. Quitting smoking leads to an average weight gain of 2.19-2.21 BMI units for
those under 45, 1.88-1.98 for 45-54 year olds, and 1.33-1.45 for those 55 and older. One
possible explanation is that the health consequences from obesity become more salient with
age, so older individuals may have a stronger incentive than others to mitigate weight gain
after smoking cessation. Again averaging over the four specifications, the average effect of
quitting smoking on BMI is 2.04-2.45 units for women compared to 1.56-1.59 for men. Stratifying by education, the average effects of smoking cessation are around 1.83-1.98 for those
with no college education, 1.82-1.93 for those with some college but no degree, and 1.64-1.73
for those with a college degree. There is therefore some evidence of a small reduction in
the effect of smoking on weight as education rises, with the largest gap being between those
without a college degree and those with a degree. Perhaps education enables individuals to
limit weight gain through an improved understanding of nutrition and exercise. Alternatively, education is correlated with income, and additional income may enable the purchase
of healthier foods, gym memberships, or over-the-counter products that can help counteract
weight gain. The average weight gain among married participants is 1.91-1.93 BMI units and
1.50-1.89 for unmarried participants. Interestingly, the effect does not vary much by marital
status, possible revealing that having a partner neither helps nor hurts avoiding weight gain

23

after quitting smoking. Finally, the average weight gain from quitting smoking is 2.50-2.52
BMI units for people with a baseline BMI level of 22.7 BMI units or less, 1.71-1.83 for people
with a baseline BMI level between 22.7-25.2, 1.60-1.75 for people with a baseline BMI level
between 25.2-27.9, and 1.56-1.65 for those with a baseline BMI level above 27.9. These results suggest that individuals who are at higher risk of health consequences from weight gain
take more steps than others to limit the amount of weight gained after smoking cessation.
It is particularly noteworthy that the effect is so much stronger for the lowest quartile than
the other groups: a 2 BMI unit weight gain following smoking cessation would only bring
the heaviest person in the lowest quartile to a BMI of 24.7, which is still under the threshold
for overweight. In other words, the population-wide health consequences from weight gain
after quitting smoking are likely smaller than would be implied by the full-sample estimates.
In all, though, perhaps the most striking results from Tables 4-6 are that, while some
heterogeneity appears to exist, the overall amount of heterogeneity is relatively small. Negative and highly significant effects of smoking on weight are evident for all subsamples. The
smallest average effect of quitting smoking on BMI from any specification (55 and over, parametric, CO) is a still sizable 1.33. The lack of substantial heterogeneity in the effect within
the sample provides perhaps some assurances that the results are generalizable outside the
sample. The next section evaluates the generalizability issue in more detail.

3.4

External Validity

We next perform some checks related to external validity. One obvious concern about the
generalizability of the results is that the LHS was conducted in the early 1990s, raising the
question of the relevance for current policy debates. (With that said, many of the frequently
cited associational estimates are from studies using data that are as old or older.) Another
concern related to generalizability is that the LHS’ participants are not a random sample of
smokers: participants had to desire to quit smoking, have mild (but not major) lung function
impairment, and live within reasonable proximity of the locations for follow-up visits. As
24

discussed in the Data section, the end result was a sample that was almost exclusively white
(97%) and exclusively middle-aged (starting age 35-59, ending age 40-64).
We attempt to at least somewhat alleviate these concerns by conducting additional analyses with the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), a large nationally representative
survey conducted annually by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The NHIS
contains self-reported data on smoking, weight, and height, along with the same control
variables used in our LHS analyses (except for baseline BMI, since the NHIS is not a panel).
We use the NHIS to see if the association between cigarettes smoked per day and BMI varies
along the dimensions of the generalizability issues: time period, race, and age. Obviously
a causal analysis is not possible with the NHIS, but verifying that the association between
smoking and weight is not particularly unique among the LHS population should provide at
least some assurance that the causal effect is not likely to be unique either. We first estimate
the association among the NHIS’ best available analog to the LHS sample: white 35-64 year
olds in 1990-1994 (the years of the five LHS follow-up waves). We then evaluate whether
this association has changed over time by estimating the same model among 35-64 year old
whites in the five most recent NHIS waves currently available: 2009-2013. Next, we examine
the issue of lack of representativeness by race by returning to the 1990-1994 NHIS waves
and restricting the sample to 35-64 year old non-whites. Finally, we estimate the model for
whites of an age outside of the 35-64 range (i.e. 18-34 year olds combined with those 65+)
in order to evaluate the implications of the lack of representativeness by age.9
Table 7 reports the results. The first column shows that, in the sample most comparable
to the LHS, each additional cigarette smoked per day is associated with a reduction in
BMI of 0.038 units. This implies an average weight gain from quitting smoking of 0.8 BMI
units. The second column shows that the association between cigarettes smoked per day and
BMI is stronger in the 2009-2013 sample than the 1990-1994 sample (-0.061 compared to
9
The associations of the control variables with BMI are very different for the 18-34 year old age group
and the 65+ age group. Therefore, in the regression combining 18-34 year olds with those 65 and older, we
include as additional covariates the interactions of each control with an indicator for whether the individual
is in the 18-34 portion of the sample or the 65+ portion.

25

-0.038), but the average effects of quitting smoking are nonetheless fairly similar (0.91 BMI
units compared to 0.8) which is similar to the short-run OLS estimate from the LHS. This
is because the average number of cigarettes smoked among smokers has dropped over the
past two decades. In other words, β2 may have grown over time but cigday has shrunk for
N

P
the average smoker, leaving
β2 cigdayi0 /N roughly constant. Next, the third column
i=1

provides evidence that the association between smoking and BMI for non-whites is stronger
than for whites, but the implied average effects of quitting smoking are similar. Again, this
is because on average non-white smokers consume fewer cigarettes than white smokers. The
final column shows that the association between smoking and BMI among those who are not
between the ages of 35 and 64 is virtually identical to the association among those who are
in this age range. The average effect of quitting smoking is, however, slightly smaller among
the non-35-to-64 sample due to a lower number of cigarettes smoked among smokers.
In sum, though there is likely some heterogeneity across age, race, and time, these results
provide at least some assurance that the lack of representativeness of the LHS is not driving
our conclusions. Smoking is inversely associated with weight in all NHIS subsamples. The
associations between cigarettes smoked per day and BMI all fall within a reasonably tight
range of -0.038 to -0.061. The implied average effects of quitting smoking are all between
0.68 and 0.91 BMI units, which equate to 4.3 to 5.7 pounds. These magnitudes are within
the range found in the associational literature and are well below our estimated average
effects of quitting smoking from the LHS IV specifications. This underscores the importance
of accounting for endogeneity when evaluating the relationship between smoking and weight.

3.5

Reconciling Our Results with Prior Literature

We close our empirical analysis by reconciling our results with those of EQ, who used previously published LHS summary statistics from O’Hara et al. (1998) to estimate a very large
21.4 lb average weight gain from smoking cessation. We first replicate EQ’s results and then
show that our finding of a considerably smaller effect can be attributed to our use of more
26

comprehensive smoking measures.
We replicate EQ by computing a Wald IV estimate of the form

β̂W ALD =

bmi1 − bmi0
quit1 − quit0

(7)

where subscript one indicates the treatment group (combination of the SI-A and SI-P groups)
and zero the control group (UC). bmi1 and bmi0 are average BMIs among the treatment and
control groups, respectively, at the end of the study period (year 5). quit represents EQ’s
measure of quitting smoking, called “sustained quitting,” which is a dummy variable equal
to one if and only if the individual was a medically verified non-smoker in all five follow-up
waves. This is a very stringent measure, as anyone who smokes any amount in any of the
five follow-up years is classified as a non-quitter.
The validity of the Wald estimator hinges on the assumption that the intervention only
affected the weight of individuals for whom quit = 1. To the extent that the intervention
also affected the weight of any other individuals (i.e. those with quit = 0), the denominator
will effectively be too small. The observed difference in average weight between the treatment and control groups will therefore be scaled by too small a number, and the estimated
effect of quitting smoking on weight will consequently be overstated. We suspect that the
Wald estimator’s identifying assumption is violated since there are two types of individuals
categorized by EQ as having quit = 0 whose smoking behavior (and therefore weight) likely
responded to the intervention to at least some extent.
The first type consists of those who quit smoking for part but not all of the 5-year followup period. If, for instance, someone quit smoking for the first two years, relapsed in year
three, and then quit again for years four and five, this person is not classified as a quitter by
EQ, but it seems likely that they would have gained almost as much weight as someone who
quit for all five years. There are 1,114 people in the treatment group who quit smoking in
at least one follow up wave but were not sustained quitters. Therefore, not accounting for

27

this group has the potential to substantially impact the results.
The second type consists of those who reduced smoking but did not quit entirely. Given
the highly addictive nature of cigarettes, it seems likely that there are at least some people
who were able to cut back on their cigarette intake as a result of the intervention but were
unable to quit completely. Indeed, among those in the treatment group who never quit in
any of the five follow-up waves, average cigarettes smoked per day still fell from 31 to 22.
There is no reason to suspect that the biological pathways through which smoking affects
weight occur only along the extensive margin of smoking, so people who cut back on smoking
would likely experience at least some amount of weight gain. Additionally, some people may
also be a blend of the two types; e.g. someone who responds to the intervention by gradually
cutting back on smoking until successfully quitting at the end of the third year.
After replicating EQ’s results using the “sustained quitting” variable, we then re-compute
the Wald estimate using our more nuanced long-run smoking measures discussed earlier in
Section 3.1.2. Our “average quitter” measure addresses the issue of people who quit in some
but not all follow-up years. The average cigarettes per day and average CO variables also
address the issue of cutting back but not quitting entirely.
Table 8 reports the results. The first column shows that, replicating EQ’s Wald estimator,
we obtain an average estimated weight gain from quitting smoking of 3.196 BMI units, or
20.13 lbs at the average height. This is very similar to the result obtained by EQ, differing
slightly because EQ used weight as the dependent variable rather than BMI. (We are unable
to directly use weight because the LHS microdata suppress height and weight and only
provide BMI.) The second column shows that using simple average quitter rather than
sustained quitter reduces the average estimated weight gain from quitting smoking by about
17% to 2.655 BMI units. In the last two columns, we see that using the simple averages of
cigarettes per day and CO attenuates this magnitude even further, to 1.84 and 1.58 BMI
units, respectively. Ultimately, then, accounting for both temporary/delayed quitting and
smoking intensity reduces the estimated average weight gain from smoking cessation by 42%-

28

51% relative to using the naive sustained quitter measure. Since the Wald estimates using
our preferred smoking measures from Table 8 are quite similar to those from our preferred
long-run specifications in Table 2, we conclude that the difference between our results and
those of EQ is due to the different smoking measures rather than our use of a covariateadjusted regression model in Table 2. This is not surprising given the randomized design.
Note, however, that the standard errors are lower in Table 2, so including covariates is still
beneficial in that it improves the precision of the estimates.

4

Conclusion

This paper aimed to provide the most credible answers to date to several questions related
to the relationship between smoking and weight. First, what is the average short-run causal
effect of quitting smoking on body weight? Our preferred estimates suggest that this effect
is around 1.5-1.7 BMI units, or 10-11 pounds at the average height. Second, does the weight
gain from quitting smoking disappear over time? The answer appears to be no, as the weight
gain actually becomes slightly larger in the long run. The long-run effect is around 11-12
pounds, which implies that the fall in smoking explains about 14% of the rise in obesity in
recent decades. Third, how does the impact of smoking on weight vary across the smoking
distribution? We find evidence of a diminishing marginal effect, with additional smoking
having little long-run impact beyond about a pack of cigarettes per day or a CO level of
20 ppm. Finally, how does the effect of smoking on weight vary by age, gender, education,
marital status and baseline BMI? Our results suggest that, while quitting smoking leads
to sizeable weight gain for all subsamples, the impacts are largest for younger individuals,
females, those with no college degree, and those in the lowest quartile of the baseline BMI
distribution.
Our estimated average effects of quitting smoking on weight fall within the range of
estimates from the associational public health literature, albiet toward the high end of the

29

range. It is clear, though, that our estimates are markedly smaller than those of EQ despite
the fact that they utilized the same randomized intervention. The fact that our results are
closer to the associational estimates than to those of EQ illustrates a broader methodological
point about the dangers of using IV estimation uncritically even when the instrument is
randomized or as-good-as-randomized. The randomization merely ensures the validity of
the estimated reduced-form relationship between the instrument and outcome. Obtaining
a reliable second-stage estimate requires the assumption that the endogenous variable is
the only pathway through which the randomized instrument affects the outcome. This
can be a difficult assumption to satisfy. As our paper shows, even if conceptually there is
only one pathway through which the intervention can plausibly impact the outcome, careful
measurement of that pathway is critical.
Our results also have interesting implications for the economics literature on tobacco
control policies. As discussed in the introduction, the literature on the effect of cigarette costs
(prices or taxes) on BMI reaches conflicting conclusions, with several studies suggesting the
effect is either very small or negative – implying that quitting or reducing smoking actually
leads to weight loss. Is it possible that the causal effect of an aggressive smoking cessation
program is to increase BMI while the casual effect of higher cigarette costs is either zero or
negative? This seems conceivable for two reasons.
First, the LATE from a price-induced reduction in smoking may differ from the LATEs
from smoking ban-induced or aggressive smoking cessation program-induced reductions in
smoking. Different smokers could be affected by these different types of interventions; for
instance, it seems reasonable to think marginal smokers would be the ones to respond to
cigarette price increases whereas those with strong addictions would be the ones to volunteer
for a comprehensive program. Perhaps those with strong addictions are relatively more likely
to “quit at all costs”, even if it means gaining a substantial amount of weight.
Second, perhaps cigarette prices/taxes affect BMI through pathways besides smoking
behavior. In other words, people who quit smoking in response to higher cigarette prices

30

may gain weight, but this could be counteracted by weight losses among those whose cigarette
consumption is unchanged – a large share of the population given the price inelasticity of
cigarettes (Chalopuka and Warner, 2000). Smokers who do not reduce their consumption
when prices rise experience potentially sizeable negative income effects, which could lead to
weight loss by reducing overall food consumption or frequency of eating out at restaurants.
Moreover, cigarette taxes generate revenue for the state, which can be used to provide funding
for nutrition education or health-related programs such as Medicaid. These, in turn, could
reduce the BMIs of even non-smokers.
To close, we should emphasize that our results should not be interpreted as suggesting
that individuals should be reluctant to quit smoking out of fear of gaining weight. The large
body of epidemiologic evidence that smoking is bad for health implies that any increase in
obesity-related ailments after quitting smoking is far outweighed by the health improvements
along other dimensions. Instead, our results fit with the broader literature that characterizes
the rise in obesity as a side-effect of otherwise beneficial technological and societal changes
such as improved food production, preservation, and distribution technologies, a shift toward
white-collar employment, and the Interstate Highway System (Cutler et al., 2003; Lakdawalla
and Philipson, 2005; Zhou and Kaestner, 2010; Courtemanche and Carden, 2011). In such
cases, the policy objective is not to undo these causes, but instead to target the mechanisms
through which they lead to weight gain.
To that end, our findings should be interpreted as a call for further investigation into
medical and policy interventions that can limit the weight gain from smoking cessation. Farley et al. (2012) provide a review of the literature on the effectiveness of various interventions
in limiting the weight gain after quitting smoking. Some evidence suggests that the drugs
dexfenfluramine, phenylpropanolamine, naltrexone, bupropion, and fluoxetine can reduce
weight gain in the short run, though there is insufficient evidence to draw clear conclusions
about whether the effects persist after the drugs are discontinued. Weight management
education alone does not seem to reduce weight gain and might actually hinder efforts to

31

quit smoking, whereas weight management education combined with personalized support
appears more successful. For all types of interventions reviewed by Farley et al. (2012),
their ability to draw clear conclusions was hindered by a lack of available research and small
sample sizes in the studies that do exist. Much more research is needed regarding which
interventions can help limit weight gain following smoking cessation as well as how best to
incentivize (e.g. more generous insurance coverage) interventions that prove effective.

32

References
[1] Angrist, J., and Pischke, J.S., 2009. Mostly harmless econometrics: an empiricist’s companion, Princeton University Press: Print.
[2] Aubin, H., Farley, A., Lycett, D., Lahmek, P., and Aveyard, P., 2012. Weight gain in
smokers after quitting cigarettes: meta-analysis. BMJ, 345: e4439.
[3] Baum, C., 2009. The effects of cigarette costs on bmi and obesity. Health Economics,
18(1): 3-19.
[4] Blundell, R., and Powell, J., 2004. Endogeneity in semiparametric binary response models. Review of Economic Studies, 71: 655-679.
[5] Cawley, J. and Meyerhoefer, C., 2012. The medical care costs of obesity: an instrumental
variables approach. Journal of Health Economics, 31: 219-230.
[6] Chaloupka, F. and Warner, K., 2000. The economics of smoking. Culyer, A. and Newhouse, J. (Eds.) Chapter 29 in Handbook of Health Economics, Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 1539-1627.
[7] Chen, Y., Horne, S., and Dosman, J., 1993. The influence of smoking cessation on body
weight may be temporary. American Journal of Public Health, 83(9): 1330-1332.
[8] Chou, S , Grossman, M. and Saffer, H., 2004. An economic analysis of adult obesity:
results from the behavioral risk factor surveillance system. Journal of Health Economics,
23(3): 565-87.
[9] Courtemanche, C., 2009. Rising cigarette prices and rising obesity: coincidence or unintended consequence? Journal of Health Economics, 28(4): 781–98.
[10] Courtemanche, C. and Carden, A., 2011. Supersizing supercenters? The Impact of
Walmart Supercenters on Body Mass Index and Obesity. Journal of Urban Economics,
69(2): 165-181.
[11] Courtemanche, C., Pinkston, J., Ruhm, C., and Wehby, G., forthcoming. Can changing
economic factors explain the rise in obesity? Southern Economic Journal.
[12] Courtemanche, C., Pinkston, J., and Stewart, J., 2015. Adjusting body mass for measurement error with invalid validation data. Economics and Human Biology, 19: 275293.
[13] Cutler, D., Glaeser, E., and Shapiro, J., 2003. Why have Americand become more obese?
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(3): 93-118.
[14] Eisenberg, D., and Quinn, B. C., 2006. Estimating the effect of smoking cessation on
weight gain: an instrumental variable approach. Health Services Research, 41(6): 2255–
2266.

33

[15] Farley, A.C., Hajek, P., Lycett, D., Aveyard, P., 2012. Interventions for preventing
weight gain after smoking cessation. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 1,
Art. No.: CD006219.
[16] Finkelstein, E. A., Fiebelcorn, I. C., and Wang, G., 2003. National medical spending
attributable to overweight and obesity: how much, and who’s paying? Health Affairs,
W3: 219-226.
[17] Finkelstein, E. A., Trogdon, J. G., Cohen, J. W., and Dietz,W., 2009. Annual medical
spending attributable to obesity: payer-and service-specific estimates. Health Affairs,
28(5): 822-831.
[18] Flegal, K., Troiano, R., Pamuk, E., Kuczmarski, R., and Campbell, S., 1995. The
influence of smoking cessation on the prevalence of overweight in the United States.
New England Journal of Medicine, 333(18): 1165-1170.
[19] Flegal, K., Carroll, M., Kuczmarski, R. and Johnson, C., 1998. Overweight and obesity
in the united states: prevalence and trends, 1960-1994. International Journal of Obesity,
22: 39-47.
[20] Flegal, K., Graubard, B., Williamson, D. and Gail, M., 2005. Excess deaths associated
with underweight, overweight, and obesity. Journal of the American Medical Association, 293: 1861-1867.
[21] Fletcher, J., 2014. The effects of smoking cessation on weight gain: new evidence using
workplace smoking bans. Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 17(2): 105-129.
[22] Gregory, C. A., and Ruhm, C. J., 2011. Where does the wage penalty bite?, Grossman,
M and Mocan, N., (Eds.) in Economic Aspects of Obesity, University of Chicago Press:
315-347.
[23] Gruber, J. and Frakes, M. 2006. Does falling smoking lead to rising obesity? Journal
of Health Economics, 25(2): 183-197.
[24] Heckman, J., 1979. Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica, 47(1):
153-161.
[25] Heckman, J., and Robb, R., 1986. Alternative methods for solving the problem of
selection bias in evaluating the impact of treatments on outcomes. Drawing Inferences
from Self-selected Samples, 63-107.
[26] Hedenstrom, P., Malmberg, H., and Fridriksson, H. V., 1986. Reference values for lung
function tests in men: regression equations with smoking variables. Upsala Journal of
Medical Science, 91: 299-310.
[27] Lakdawalla, D., Philipson, P., and Bhattacharya, J., 2005. Welfare-enhancing technological change and the growth of obesity. American Economic Review, 95(2): 253-257.

34

[28] Lee. S., 2007. Endogeneity in quantile regression models: A control function approach.
Journal of Econometrics 141: 1131-1158.
[29] Manson, J. E., Colditz, G. A., Stampfer, M. J., Willett, W. C., Rosner, B., Monson,
R. R., Speizer, F. E., and Hennekens, C. H., 1990. A prospective study of obesity and
risk of coronary heart disease in women. New England Journal of Medicine, 322(13):
882-889.
[30] Mizoue, T., Ueda, R., Tokui, N., Hino, Y., and Yoshimura, T., 1998. Body mass decrease
after initial gain following smoking cessation. International Journal of Epidemiology,
27(6): 984-989.
[31] Mokdad, A. H., Bowman, B. A., Ford, E. S., Vinicor, F., Marks, J. S., and Koplan, J.
P., 2001. The continuing epidemics of obesity and diabetes in the united states. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 286(10): 1195-1200.
[32] Nonnemaker, J., Finkelstein, E., Engelen, E., Hoerger, T., and Farrelly, M., 2009. Have
efforts to reduce smoking really contributed to the obesity epidemic? Economic Inquiry,
47(2): 366-376.
[33] Ogden, C.L., Carroll, M.D., Kit B.K., and Flegal, K. M., 2014. Prevalence of childhood
and adult obesity in the united states, 2011-2012, Journal of the American Medical
Association, 311(8): 806-814.
[34] Ogden, C. and Carroll, M., 2010. Prevalence of overweight, obesity, and extreme obesity
among adults: United states, trends 1960–1962 through 2007–2008. Division of Health
and Nutrition Examination Surveys.
[35] Ogden, C., Carroll, M., Kit, B., and Flegal, K., 2012. Prevalence of obesity in the united
states, 2009–2010. NCHS data brief, no 82.
[36] O’Hara, P., Connett, J., Lee, W., Nides, M., Murray, R., and Wise, R., 1998. Early
and late weight gain following smoking cessation in the Lung Health Study. American
Journal of Epidemiology, 148(9): 821-830.
[37] O’Hara, P., Grill, J. Rigdon, M. A., Connett, J. E., Lauger, G. A.,and Johnston,J. J.,
1993. Design and results of the initial intervention program for the lung health study.
Preventive Medicine, 22(3): 304-315.
[38] Philipson, T. and Posner, R., 1999. The long-run growth in obesity as a function of
tehnological change. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7423.
[39] Pinkowish, M., 1999. Hand in glove: smoking cessation and weight gain. Patient Care,
33(2): 134.
[40] Rashad, I., Grossman, M., and Chou, S., 2006. The super size of america: An economic
estimation of body mass index and obesity in adults. Eastern Economic Journal, 32(1):
133-148.

35

[41] Rexrode, K. M., Hennekens, C. H., Willett, W. C., Colditz, G. A., Stampfer, M. J.,
Rich-Edwards, J. W., Speizer, F. E., and . Manson, J. E., 1997. A prospective study of
body mass index, weight change, and risk of stroke in women. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 277(19): 1539-1545.
[42] Robinson, P., 1988. Root-n-consistent semiparametric regression. Econometrica, 56(4):
931-954.
[43] Terza, J., Basu, A., and Rathouz, P., 2008. Two-Stage Residual Inclusion Estimation:
Addressing Endogeneity in Health Econometric Modeling. Journal of Health Economics,
27(3): 531-543.
[44] Travier, N., Agudo, A., May, A., et al., 2012. Longitudinal changes in weight in relation to smoking cessation in participants of the EPIC-PANACEA study. Preventive
Medicine, 54: 183-192.
[45] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1964. Smoking and health: report of
the advisory committee of the surgeon general of the public health service. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National Center for Chronic
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health.
[46] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1990. The health benefits of smoking
cessation: A report of the surgeon general. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health.
[47] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2012. Health, united states, 2011:
with special feature on socioeconomic status and health. U.S. Hyattsville, MD: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
National Center for Health Statistics.
[48] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2014. The health consequences of
smoking—50 years of progress: A report of the surgeon general. Atlanta, GA: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health.
[49] Verardi, V. and Debarsy, N., 2012. Robinson’s square root of N consistent semiparametric regression estimator in Stata. The Stata Journal, 12(4): 726–735.
[50] Wang,Y. C., McPherson, K., Marsh, T., Gortmaker, S. L., and Brown, M., 2011. Health
and economic burden of the projected obesity trends in the USA and the UK. Lancet,
378(9793): 815-825.
[51] Wehby, G, and Courtemanche, C., 2012. The heterogeneity of the cigarette price effect
on body mass index. Journal of Health Economics, 31(5): 719-729.
36

[52] Williamson, D. F., Madans, J., Anda, R. F., Kleinman, J. C., Giovino, G. A., and
Byers, T., 1991. Smoking cessation and severity of weight gain in a national cohort.
New England Journal of Medicine, 324(11): 739-745.
[53] Zhao, Z. and Kaestner, R., 2010. Effects of Urban Sprawl on Obesity. Journal of Urban
Economics, 29(6): 779-787.

37

Table 1 – Summary Statistics
(Means, with Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
Variable
SI-A
SI-P
UC
Age
48.41
48.55
48.43
(6.84) (6.83) (6.80)
Cigarettes per Day
29.59
29.49
29.53
(14.08) (13.60) (14.11)
Carbon Monoxide
25.97
26.70
25.98
(13.47) (12.67) (12.66)
BMI
25.42
25.67
25.55
(3.91) (3.92) (3.92)
High School Degree
0.29
0.30
0.29
(0.45) (0.46) (0.45)
Some College
0.34
0.34
0.35
(0.47) (0.47) (0.47)
College Degree
0.22
0.22
0.24
(0.41) (0.42) (0.42)
Male
0.60*
0.64
0.64
(0.49) (0.48) (0.48)
Married
0.65
0.67
0.65
(0.47) (0.47) (0.47)
Observations
1961
1962
1964
*T-tests show that the mean is different from the SI-P
and UC means at the 5% level.

38

Table 2 – Parametric Regression Results
Short Run (BMI Year 1)
Long Run (BMI Year 5)
Quit
Cigarettes
CO
Average Average
Average
Quit
Cigarettes
CO
Panel A: Effects of Smoking Measures on BMI
OLS
1.295∗∗∗ -0.031∗∗∗ -0.032∗∗∗
2.299∗∗∗ -0.052∗∗∗ -0.060∗∗∗
(0.047)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.077)
(0.002)
(0.003)
[0.91]
[0.72]
[1.52]
[1.33]
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
IV
2.202
-0.052
-0.077
2.646
-0.065
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.148)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.285)
(0.007)
(0.011)
[1.52]
[1.71]
[1.91]
[1.81]
Hausman
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.211
0.047
0.030
Panel B: Effects of Treatment Dummies on Smoking Measures (First Stage of
SI-A
0.277∗∗∗ -11.952∗∗∗ -8.025∗∗∗
0.206∗∗∗ -9.092∗∗∗
(0.013)
(0.489)
(0.464)
(0.012)
(0.431)
SI-P
0.272∗∗∗ -11.390∗∗∗ -7.728∗∗∗
0.211∗∗∗ -8.874∗∗∗
(0.013)
(0.495)
(0.472)
(0.012)
(0.437)
F Statistic
320.6
371.1
190.3
227.8
284.3
N

5345

5344

5274

5446

IV)
-6.634∗∗∗
(0.416)
-6.380∗∗∗
(0.417)
163.6

4966

4517

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate
significance at the 0.1, 1, and 5 percent levels. For the non-binary smoking measures, the
implied average effect of quitting smoking is in brackets. The controls for education, gender,
marital status, age, and baseline BMI are included in all regressions.

SI-A
SI-P
N

Table 3 – Falsification Test Results
Short Run (BMI Year 1)
Long Run (BMI Year
Full
Quit=0 <25%
<25%
Full
Average <25%
Sample
Change Change
Sample Quit=0 Change
in Cigs. in CO
in Avg.
Cigs.
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗
0.596
0.278
0.038
-0.179
0.541
0.210
0.086
(0.048) (0.051) (0.075) (0.210)
(0.075) (0.082) (0.121)
0.614∗∗∗ 0.214∗∗∗ -0.016
-0.034
0.561∗∗∗ 0.252∗∗
-0.014
(0.049) (0.052) (0.077) (0.211)
(0.074) (0.084) (0.118)
5345
3812
1721
225
5446
2958
1379

See notes for Table 2.

39

5)
<25%
Change
in Avg.
CO
-0.368
(0.342)
0.204
(0.367)
211

Table 4 – Subsample Results for Age and Gender
(IV with Year 5 BMI Only)
Age
Gender
<45
45 to 54
≥55
Women
Men
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Average Cigarettes
-0.074
-0.066
-0.052
-0.091
-0.051∗∗∗
(0.014)
(0.010)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.008)
[2.21]
[1.98]
[1.45]
[2.45]
[1.56]
N
1514
2275
1177
1894
3072
Average CO

N

-0.093∗∗∗
(0.021)
[2.19]
1374

-0.083∗∗∗
(0.015)
[1.88]
2065

-0.069∗∗∗
(0.021)
[1.33]
1078

-0.101∗∗∗
(0.020)
[2.04]
1714

-0.069∗∗∗
(0.012)
[1.59]
2803

See notes from Table 2.

Table 5 – Subsample Results for Education and Marital Status
(IV with Year 5 BMI Only)
Education
Marital Status
No
Some
College
Married Unmarried
College
College Graduate
Average Cigarettes
-0.068∗∗∗ -0.065∗∗∗ -0.059∗∗∗
-0.065∗∗∗
-0.064∗∗∗
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.015)
[1.98]
[1.93]
[1.73]
[1.91]
[1.89]
N
2082
1722
1162
3522
1444
Average CO

N

-0.088∗∗∗
(0.016)
[1.83]
1895

-0.080∗∗∗
(0.021)
[1.82]
1555

See notes from Table 2.

40

-0.071∗∗∗
[0.019]
[1.64]
1067

-0.088∗∗∗
(0.012)
[1.93]
3220

-0.068∗∗∗
(0.022)
[1.50]
1297

Table 6 – Subsample Results for Baseline BMI
(IV with Year 5 BMI Only)
Lowest
Second
Third
Highest
Quartile
Quartlie
Quartile
Quartile
(≤22.7) (22.7-25.2) (25.2-27.9) (>27.9)
Average Cigarettes
-0.088∗∗∗ -0.063∗∗∗
-0.059∗∗∗ -0.054∗∗∗
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.016)
[2.50]
[1.83]
[1.75]
[1.65]
N
1,262
1,278
1,215
1,211
Average CO

N

-0.113∗∗∗
(0.022)
[2.52]
1,147

-0.080∗∗∗
(0.018)
[1.71]
1,173

-0.075∗∗∗
(0.022)
[1.60]
1,100

-0.069∗∗∗
(0.024)
[1.56]
1,097

See notes from Table 2.

Table 7 – Comparison of Associations Between Smoking and BMI in Different
NHIS Samples
(OLS Results Only)
1990-1994 2009-2013 1990-1994 1990-1994
White
White
Non-White
White
Age 35-64 Age 35-64 Age 35-64
Age Not
35-64
Cigarettes
-0.038∗∗∗
-0.061∗∗∗
-0.059∗∗∗
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.0 05)
(0.007)
(0.002)
[0.80]
[0.91]
[0.79]
[0.68]
N
51253
53136
10114
60424
Notes: The controls for education, gender, marital status, and age are
included in all regressions. NHIS sampling weights are used. See other
notes from Table 2.

Table 8 – Reconciling Our Results with those of EQ
(IV with Year 5 BMI Only)
Sustained Average Average
Average
Quit (EQ)
Quit
Cigarettes
CO
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Smoking Variable
3.196
2.655
-0.063
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.736)
(0.605)
(0.015)
(0.021)
[1.84]
[1.58]
N
5446
5446
4966
4517
Notes: No control variables are included. See other notes for Table 2.

41

Cigarettes per Day
10 15 20 25 30

Percent Smoking in Sample
.6 .7 .8 .9 1

Figure 1: Changes Over Time in BMI and Smoking for Treatment and Control
Groups

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

Year
Control

SI_P

Control

4

5

SI_P

SI_A
BMI
25.5 26 26.5 27 27.5

SI_A
Carbon Monoxide Level
16 18 20 22 24 26

3
Year

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

Year
Control

3

4

Year
SI_P

Control

SI_A

SI_A

42

SI_P

5

24

25

BMI
26

27

28

Figure 2: Estimated Short-Run Effect of Cigarettes Per Day on BMI from
Semi-Parametric Model

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day
95% CI

40

Predicted BMI

43

50

25

26

BMI
27

28

29

Figure 3: Estimated Short-Run Effect of CO Level on BMI from
Semi-Parametric Model

0

10

20
30
Cotinine Level
95% CI

40

Predicted BMI

44

50

25

26

27

28

29

Figure 4: Estimated Long-Run Effect of Simple Average Cigarettes Per Day on
BMI from Semi-Parametric Model

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day
95% CI

40

Predicted BMI

45

50

25

26

27

28

29

30

Figure 5: Estimated Long-Run Effect of Simple Average CO on BMI from
Semi-Parametric Model

0

10

20
30
Avg. CO Level
95% CI

40

Predicted BMI

46

50

Appendix Table 1 – Sensitivity of Estimates to Different BMI Depreciation
Rates
(IV With Year 5 BMI Only)
Long Run (BMI Year 5)
Average Average
Average
Quit
Cigarettes
CO
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
δ=0
2.646
-0.065
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.285)
(0.007)
(0.011)
[1.91]
[1.81]
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
δ = 0.05
2.675
-0.066
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.288)
(0.007)
(0.011)
[1.94]
[1.83]
δ = 0.1
2.706∗∗∗ -0.067∗∗∗ -0.084∗∗∗
(0.291)
(0.007)
(0.011)
[1.97]
[1.86]
δ = 0.15
2.738∗∗∗ -0.068∗∗∗ -0.086∗∗∗
(0.294)
(0.008)
(0.011)
[2.00]
[1.89]
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
δ = 0.2
2.772
-0.069
-0.088∗∗∗
(0.297)
(0.008)
(0.011)
[2.03]
[1.93]
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
δ = 0.25
2.808
-0.070
-0.089∗∗∗
(0.300)
(0.008)
(0.011)
[2.07]
[1.96]
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
δ = 0.30
2.844
-0.072
-0.091∗∗∗
(0.304)
(0.008)
(0.012)
[2.10]
[2.00]
N
5446
4966
4517
See notes for Table 2.

47

Appendix Table 2 – Summary Statistics for Sample Quit=0 (Short Run)
(Means, with Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
Variable
SI-A
SI-P
UC
Age
48.22
48.31
48.45
(6.99) (6.84) (6.80)
Cigarettes per Day
30.19
29.98
29.53
(13.59) (13.59) (14.11)
Carbon Monoxide
27.21
30.18
27.62
(9.72) (13.97) (12.87)
BMI
25.30
25.55
25.50
(3.88) (3.98) (3.89)
High School Degree
0.32
0.31
0.29
(0.47) (0.46) (0.46)
Some College
0.36
0.35
0.35
(0.48) (0.48) (0.48)
College Degree
0.19*
0.21*
0.24
(0.39) (0.41) (0.43)
Male
0.60*
0.63
0.64
(0.49) (0.48) (0.48)
Married
0.63
0.66
0.65
(0.48) (0.47) (0.48)
Observations
1272
1283
1780
* indicate that T-tests show that the mean is different
from the UC mean at the 5% level.

48

Appendix Table 3 – Summary Statistics for Sample < 25% Change in Cigs.
(Short Run)
(Means, with Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
Variable
SI-A
SI-P
UC
Age
47.22*
48.06
48.57
(7.33) (6.68) (6.82)
Cigarettes per Day
30.28
30.17
30.83
(12.55) (12.64) (12.43)
Carbon Monoxide
27.21
30.18
27.62
(9.72) (13.97) (12.87)
BMI
25.07
25.32
25.48
(3.80) (3.82) (3.76)
High School Degree
0.33
0.32
0.30
(0.47) (0.47) (0.46)
Some College
0.34
0.37
0.35
(0.47) (0.48) (0.48)
College Degree
0.21
0.19
0.21
(0.41) (0.39) (0.41)
Male
0.58*
0.62
0.66
(0.49) (0.49) (0.48)
Married
0.58*
0.64
0.67
(0.49) (0.48) (0.47)
Observations
395
429
995
* indicates that T-tests show that the mean is different
from the UC mean at the 5% level.

49

Appendix Table 4 – Summary Statistics for Sample < 25% Change in CO
(Short Run)
(Means, with Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
Variable
SI-A
SI-P
UC
Age
49.37
48.89
48.67
(7.34) (6.61) (6.92)
Cigarettes per Day
27.05
31.41
28.96
(16.33) (14.14) (14.28)
Carbon Monoxide
20.88*
24.11
26.78
(10.98) (10.36) (12.18)
BMI
25.15
25.53
25.95
(3.38) (4.25) (4.40)
High School Degree
0.31
0.29
0.29
(0.47) (0.46) (0.46)
Some College
0.42
0.39
0.43
(0.49) (0.49) (0.50)
College Degree
0.14
0.18
0.20
(0.35) (0.39) (0.40)
Male
0.53*
0.62
0.71
(0.50) (0.49) (0.45)
Married
0.75
0.62
0.71
(0.44) (0.49) (0.45)
Observations
59
66
101
* indicates that T-tests show that the mean is different
from the UC mean at the 5% level.

50

Appendix Table 5 – Summary Statistics for Sample Average Quit=0
(Means, with Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
Variable
SI-A
SI-P
UC
Age
47.97
48.17
48.25
(7.04) (6.83) (6.70)
Cigarettes per Day
30.69
30.70
30.68
(13.63) (13.66) (13.80)
Carbon Monoxide
28.29
27.62
26.28
(14.39) (12.52) (12.52)
BMI
25.25
25.49
25.42
(3.84) (3.98) (3.88)
High School Degree 0.34*
0.33
0.30
(0.47) (0.47) (0.46)
Some College
0.35
0.35
0.36
(0.48) (0.48) (0.48)
College Degree
0.17*
0.18*
0.23
(0.37) (0.38) (0.42)
Male
0.60
0.64
0.64
(0.49) (0.48) (0.48)
Married
0.62
0.65
0.65
(0.49) (0.48) (0.48)
Observations
916
935
1353
* indicates that T-tests show that the mean is different
from the UC mean at the 5% level.

51

Appendix Table 6 – Summary Statistics for Sample < 25% Change in Avg.
Cigs.
(Means, with Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
Variable
SI-A
SI-P
UC
Age
47.71
48.07
48.41
(7.26) (6.84) (6.82)
Cigarettes per Day
29.31
28.76
29.85
(11.98) (12.28) (11.87)
Carbon Monoxide
26.79
29.57
26.46
(11.06) (13.10) (12.43)
BMI
24.92
25.33
25.42
(4.01) (3.98) (3.84)
High School Degree
0.36
0.35
0.32
(0.48) (0.48) (0.47)
Some College
0.34
0.36
0.34
(0.48) (0.48) (0.48)
College Degree
0.18
0.18
0.20
(0.39) (0.38) (0.40)
Male
0.52+
0.60
0.64
(0.50) (0.49) (0.48)
Married
0.63*
0.67
0.69
(0.48) (0.47) (0.47)
Observations
313
348
736
* indicates that T-tests show that the mean is different
from the UC mean at the 5% level.
+
indicates that T-tests show that the mean is different
from the SI-P and UC mean at the 5% level.

52

Appendix Table 7 – Summary Statistics for Sample < 25% Change in Avg. CO
(Means, with Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
Variable
SI-A
SI-P
UC
Age
49.02
47.42
48.46
(6.73) (6.52) (6.89)
Cigarettes per Day
29.98
31.86
28.65
(13.20) (12.96) (13.29)
Carbon Monoxide
24.14
27.32
25.78
(10.80) (11.25) (9.19)
BMI
25.14
25.28
26.20
(3.66) (4.07) (4.33)
High School Degree
0.29
0.35
0.26
(0.46) (0.48) (0.44)
Some College
0.43
0.39x
0.36
(0.49) (0.49) (0.48)
College Degree
0.13
0.11*
0.25
(0.34) (0.31) (0.44)
Male
0.54*
0.61
0.70
(0.50) (0.49) (0.46)
Married
0.75
0.65
0.70
(0.44) (0.48) (0.45)
Observations
63
57
91
* indicates that T-tests show that the mean is different
from the UC mean at the 5% level.

53

Appendix Figure A1: Semi-Parametric Graphs of Long-Run Effects of Simple
Average Cigarettes per Day on BMI for Education and Age Subsamples

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

40

50

28
22

24

BMI
26

28
BMI
26
24
22

22

24

BMI
26

28

30

College Graduate

30

Some College

30

High School

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

50

Predicted BMI

20
30
40
Cigaretttes per Day

95% CI

50

Predicted BMI

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

40

50

Predicted BMI

30
22

24

BMI
26

28

30
28
24
22
10

10

Age: 55 and above

BMI
26

28
BMI
26
24
22
0

0

Age: 45 to 55

30

Age: Under 45

40

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

54

40

50

Predicted BMI

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

40

50

Predicted BMI

Appendix Figure 2: Semi-Parametric Graphs of Long-Run Effects of Simple
Average Cigarettes per Day on BMI for Gender and Marital Status Subsamples

BMI
24 25 26 27 28 29

Men

BMI
24 25 26 27 28 29

Women

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

40

50

0

10

Predicted BMI

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

50

Predicted BMI

24 25 26 27 28 29

Unmarried

24 25 26 27 28 29

Married

40

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

40

50

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

55

40

50

Predicted BMI

Appendix Figure A3: Semi-Parametric Graphs of Long-Run Effects of Simple
Average Cigarettes per Day on BMI for BMI Subsamples
24 25 26 27 28 29

BMI between 22.7-25.2

24 25 26 27 28 29

BMI less or equal 22.7

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

40

50

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

50

Predicted BMI

24 25 26 27 28 29

BMI above 27.9

24 25 26 27 28 29

BMI between 25.2-27.9

40

0

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

40

50

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
Cigarettes per Day

95% CI

56

40

50

Predicted BMI

Appendix Figure A4: Semi-Parametric Graphs of Long-Run Effects of Simple
Average CO on BMI for Education and Age Subsamples

0

10

20
30
Avg. CO Level

95% CI

40

50

30
24

26

28

30
28
26
24

24

26

28

30

32

College Graduate

32

Some College

32

High School

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
Avg. CO Level

95% CI

50

Predicted BMI

20
30
Avg. CO Level

95% CI

40

50

Predicted BMI

20
30
Avg. CO Level

95% CI

40

50

Predicted BMI

32
24

26

28

30

32
30
26
24
10

10

Age: 55 and Above

28

30
28
26
24
0

0

Age: 45 to 55

32

Age: Under 45

40

0

10

20
30
Avg. CO Level

95% CI

57

40

50

Predicted BMI

0

10

20
30
Avg. CO Level

95% CI

40

50

Predicted BMI

Appendix Figure A5: Semi-Parametric Graphs of Long-Run Effects of Simple
Average CO on BMI for Gender and Marital Status Subsamples
22 24 26 28 30

Men

22 24 26 28 30

Women

0

10

20
30
Avg. CO Level

95% CI

40

50

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
Avg. CO Level

95% CI

50

Predicted BMI

22 24 26 28 30

Unmarried

22 24 26 28 30

Married

40

0

10

20
30
CO Level

95% CI

40

50

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
CO Level

95% CI

58

40

50

Predicted BMI

Appendix Figure A6: Semi-Parametric Graphs of Long-Run Effects of Simple
Average Cigarettes per Day on BMI for BMI Subsamples

24 26 28 30 32

BMI between 22.7-25.2

24 26 28 30 32

BMI less or equal 22.7

0

10

20
30
CO Level

95% CI

40

50

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
CO Level

95% CI

50

Predicted BMI

24 26 28 30 32

BMI above 27.9

24 26 28 30 32

BMI between 25.2-27.9

40

0

10

20
30
CO Level

95% CI

40

50

0

Predicted BMI

10

20
30
CO Level

95% CI

59

40

50

Predicted BMI

