NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH
Alejandro Justiniano
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Andrea Tambalotti
Working Paper 21942
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21942

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016

We thank Aaron Kirkman for superb research assistance, Simon Gilchrist for useful comments, and
Atif Mian and Amir Sufi for kindly sharing their geocodes for the empirical analysis. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Chicago or New York, or the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Giorgio Primiceri is a consultant for the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and a research
visitor at the European Central Bank.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Simple Model of Subprime Borrowers and Credit Growth
Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti
NBER Working Paper No. 21942
January 2016
JEL No. E21,E44,G21
ABSTRACT
The surge in credit and house prices that preceded the Great Recession was particularly pronounced
in ZIP codes with a higher fraction of subprime borrowers (Mian and Sufi, 2009). We present a simple
model with prime and subprime borrowers distributed across geographic locations, which can reproduce
this stylized fact as a result of an expansion in the supply of credit. Due to their low income, subprime
households are constrained in their ability to meet interest payments and hence sustain debt. As a result,
when the supply of credit increases and interest rates fall, they take on disproportionately more debt
than their prime counterparts, who are not subject to that constraint.

Alejandro Justiniano
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
ajustiniano@frbchi.org
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
318 Andersen Hall
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
g-primiceri@northwestern.edu

Andrea Tambalotti
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Research and Statistics Group
33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
New York, NY 10045
a.tambalotti@gmail.com

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT
GROWTH
ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO, GIORGIO E. PRIMICERI, AND ANDREA TAMBALOTTI
Abstract. The surge in credit and house prices that preceded the Great Recession
was particularly pronounced in ZIP codes with a higher fraction of subprime borrowers
(Mian and Sufi, 2009). We present a simple model with prime and subprime borrowers
distributed across geographic locations, which can reproduce this stylized fact as a result
of an expansion in the supply of credit. Due to their low income, subprime households are
constrained in their ability to meet interest payments and hence sustain debt. As a result,
when the supply of credit increases and interest rates fall, they take on disproportionately
more debt than their prime counterparts, who are not subject to that constraint.

1. Introduction
During the boom that preceded the Great Recession, aggregate mortgage debt and house
prices surged in tandem across the United States, while interest rates fell. This sharp
increase in household borrowing, and in the house values that collateralized it, was also
characterized by a well-defined geographic pattern. As first documented by Mian and Sufi
(2009), both credit and house prices rose disproportionately in ZIP codes with a higher
percentage of “subprime” borrowers.
Figure 1.1 reproduces these stylized facts using micro data from the FRBNY Consumer
Credit Panel (CCP) and CoreLogic for over seven thousand ZIP codes, focusing on the
period between 2000 and 2006. The relationship between cumulative credit growth and
the share of subprime borrowers is illustrated in the left panel, where the slope of the
regression line is 0.3. This coeﬃcient implies that mortgage debt over this period grew by
30 percentage points more in a hypothetical ZIP code inhabited only by subprime borrowers,
compared to one inhabited only by prime borrowers. Similarly, the right panel of figure
Date: January 2016.
We thank Aaron Kirkman for superb research assistance, Simon Gilchrist for useful comments, and Atif
Mian and Amir Sufi for kindly sharing their geocodes for the empirical analysis. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Chicago, New York or the Federal Reserve System.
1

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH
House price growth & subprime across zipcodes

.5
0
-1

-.5

growth in house prices 2000-2006

.5
0
-.5
-1

growth in mortgage debt 2000-2006

1

1

Mortgage debt growth & subprime across zipcodes

2

-.5

0

.5

-.5

fraction of subprime borrowers in 1999
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax

0

.5

fraction of subprime borrowers in 1999
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax & CoreLogic Home Prices

Figure 1.1. Cumulative growth of mortgage debt and house prices between 2000
and 2006 plotted against the share of subprime borrowers, defined as those with an
Equifax Risk Score under 660 in 1999. The unit of observation is a ZIP code and
variables are in deviation from county fixed eﬀects and ZIP code level controls.

For further details on the regression line, see Table 1.

1.1 shows that the slope for the cumulative growth in house prices in the corresponding
regression is 0.35.1
The fact that aggregate debt rose and interest rates declined during this period points to
an expansion in the supply of credit as the ultimate driver of the boom. In Justiniano et al.
(2015b), we formalize this intuition through a simple general equilibrium model, in which
the expansion in credit supply is brought about by a relaxation of lending constraints, or
equivalently, of leverage restrictions on financial intermediaries. A progressive reduction in
these barriers to lending, which captures the explosion of securitization and of market-based
financial intermediation starting in the late 1990s, produces a credit boom in the model
that is consistent with four key aggregate stylized facts about the U.S. economy in the
early 2000s: the surge in house prices and in household debt, the stability of debt relative
to home values, and the fall in mortgage rates.
The contribution of this paper is to confront this same mechanism with the cross-sectional
evidence presented above. To do so, we extend the representative borrower model of Justiniano et al. (2015b) to include both prime and subprime borrowers, which we assume
are heterogeneously distributed across ZIP codes. We then subject a calibrated version of
this economy to a progressive relaxation of lending constraints that increases the supply
of credit, reducing interest rates from 5 to 2.5 percent, roughly as observed in the data
between 2000 and 2006.
1

Further details on the data underlying these figures are in the Appendix.

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

3

The main result of this experiment is that, in response to the expansion in credit supply,
the model closely reproduces the distribution of increases in mortgage debt and house
prices across ZIP codes described above. In particular, ZIP codes with a higher fraction of
subprime borrowers experience higher increases in both debt and house prices, with a slope
of approximately 0.25, remarkably close to the empirical slopes of 0.3 and 0.35 for debt and
house prices depicted in figure 1.1.2
The intuition for the more pronounced increase in debt among subprime borrowers is
fairly straightforward, and arguably realistic. Subprime households have low income, and
hence a limited capacity to aﬀord interest payments. This limit, in turn, constrains their
ability to borrow and hence the value of the house that they can purchase. In contrast,
prime households are richer and only subject to a collateral constraint that limits their
borrowing to a fraction of the value of their real estate.
As a result of this asymmetry, the two types of households respond diﬀerently to the fall in
interest rates and the rise in house prices that are triggered by the expansion in credit supply.
Prime households’ collateral constraint slackens as a function of the equilibrium increase in
the value of real estate, driving the increase in their debt. Instead, subprime households
get a direct boost to their ability to borrow from the fall in the interest rate, which makes
bigger mortgages aﬀordable for them, driving up their housing demand. In equilibrium, this
latter eﬀect is always larger, leading to more debt accumulation by subprime borrowers,
and to larger house price increases in areas in which those borrowers are more concentrated.
In terms of the empirical evidence that motivates the analysis, our paper is related to the
large literature on the evolution of debt, house prices and other macroeconomic variables
across the United States before and after the recent financial crisis, which was pioneered by
Mian and Sufi (2009) and Mian and Sufi (2011) (e.g. Di Maggio and Kermani, 2014; Favara
and Imbs, 2012; Ferreira and Gyourko, 2015; Foote et al., 2012; Mian et al., 2013; Mian and
Sufi, 2014). Recently, the implications of their ZIP code level evidence for the trajectories of
individual debt across the credit score spectrum have been called into question by Adelino
et al. (2015a and 2015b) and Albanesi et al. (2016), but re-asserted in Mian and Sufi
(2015a and 2015b). Since we confront our model directly with evidence at the ZIP code,

2

In the model, this slope is the same for debt and house prices, since borrowing is limited to a constant
fraction of the value of real estate, whose supply is constant. As a result, debt and house prices move one
to one in equilibrium.

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

4

rather than at the individual level, our conclusions should be robust to the resolution of
this debate.
In terms of theory, this paper is related to a fast growing literature that has developed
general equilibrium frameworks to study the causes and consequences of the boom and
bust in credit and house prices over the last decade (e.g. Favilukis et al., 2013, Kermani,
2012, Justiniano et al., 2014, 2015a and 2015b, Kehoe et al., 2014, Berger et al., 2015,
Greenwald, 2015, Kaplan et al., 2016). Among these papers, perhaps the closest in spirit
to ours is Midrigan and Philippon (2011), who also propose a model with an explicit
geographic structure. The most notable diﬀerence is that they emphasize the role of housing
in facilitating transactions and hence non-durable consumption. On the contrary, we focus
on how the relaxation of lending constraints lowers interest rates and boosts both house
prices and mortgage debt.
2. A Simple Model with Subprime Borrowers
This section presents a simple macroeconomic framework to address the cross-sectional
facts discussed in the introduction. The model features impatient borrowers and more patient lenders. Lenders are the same as in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2015b,
henceforth JPT), except that for simplicity we assume here that they do not own houses.
Lenders have a discount factor

l

and face a lending limit, denoted by L̄. This restriction

on the ability of savers to extend credit captures a variety of implicit and explicit regulatory, institutional and technological constraints that hamper the free flow of funds towards
mortgage borrowers, as discussed at length in JPT.
2.1. Prime and subprime borrowers. To address the cross-sectional evidence presented
in the introduction, we introduce a distinction between two sets of borrowers, prime (p) and
subprime (s). Both have a discount factor

<

l,

but the latter are poorer. In the data,

subprime borrowers are usually identified by their low credit score. For example, Mian and
Sufi (2009) set this threshold at a FICO score of 660. Credit scores, which are primarily
designed to capture risk of default, depend on a person’s credit history, and hence are
correlated with the level and volatility of individual income. Here, we base the distinction
between prime and subprime borrowers on their level of income alone, both for simplicity,
and because this characteristic correlates strongly with the credit score (e.g. Mayer and
Pence, 2009, Mian and Sufi, 2009).

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

5

Borrowers are distributed across geographic areas, say ZIP codes, which are indexed by
the fraction ↵ of subprime households that live there. Households in these locations borrow
from a representative national (or international) lender at interest rate Rt , using houses
as collateral. They can trade houses within a ZIP code, but not across them, and they
cannot migrate. In the model, some equilibrium prices and allocations depend on ↵, but
we explicitly introduce this dependence only at a later stage, to streamline the notation.
In each location, representative borrower j = {p, s} maximizes utility
E0

1
X

t

[cj,t + v (hj,t )] ,

t=0

where cj,t denotes consumption of non-durable goods, and v (hj,t ) is the utility of the service
flow derived from a stock of houses hj,t owned at the beginning of the period. Households
purchase new houses from local house producers, who receive an endowment of houses
that is just enough to cover depreciation in that area, leaving the overall supply of houses
fixed at h̄. House producers sell this endowment to households and simply consume the
proceedings.
Assuming that utility is linear in non-durable consumption, as in JPT, helps to obtain
clean analytical solutions, without compromising the model’s basic mechanisms. However,
here we accompany this simplifying assumption with the explicit consideration that consumption cannot fall below a subsistence level c, i.e.
cj,t

c.

If we ignored this constraint, which is usually enforced at zero by suitable Inada conditions,
consumption could become very low or negative, depending on the level of income. As
shown below, this lower bound on consumption eﬀectively imposes a maximum coverage
ratio—a limit on the amount of debt-service payments that low-income borrowers can aﬀord
at a given interest rate.
Utility maximization is subject to the flow budget constraint
cj,t + pt [hj,t+1
where

(1

) hj,t ] + Rt

1 Dj,t 1

 yj,t + Dj,t ,

is the depreciation rate of houses, pt is their price in terms of the consumption

good, and Dj,t is the amount of one-period debt accumulated by the end of period t, and

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

6

carried into period t + 1, with gross interest rate Rt . yj,t is an exogenous endowment of
consumption goods, which is lower for subprime borrowers, so that ys,t < yp,t .
Finally, borrowers’ decisions are subject to a collateral constraint a la Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997), which limits debt to a fraction ✓ of the value of the housing stock they own,
(2.1)

Dj,t  ✓pt hj,t+1,

where ✓ is the maximum allowed loan-to-value ratio. This ratio could in principle be diﬀerent for prime and subprime borrowers, but we will abstract from this source of heterogeneity
here.

2.2. Steady-state equilibria. The steady state of the model presented in the previous
section depends on the parameter configuration, which determines the constraints that
bind in equilibrium. For instance, when the income of both households is high enough with
respect to the subsistence point c, the minimum consumption constraint does not bind. In
this case, the model’s equilibria are the same as those studied in JPT, with no distinction
between prime and subprime borrowers. On the contrary, prime and subprime borrowers
behave diﬀerently when the consumption constraint binds for one of the two groups. This
is the interesting case developed in what follows. In particular, we will assume that the
income of subprime borrowers, ys , is low enough to push their consumption against the
subsistence point, while prime borrowers are always away from this constraint.
Another important parameter in determining the model’s steady state is L̄, which determines the tightness of lending constraints. If L̄ is very low, making lending constraints
tight, the supply of credit is not suﬃcient to satisfy the demand. On the contrary, if L̄ is
very high, households can borrow up to their collateral limit, making lending constraints
irrelevant. As shown in JPT, the most interesting equilibria are those corresponding to
intermediate values of L̄, where both lending and borrowing constraints bind.
In what follows, we characterize the model’s steady state analytically in the region in
which a) the income of subprime borrowers, ys , is low enough to push their consumption
against the subsistence point, b) prime borrowers are always away from this constraint, and
c) both lending and borrowing constraints bind.
First, if the borrowing constraint is binding for any agent, it must be binding for both
subprime and prime borrowers, since their consumption Euler equations are identical due

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

7

to the assumption of linear utility in consumption. Therefore we have
(2.2)

Dp = ✓p (↵) hp (↵)

(2.3)

Ds = ✓p (↵) hs (↵) ,

where the dependence of certain variables on ↵ in equilibrium is now made explicit. Moreover, the budget constraint of the subprime agents, together with cs = c, implies
(2.4)

Ds =

ys

c
R

p (↵) hs (↵)
.
1

Although this equation is derived under stylized assumptions, it captures quite literally
the idea that poor, subprime households are likely to be in a “corner.” Their borrowing
is limited by the present discounted value of their disposable income, once they have met
the subsistence level of consumption and replaced the depreciated portion of their house.
Multiplying both sides by R

1 makes clear that (2.4) represents a coverage limit on

mortgage obligations, restricting the amount of debt that a borrower can take on as a
function of the income at her disposal to service the debt. This restriction is similar to that
assumed by Gelain et al. (2013) or Greenwald (2015).
Equation (2.4), together with the binding collateral constraint (2.3), implies the following
housing demand equation for subprime households
p (↵) =

ys c
(R 1) ✓ +

·

1
,
hs (↵)

from which we see that their housing expenditure is limited by their ability to make mortgage payments, and hence to take on leverage.
In contrast, prime households, whose minimum consumption constraint does not bind,
price housing according to a fairly standard Euler equation, adjusted for the eﬀect of the
binding borrowing constraint. Assuming v (h) =

ln h, the steady state pricing equation

for prime borrowers is
p (↵) =

1

✓µ

(1

)

hp (↵)

,

where µ is the multiplier on the collateral constraint.3 With the marginal utility of consumption normalized to one, /hp is the marginal rate of substitution between housing and
3In equilibrium this multiplier is the same for p and s agents, which is why there is no subscript.

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

8

non-durable consumption for prime households. Therefore, their valuation of housing is
the present discounted value of this MRS, where the discount is adjusted by a collateral
“premium” ✓µ, which depends on the maximum allowed leverage (✓), and on the tightness
of the borrowing constraint (µ).
Together with housing market clearing in each ZIP code, ↵hs (↵) + (1
the two housing demand equations yield

ys c
p (↵) = ↵
+ (1
(R 1) ✓ +

↵)

1

µ✓

(1

)

↵) hp (↵) = h̄,

1
,
h̄

from which we see that house prices are a weighted average of the valuations of prime and
subprime households, making them a function of the share of the latter in each ZIP code.4
Similarly, total debt in each ZIP code is
D (↵) = ↵Ds + (1

↵) Dp = ✓p (↵) h̄,

and therefore also depends on the share of subprime households in that area, through its
eﬀect on house prices.
Since subprime borrowers spend less in housing than their prime counterparts, housing
expenditure, house prices and mortgage debt are lower in areas with a higher share of
subprime households. However, a relaxation of credit supply that lowers interest rates
directly reduces mortgage payments for subprime households, allowing them to expand
their borrowing and house purchases more than prime households. Therefore, home prices
and debt will grow more in areas with a higher fraction of subprime borrowers when interest
rates fall, despite starting from a lower level. The next section studies this cross-sectional
response of the economy to a relaxation of lending constraints in a calibrated version of the
model.
3. An Increase in Credit Supply
In this section, we parametrize the model and study quantitatively the response of house
prices and household debt to an outward shift in credit supply, due to a slackening of the
lending constraint L̄. The main result of this experiment is a more pronounced increase in
home values and mortgage debt in ZIP codes with a larger share of subprime borrowers, to
an extent very similar to that documented in the introduction.
4The results would not change if h̄ were ZIP code specific.

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

9

3.1. Parameter values. The quarterly calibration of the model is based on U.S. macro
and micro targets. The economy’s initial steady state is characterized by tight lending
constraints, implying that mortgage rates are equal to 1/ . Hence, we set

= 0.9879 to

match the 5-percent average value of real mortgage rates in the 1990s, as in JPT. When
lending constraints no longer bind, following the rise in L̄, interest rates switch to being
pinned down by the discount factor of the lenders. Therefore, we choose

l

= 0.9938 to

match the approximate 2.5-percent decline in mortgage rates experienced in the first half
of the 2000s.
The depreciation rate of houses ( ) is set equal to 0.003, based on the NIPA Fixed Asset
Tables. The calibration of the loan-to-value ratio (✓) is based on the 1992, 1995 and 1998
rounds of the Survey of Consumer Finances, a triennial statistical survey of the balance
sheet of US families. We identify “borrowers” in these data as those households who own
a house and have little liquid financial assets (Kaplan and Violante, 2014). Their average
ratio of debt to real estate is 0.43, which is the value used for ✓.5
Finally, the composite parameter
If

ys c

ys c

is key for the quantitative properties of the model.

is large, prime and subprime borrowers are identical, and the model implies the same

response of mortgage debt across geographic areas during the housing boom. in contrast,
the smaller is

ys c

, the larger the region of the parameter space in which subprime borrowers

are constrained by their income, and hence the stronger their response to a credit supply
expansion that reduces interest rates. We calibrate

ys c

to match the relative mortgage

debt of the average subprime and prime borrowers in the CCP. In this dataset, we identify
subprime borrowers as those individuals with a Risk Score less than or equal to 660 in
1999, which is the earliest year available. This criterion classifies 36 percent of borrowers as
subprime.6 Based on these data, the ratio between mortgage debt of the average subprime
and prime borrower in 1999 is 0.74, which is our target to set

ys c

.

3.2. The experiment. Given these parameter values, we study the eﬀects of a progressive
relaxation of the lending constraint, which moves the economy from a steady state with high
mortgage rates, low debt and low house prices circa 2000, to one with low mortgage rates,
high debt and high house prices around 2006. As shown in JPT, this experiment captures
5An alternative, simpler way to identify the borrowers is as those individuals with a mortgage.

This
alternative definition produces a very similar calibration of ✓ = 0.4.
6The Equifax credit score (Risk Score) covers the range 280 to 850, similar, but not identical to the wellknown FICO score (350-850).

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

10

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Fraction of subprime borrowers (α)

Figure 3.1. Model-implied cumulative credit and house price growth as a function of the share of subprime borrowers in a geographic area.

the main aggregate dimensions of the housing boom. The question that we ask in this
section is if it can also reproduce the cross-sectional evidence presented in the introduction.
The premise of this exercise is that at the end of the 1990s the U.S. economy was
constrained by a limited supply of credit. In this initial steady state, we set L̄ so that
the lending constraint is binding and the interest rate is equal to

1

, as in JPT.7 We then

increase L̄ until the economy reaches a new steady state in which the lending constraint is
not binding, and, consequently, the interest rate falls to

1
l

. This reduction in the interest

rate enhances the ability of both types of borrowers to take on debt, but at diﬀerent rates.
Figure 3.1 plots the model-implied percentage increase in household debt in a given ZIP
code associated with the move from the initial to the final steady state, as a function of the
fraction ↵ of subprime borrowers in that ZIP code. The figure shows that mortgage debt,
and hence home values, which in the model move together due to the binding collateral
constraint, grow more in locations with a higher share of subprime borrowers, as in the
data.
Quantitatively, we assess the ability of the model to reproduce the cross-sectional evidence along several dimensions. First, the model implies that the typical subprime and
7More precisely, if L̄ is too low, the supply of credit is not suﬃcient to satisfy the demand, requiring a

rationing rule to split the available funds between the two types of borrowers. To avoid this complication,
in the initial steady state we set L̄ to the minimum value that does not require the use of a rationing rule.
In fact, a reasonable rationing rule would imply that credit is extended to prime borrowers first. In this
case, therefore, it would follow quite mechanically that an expansion in credit supply generates a larger
increase in debt for the subprime borrowers, thereby strengthening our results.

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

11

prime borrowers should experience an increase in debt of approximately 46 and 21 percent,
respectively. These values can be read on the vertical axis in figure 3.1 at ↵ = 1 (the ZIP
code in which all borrowers are subprime ) and ↵ = 0 (the ZIP code in which all borrowers
are prime). In the CCP, the percentage increase in real mortgage balances of the average
subprime and prime borrowers between 2000 and 2006 is 62 and 39 percent respectively.
Therefore, the model is able to generate about two thirds of the observed increase in debt
for the two classes of borrowers. In relative terms, however, the model reproduces the data
almost exactly. In the initial steady state, the relative debt of subprime to prime borrowers
is calibrated to 74 percent. It rises to 90 percent in the final steady state, compared to 87
percent in the data in 2006.
Second, we compare the slope of the curve in figure 3.1 to those of the regression lines
in figure 1.1. Column A in table 1 reports a coeﬃcient of 0.3 when regressing cumulative
mortgage credit growth between 2000 and 2006 on the share of subprime borrowers across
ZIP codes.8 This slope is virtually identical to that of the curve obtained from the model,
which is close to a straight line.
Finally, in the model the percentage increase in credit when moving from one steady
state to the other is equal to that in home values . To test this implication, column B in
table 1 displays the regression coeﬃcient of ZIP code level house price growth between 2000
and 2006 from CoreLogic on the same share of subprime borrowers as before. The slope of
this relationship (0.35) is quite close to the 0.3 estimated for credit growth, suggesting that
in the data, as in the model, debt and house prices grew closely together in the cross-section
during the boom.

4. Conclusion
As documented by Mian and Sufi (2009), house prices and mortgage debt between 2002
and 2005 surged more in ZIP codes with a higher concentration of subprime borrowers.
We presented a simple model that is consistent with this empirical evidence, which we also
extend to the period between 2000 and 2006, to cover a larger swath of the boom.
8This slope is very close to that estimated by Mian and Sufi (2009) in similar regressions, for instance

in the fifth column of their table V, once we take into account that they only look at the period 2002
to 2005 and that their left-hand-side variable is annualized. Since Mian and Sufi (2009) use the share of
subprime borrowers in 1996, this similarity should ameliorate concerns of possible reverse causality due to,
say, gentrification dynamics (Guerrieri et al., 2013).

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

A
Mortgage debt
growth 2000-06

B
House price
growth 2000-06

share of subprime
borrowers in 1999

0.30
(0.06)

0.35
(0.09)

county fixed-eﬀects
and ZIP-level controls

yes

yes

# observations

7,005

7,005

12

Table 1. Coeﬃcient estimates of a regression of mortgage debt and house price
growth from 2000 to 2006 on the share of subprime borrowers in 1999. The unit
of observation is a ZIP code, and observations are weighted by population in 2000.
ZIP code level controls include the growth rate of employment, annual payroll and
number of establishments between 2000 and 2006. Standard errors are clustered
at the MSA level. Source: FRBNY CCP/Equifax, CoreLogic and authors’ calculations.

The key ingredient of the model is a distinction between two types of borrowers, based on
their income level. Due to the presence of a minimum consumption level, poorer borrowers
face an upper limit on the mortgage payments they can aﬀord. For this reason, we label
them “subprime”. In this environment, an expansion in credit supply that lowers mortgage
rates enhances all borrowers’ ability to acquire additional debt. However, the eﬀect is
larger for subprime borrowers, since it directly lowers their mortgage payments, hence
slackening the coverage ratio constraint that they are eﬀectively subject to. A calibration
using micro data from the CCP and the Survey of Consumer Finances shows that the model
is quantitatively consistent with the evidence about the higher growth of debt and house
prices in ZIP codes with relatively more subprime borrowers.

Appendix A. Data description
Our empirical work and model calibration are based on the FRBNY Consumer Credit
Panel (CCP), which is a quarterly dataset on household liabilities based on consumer credit
data from Equifax. The CCP provides detailed panel data on a 5% representative sample
of all individuals with a credit history in the U.S., from 1999 through the present. Our

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

13

measure of mortgage debt is the variable “All Mortgage Balances,” which captures the sum
of first, second, third, and higher outstanding mortgage obligations.9
For the purpose of sorting borrowers into prime and subprime, the sample is restricted
to individuals observed continuously for all quarters between 1999 and 2006, without a
missing observation in their credit score. This restriction results in a panel of roughly
7.7 million individuals, for a total of about 246 million individual-quarter observations.
Subprime borrowers are defined as those with an average credit score of less than 660 in
1999. They represent 36 percent of the panel. This definition is similar to that adopted by
Mian and Sufi (2009), although they identify subprime borrowers using their 1996 credit
score. Having classified borrowers, we compute the growth rates of mortgage debt of the
average subprime and prime borrower between 2000 and 2006, and transform them in real
terms by subtracting realized inflation from the CPI. This is how we obtain the 39 and 62
percent numbers reported in section 3.2.
For the data underlying figure 1.1 and table 1, we work with all primary borrowers in
the CCP without a missing credit score and ZIP code for the years 1999, 2000 and 2006.
For each ZIP code, we construct the growth rate of mortgage debt between 2000 and 2006
by dividing total mortgage balances by the number of individuals with a positive balance.
Data on house prices at the ZIP-code level are from CoreLogic. Data on employment,
annual payroll and number of establishments at the ZIP-code level are from the County
Business Patterns Census database. Using the geocodes of Mian and Sufi (2009), we match
data on house prices and mortgage debt for 7,005 ZIP codes and 301 counties that account
for two thirds of all borrowers in 2000.

References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2015a): “Loan Originations and Defaults in the
Mortgage Crisis: Further Evidence,” NBER Working Papers 21320, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
——— (2015b): “Loan Originations and Defaults in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle
Class,” NBER Working Papers 20848, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
9In the CCP, second or third mortgages are sometimes misclassified as home equity debt, and vice versa.

For this reason, we also construct an alternative comprehensive mortgage measure that adds to “First
Mortgage Balances” all “Home Equity Installment and Revolving Debt.” Results with this alternative series
are similar to our baseline and available upon request.

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

14

Albanesi, S., G. De Giorgi, J. Nosal, and M. Ploenzke (2016): “Credit Growth and the
Financial Crisis: A New Narrative,” Mimeo, Ohio State University.
Berger, D., V. Guerrieri, G. Lorenzoni, and J. Vavra (2015): “House Prices and Consumer
Spending,” Mimeo, Northwestern University.
Di Maggio, M. and A. Kermani (2014): “Credit-Induced Boom and Bust,” Mimeo, Columbia
University.
Favara, G. and J. Imbs (2012): “Credit Supply and the Price of Housing,” Mimeo, Boad of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. V. Nieuwerburgh (2013): “The Macroecononomic
Eﬀects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk Sharing in General Equilibrium,”
New York University, mimeo.
Ferreira, F. and J. Gyourko (2015): “A New Look at the U.S. Foreclosure Crisis: Panel Data
Evidence of Prime and Subprime Borrowers from 1997 to 2012,” NBER Working Papers 21261,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Foote, C. L., K. S. Gerardi, and P. S. Willen (2012): “Why Did So Many People Make So
Many Ex Post Bad Decisions? The Causes of the Foreclosure Crisis,” NBER Working Papers
18082, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Gelain, P., K. J. Lansing, and C. Mendicino (2013): “House Prices, Credit Growth, and
Excess Volatility: Implications for Monetary and Macroprudential Policy,” International Journal
of Central Banking, 9, 219–276.
Greenwald, D. L. (2015): “The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission,”
Mimeo, New York University.
Guerrieri, V., D. Hartley, and E. Hurst (2013): “Endogenous gentrification and housing
price dynamics,” Journal of Public Economics, 100, 45–60.
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2015a): “Household leveraging and deleveraging,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 18, 3–20.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2014): “The Eﬀects of the Saving and
Banking Glut on the U.S. Economy,” Journal of International Economics, 92, Supplement 1,
S52–S67.
——— (2015b): “Credit Supply and the Housing Boom,” Working Paper 20874, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. Violante (2016): “Consumption and House Prices in the
Great Recession: Model meets Evidence,” Mimeo, Princeton University.

A SIMPLE MODEL OF SUBPRIME BORROWERS AND CREDIT GROWTH

15

Kaplan, G. and G. Violante (2014): “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus
Payments,” Econometrica.
Kehoe, P., V. Midrigan, and E. Pastorino (2014): “Debt Constraints and Employment,”
Mimeo, New York University.
Kermani, A. (2012): “Cheap Credit, Collateral and the Boom-Bust Cycle,” Mimeo, University of
California.
Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 211–48.
Mayer, C. J. and K. Pence (2009): “Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to Whom?” in
Housing Markets and the Economy: Risk, Regulation, and Policy, ed. by E. L. Glaeser and J. M.
Quigley, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA.
Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013): “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the
Economic Slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1687–1726.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009): “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1449–1496.
——— (2011): “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US Household Leverage
Crisis,” American Economic Review, 101, 2132–56.
——— (2014): “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?” Mimeo, Princeton University.
——— (2015a): “Household Debt and Defaults from 2000 to 2010: Facts from Credit Bureau Data,”
Princeton University, mimeo.
Mian, A. R. and A. Sufi (2015b): “Fraudulent Income Overstatement on Mortgage Applications
during the Credit Expansion of 2002 to 2005,” NBER Working Papers 20947, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Inc.
Midrigan, V. and T. Philippon (2011): “Household Leverage and the Recession,” New York
University, mimeo.
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
E-mail address: ajustiniano@frbchi.org
Northwestern University, CEPR, and NBER
E-mail address: g-primiceri@northwestern.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
E-mail address: a.tambalotti@gmail.com

