                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SEPARATE AND UNEQUAL IN THE LABOR MARKET:
                    HUMAN CAPITAL AND THE JIM CROW WAGE GAP

                                        Celeste K. Carruthers
                                       Marianne H. Wanamaker

                                         Working Paper 21947
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21947


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




We thank William Collins, Robert Margo, Don Bruce, John Parman, Michael Kofoed, Price Fishback,
anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the University of Tennessee, the University of Pittsburgh,
the College of William and Mary, Harvard University, York University, the University of California-Davis,
the University of Florida, the University of California-Irvine, the 2013 Southern Economic Association
annual meetings, and the 2014 NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments and suggestions. Ye
Gu, Jim Sheffield, Mary Elizabeth Glenn, Andrew Moore, James England, III, and Nicholas Busko
provided outstanding research assistance. Funding for data collection was provided by the University
of Tennessee Office of Research. Additional support includes a grant from the Spencer Foundation,
grant number 201200064, and a grant from the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research
via the U.S.˛Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Evaluation, grant number 5 U01 PE000002-06. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein
are solely those of the authors and should not be construed as representing the opinion or policy of
the Spencer Foundation, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, any agency of the Federal
Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Celeste K. Carruthers and Marianne H. Wanamaker. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Separate and Unequal in the Labor Market: Human Capital and the Jim Crow Wage Gap
Celeste K. Carruthers and Marianne H. Wanamaker
NBER Working Paper No. 21947
January 2016
JEL No. I24,J15,J7,N32

                                              ABSTRACT

The gap between black and white earnings is a longstanding feature of the United States labor market.
Competing explanations attribute different weight to wage discrimination and access to human capital.
Using new data on local school quality, we find that human capital played a predominant role in determining
1940 wage and occupational status gaps in the South despite the effective disenfranchisement of blacks,
entrenched racial discrimination in civic life, and lack of federal employment protections. The 1940
conditional black-white wage gap coincides with the higher end of the range of estimates from the
post-Civil Rights era. We estimate that a truly “separate but equal” school system would have reduced
wage inequality by 40 - 51 percent.


Celeste K. Carruthers
Department of Economics
Center for Business and Economic Research
702 Stokely Management Center
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
carruthers@utk.edu

Marianne H. Wanamaker
Department of Economics
University of Tennessee
524 Stokely Management Center
Knoxville, TN 37996
and NBER
wanamaker@utk.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21947
1 Introduction
The American labor market has long exhibited a sizable gap in wages awarded to black
and white workers, motivating a large body of research devoted to disentangling the role
of human capital, or “pre-market,” factors from more structural labor market issues and,
chiefly, wage discrimination.1 This decomposition exercise has important policy implica-
tions. If pre-market skill gaps are largely responsible for pay differences, policy solutions
should prioritize disparities in human capital accumulation over direct labor market inter-
ventions. At the same time, if residual gaps unexplained by measurable human capital
can be confidently labeled discrimination, direct labor market interventions are apt. Isolat-
ing the contribution of pre-market factors also holds historic importance for understanding
the long-term consequences of segregation as well as the late 20th-century convergence of
black and white wages. Leading explanations for this convergence include declining wage
discrimination – and in particular, the effect of the 1964 Civil Rights Act – and the rise of
black public school quality and, in turn, black human capital.
       Detailed measures of individual skill are necessary in order to deconstruct the relative
importance of human capital versus wage discrimination. In this respect, literature on the
post-Civil Rights era has had the advantage of observing rich data on workers’ schooling,
aptitude, and earnings. We utilize recently developed historic data to extend the time series
of wage decomposition to the 1940 U.S. South, a setting renowned for racial discrimination
and disenfranchisement. In addition to hosting discriminatory mores in general, this time
period lacked employment protections for black workers.2 We answer two questions fun-
damental to understanding racial wage inequality early in the 20th century. How important
were human capital differences for racial labor market gaps in 1940? And how large was
   1
      See Lazear (1991); Oettinger (1996); Darity and Mason (1998); Altonji & Pierret (2001); Lang &
Manove (2011). Also see Lang & Lehmann (2012) for a more complete survey of the racial discrimina-
tion literature.
    2
      Our focus on the 1940 South is also appropriate for practical reasons. Importantly, the 1940 census is
the first to report individual earnings. The vast majority of black males resided in the South in 1940, and
regional wage gaps were still large in the early years of the Great Migration. Last, school quality metrics
for non-southern states with integrated schools are not reported by race, preventing us from approximating
race-specific human capital outside the South.



                                                     2
the corresponding conditional wage gap, including wage discrimination, in this pre-Civil
Rights era?
       The U.S. South in this period was characterized both by local control of public schools
and by separate and de jure unequal schools for black and white students. The result was
wide variation in school resources both across and within races.3 Consequently, an ade-
quate profile of individual human capital in 1940 should include educational attainment,
which is readily available for all adults in the 1940 census returns, as well as local infor-
mation on the quality of schooling available to black and white students. It is the latter
that has previously inhibited estimation of the conditional wage gap in this context. We
develop a new panel of county-by-race school quality statistics for each year between 1920
and 1940 for ten southern states. We use these data to assign young men in the 1940 pub-
lic use microsample (Ruggles et al., 2010) a school quality metric specific to their race,
age, and probable county of education. In addition to years of schooling and the quality of
available schooling, we utilize a known oddity in the World War II enlistment records to
impute Army General Classification Test (AGCT) scores for southern males in 1940 as a
third measure of human capital.
       We find that pre-market human capital disparities are the predominant determinant of
southern racial gaps in 1940 for a number of labor market outcomes. For young, employed
males in our sample, the age- and location-adjusted difference between black and white
wages in 1940 was a substantial 46.7 log points on an annual basis and 49.0 log points
per week worked. These gaps attenuate by 71 and 61 percent, to 13.7 and 19.1 log points,
respectively, when we condition on educational attainment and school quality. Differences
   3
     In the 1930 South, according to public reports of state education departments, annual spending per en-
rolled black pupil was typically $9, versus $61 in spending per white pupil. White school years measured 156
days, typically, whereas black term lengths were 20.5 percent shorter at 123 days (authors’ calculations using
county-level school resource data described in Section 3). Although school quality in the post-Reconstruction
South was relatively similar across races, and although Plessy v. Ferguson (163 U.S. 537 1896) was premised
on equal access to schooling, the erosion of black voter protections in the latter part of the 19th century re-
sulted in a parallel reduction in public support for black schools (Margo, 1990). Regional variation in local
control of schools and the tax base with which to fund schools led to wide within-race variance in education
resources across the South. Looking again to 1930, we find that per-pupil black expenditures had a standard
deviation of $6 (two-thirds of the mean) across counties and per-pupil white expenditures had a standard
deviation of $181 (nearly three times the mean). From 1910 through 1940, these differences in interracial
and intra-racial gaps in school quality converged and diverged at widely varying rates.


                                                      3
in educational attainment and differences in school quality account for similar proportions
of the attenuation. It does not appear that school quality measures are simply proxying
for local labor market discrimination. School quality per se had little effect on wages but,
rather, served to enhance returns to years of schooling, and we find little evidence of race-
dependent returns to school resources that would be indicative of school quality standing in
for local wage discrimination.4 When we impute standardized test scores for our sample,
the conditional annual earnings gap falls to 1 - 11 log points while the weekly wage gap
falls to 12 - 15 log points. At the same time, and echoing the previous literature (Wright,
2013), we find that conditional wage gaps within occupations were smaller (6.7 log points
annually and 15.1 log points per week worked). Human capital gaps had less bearing on
occupational status gaps than wage and income gaps, implicating occupational sorting by
race as one barrier to higher wages.
       These results highlight the predominant role of public sector discrimination, as opposed
to wage discrimination, in determining wage differences for black and white workers in
1940. We simulate counterfactual racial wage gaps under separate and equal school re-
sources within southern counties. Blacks were disproportionately located in areas with
weaker school funding overall, thus the mandate only partially closes the regional black-
white gap in average school quality. Still, the wage gap falls by 24 - 41 percent. When we
further allow educational attainment to be endogenous to school quality, the wage gap is
reduced by up to 51 percent.
       Our empirical design necessarily has limitations, two of which we highlight here. First,
in order to accurately assign school quality, we restrict our analysis to young men and test
for returns to human capital at the origin of the age-earnings profile. Results for older men
may differ (Smith, 1984; Smith & Welch, 1989; Carneiro et al., 2005). Second, although we
find little evidence of race-dependent returns to human capital (see Section 5), we cannot
completely rule out the possibility that human capital was endogenously determined in
anticipation of lower wages for blacks. That is, if black students expected to receive little
   4
    Throughout the paper, we eschew county and state fixed effects as they may be correlated with unob-
served discrimination. Still, we show in the appendix that results are robust to the inclusion of both county
and state fixed effects.


                                                     4
return to additional schooling or if local school authorities anticipated low returns to black
school quality and allocated resources accordingly, we underestimate the level and the
nuance of racial wage discrimination. Still, local decisions regarding school quality were
highly political and plausibly disassociated from anticipated labor market returns (Goldin,
2001; Cascio & Washington, 2013; Carruthers & Wanamaker, 2013, 2015). In cases where
gains in school quality were credibly exogenous (the Rosenwald school-building campaign
or women’s enfranchisement, for instance), educational attainment rose substantially in
response, and moreso for blacks than for whites (Aaronson & Mazumder, 2011; Kose et al.,
2015). In other words, educational attainment for blacks, although perhaps limited by
anticipated discrimination, was also limited by the supply of local education.
    Keeping these caveats in mind, the conditional wage gaps we estimate imply that dis-
crimination was only somewhat more crippling for racial wage equality in 1940 than it
was much later, when equal employment protections were in place. The discriminatory
preferences of white southerners were powerful in limiting black public school quality and
reducing the wages of young black men through the human capital channel. But they ap-
pear to have been less powerful in affecting outcomes through wage discrimination, at least
in the occupations in which we observe southern black males in 1940. These findings do
not rule out a role for federal employment policy interventions later in the century, but they
do highlight the vast potential for schooling equality to remediate unequal pay.


2    Literature on the Black-White Wage Gap
Ex ante, one might expect the unexplained portion of wage differentials to be greater in
1940 than that observed later in the century. When driven by discrimination, racially sepa-
rable wage equilibria depend on the number and size of discriminatory firms relative to the
group being discriminated against. The size of the wage gap is a function of the disutility
of employing workers in this group. Thus the gap is increasing in the prejudicial pref-
erences of the general population because it both increases the number of discriminatory




                                              5
employers and the disutility of employing black workers.5 In the period in question, exten-
sive discrimination was evident in racially segregated job listings and stark differences in
publicly-reported salaries for black and white teachers.6 Our analysis pre-dates the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and the associated employment and pay protections that outlawed la-
bor discrimination against black Americans. Evidence that racially discriminatory views
in the United States have declined over time7 gives rise to the idea that discrimination
plays a smaller role in the black-white wage gap than it once did (Fryer, 2011), though not
so small as to go undetected in modern surveys or randomized audit studies (Charles &
Guryan, 2008; Bertrand & Mullainathan, 2004).
       Still, economic historians have many times failed to detect racial wage discrimination
in the early part of the 20th century, observing that black and white workers received equal
pay within particular occupations, even in the U.S. South.8 But this literature stops short of
determining whether black and white workers across skill levels and occupations received
equal wages conditional on human capital,9 and is therefore not comparable to modern
estimates of wage discrimination. Largely due to the absence of data on workers’ schooling,
the empirical validity of equal pay for equally productive human capital prior to the Civil
Rights era remains unknown.
       For the modern era (after 1960 in this context), Table 1 presents a limited review of
papers measuring the contributions of schooling, school quality, experience, ability, and
family background to the overall wage gap. The second column of the table lists the data
source and cohorts used in each analysis. The third indicates which human capital variables
are included in the study, and the fourth indicates what percentage of the overall gap they
   5
      These implications are true both in Becker’s (1957) original framework and in adaptations to a search
model as discussed in Lang & Lehmann (2012).
    6
      See Goldin (1990). Across ten southern states in 1930, white (black) teacher salaries averaged $5.89
($2.55) per day in session. See Section 3 for sources and Margo (1984) for further discussion.
    7
      See Lang & Lehmann (2012), Figure 3, for evidence of a decline in prejudice measures after 1956. The
decline continues through the racially charged 1960s. To our knowledge, no analogous data for 1940 exist.
    8
      The evidence is particularly consistent prior to the 1920s (Fishback, 1989; Smith, 1984; Smith & Welch,
1989). Whatley & Wright (1994) and Wright (2013) cite evidence of a more substantial wage differential
for entry-level workers by 1937, a difference they attribute at least in part to a yawning racial gap in human
capital related to schooling. Another exception is a large within-occupation racial gap for black teachers
relative to whites (Margo, 1990).
    9
      Alternatively, “(un)equal rewards to otherwise identical workers” (Whatley & Wright, 1994).


                                                      6
explain. The fifth column reports the log conditional black-white gap. The overwhelm-
ing indication from this literature is that pre-market factors matter for determining wage
differences, and, in many cases, the wage gap potentially attributable to labor market dis-
crimination is minimal after controlling for these factors. Estimates from later decades of
the 20th century draw on measures of educational attainment and school quality, as well as
standardized test scores.10
       In evaluating the importance of measured human capital for labor market wages in
1940, this paper speaks to a broader literature on the causes of racial income convergence
over the 20th century. Margo (1986), Welch (1974), Smith (1984), and Smith & Welch
(1986, 1989) represent the earliest wave of research highlighting the rising quality and
quantity of black education as important drivers of change in the black-white earnings ra-
tio, but to date, direct tests of the impact of improving black school quality have relied
on state-level school quality measures or focused on a time period after employment pro-
tections were in place (Link & Ratledge, 1975; Link et al., 1976; Nechyba, 1990; Card
& Krueger, 1992a,b; Ashenfelter et al., 2006). Notably, Card & Krueger (1992b) find a
differential return to schooling across blacks and whites in the census which, in turn, can
be attributed directly to differences in state-level school quality metrics. They conclude
that 20 percent of the narrowing of the black-white earnings gap between cohorts born in
the 1920s and those born in the 1940s (measured between 1960 and 1980, in the midst
and wake of the civil rights movement) is attributable to rising school quality.11 This story
of steady, continuous change is countered by Heckman & Payner (1989) and Donohue &
Heckman (1991), who identify the Civil Rights era as a watershed in reducing entrenched
  10
      There are examples of standardized achievement microdata for particular states in the Jim Crow era, but
we do not know of multi-state pre-market test data that could be incorporated into 1940 census respondents’
human capital profile.
   11
      Several others have quantified the impact of school quality on earnings, per se, without a particular
focus on the black-white gap. For our period, the most relevant of these are Johnson & Stafford (1973),
Morgan & Sirageldin (1968), and Morgenstern (1973). Each use state-level data on school resources. Wachtel
(1975,1976) documents positive returns to school quality for a selected sample of individuals likely restricted
only to whites. See Betts (2010) for a summary of the literature on the effect of school quality on earnings.
See also Rizzuto & Wachtel (1980) for an estimate of the social rate of return to investments in school quality
for whites and blacks separately in the 1960 and 1970 census. Finally, see Orazem (1987) for evidence that
differences in district-level school characteristics were the primary driver of differences in both attendance
and student achievement test scores in Maryland between 1924 and 1938.


                                                      7
labor market discrimination that hampered black economic progress. Wage gains for black
Americans sharply deviated from underlying trends in the 1960s, implying that the federal
antidiscrimination policies of that time were more important than rising human capital.
         Finally, we note that a consistent feature of the literature is that estimated returns to
school quality differ depending on whether data are at the state, district, or school level.
The question of which level of aggregation is best in a standard wage model does not have
an obvious answer. A primary limitation of state-level would seem to be aggregation (at-
tenuation) bias discussed explicitly in Morgenstern (1973). Local school quality should do
a better job of characterizing school resources that were experienced by respondents. If
so, and if school quality is indeed a component of marketable human capital, local data
will explain more of the variation in individual wages. In other contexts, however, more
granular school quality indices do not necessarily increase the estimated returns to school-
ing (Betts, 2010; Hanushek et al., 1996).12 In the appendix we compare conditional wage
gaps derived from state-level and county-level school quality measures in our sample, con-
cluding on empirical grounds that county-level data are superior in this application. And
in practical terms, county-level data allow us to fully populate a distribution of normalized
school quality and capture non-linear returns to Jim Crow-era human capital.


3         Data
The public-use sample of the 1940 U.S. Census (Ruggles et al., 2010) is one of the ear-
liest available micro-level datasets on wages for a cross-section of the U.S. population.13
    12
      Quoting Betts (2010): “Most of the studies that find no link or a weak link between school inputs and
student outcomes measure school inputs at the level of the actual school attended; studies that do find a
strong effect typically measure school resources at the level of the state.” More generally, it is not obvious
that school-level metrics are the “correct” level of observation for this exercise as there may be endogenous
within-county household sorting.
   13
      There are precious few sources for labor market earnings other than the Census prior to the advent of the
National Longitudinal Surveys in 1966. Notable exceptions are the 1915 Iowa census (Goldin & Katz, 2000),
where perhaps 1 percent of respondents were black, and the NBER Thorndike-Hagen sample exploited by
Wachtel (1975,1976), where the sample is believed to be limited to white males. A 100% sample of the 1940
census has recently been made available to researchers, but several key variables have not been standardized
in accordance with IPUMS practice, limiting the dataset’s usefulness for this application. We utilize the 1%
public use sample in this paper.



                                                      8
Prior to 1940, labor market measures in census returns include occupation and industry of
employment, but no individual earnings data.
       Census enumerators recorded labor market wages but not non-wage income. Conse-
quently, almost all of the self-employed (including a substantial number of farmers and
farm tenants) do not report income in this sample. As such, we exclude individuals with-
out recorded earnings from our main results.14 Occupational score results are robust to
including some of these individuals, as we show in supplemental analyses discussed in the
appendix.15
       In addition to earnings from the census, we generate an occupational score for each
individual in the sample based on their 1940 reported occupation. Our constructed occu-
pational score variable is the average 1950 income, including non-wage earnings, among
white males for each reported occupation in the 1940 manuscripts, mapped to a three-digit
code.16 The occupational score is best thought of as a potential wage or an index of occupa-
tional standing that is comparable across races, ages, genders, and geographies, abstracting
from race-dependent occupational or regional sorting. Keeping this in mind, we are less
interested in the score’s cardinal properties, which are affected by the Great Compression
leading up to 1950 (Goldin & Margo, 1992), than its relative attenuation once we condition
on human capital.
       The 1940 census contains measures of the highest grade completed by each individual.
  14
      Farm laborers remain in the sample. We acknowledge that we are not modeling selection into wage-
earning occupations, although the appendix illustrates that human capital has a substantial effect on the
likelihood of farming employment. Elsewhere, the literature has identified larger wage gaps for skilled occu-
pations (Wright, 2013). Thus, excluding lower-skilled farmers from the analysis may lead us to overstate the
underlying black-white earnings gap. In the appendix, we perform a crude imputation of farmer wages as a
sensitivity test.
   15
      Another drawback of the 1940 census is that we cannot adequately measure payments-in-kind as part of
wages. This limitation is problematic given that there was substantial agricultural employment in this time
period, even after omitting farm owners and tenants without reported earnings. Payments-in-kind may have
been more prevalent for agricultural workers, and in particular, for black agricultural workers. Robustness
checks described in the appendix show that findings are insensitive to the exclusion of respondents with
more than $50 in non-wage earnings, which includes payments-in-kind as well as interest income and self-
employment income.
   16
      Again, we rely on Ruggles et al. (2010). We do not use the IPUMS-constructed “occscore” variable
contained in their data because it is calculated using all workers, regardless of race, and thus encompasses
wage discrimination.



                                                     9
Census enumerators were instructed to record the “highest full grade that the person has
successfully finished.” Despite this instruction, there is some concern that the question was
interpreted differently across races, especially for (predominantly older) black individuals
who were educated in ungraded schools (Margo, 1986). In that case, the census instructions
directed enumerators to record the number of years the person was in school.17 Our focus
on younger men in the data avoids much of this form of mismeasurement.18 We identify
working men aged 18 to 25 from the public-use sample who reside in one of ten south-
ern states for which we have school resource data (described below): Alabama, Arkansas,
Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee,
and Texas. The age controls are designed to ensure that we can more accurately assign in-
dividuals to their county of schooling and reasonably ignore differential on-the-job training
or experience.19
       To measure the quality of schools available to each individual in our sample, we utilize
transcribed county-level measures of race-specific school resources in the years leading up
to 1940 for these ten southern states. Over much of the 20th century, each U.S. state’s de-
partment of education or equivalent office published a series of reports containing statistics
on revenues and expenditures, disaggregated by county and by race. With the exception of
a small number of biennial editions, education reports allow us to measure at least one race-
specific school quality statistic for each year for each county. The data and data collection
process are described more fully in the appendix.
       The school quality data can be matched to each individual in the Census data after
making some assumptions about where individuals lived when they were young. In 1940,
census takers inquired as to the location of respondents five years prior, in 1935. This
  17
      “[I]f this cannot readily be determined, [enter] the number of years the persons attended school.”
  18
      To the extent that there remains overstatement of “highest full grade” for men with an ungraded education
(perhaps because grades were typically completed in more than one year), it will serve to bias downwards the
contribution of differences in human capital to the black-white earnings gap and overstate the role of labor
market discrimination. See Margo (1986) for evidence that using respondents’ highest grade completed as a
proxy for educational attainment understates the contribution of human capital to the 1930-1970 decline in
the wage gap.
   19
      We cannot calculate labor market experience as the difference between age and years of schooling (plus 6
or 7) because age-in-grade differed significantly between black and white students (Collins & Margo, 2006).



                                                     10
detailed geographic information is newly released in the microsample files. We assume this
1935 location is the county of residence during an individual’s potential schooling years.
Because our analysis focuses on individuals 18 to 25 in 1940, this amounts to assuming
that individuals aged 13 to 20 in 1935 reside in their county of schooling.20 The ability to
identify the probable county of education for individuals allows us to assign a race-specific
school quality measure more proximate to the actual education experience of individuals
than previously possible.
       Depending on the year and state, school resource data are comprised of one or more
of the following eight metrics: expenditures per enrolled pupil, expenditures per pupil in
average daily attendance (ADA), teachers per enrolled pupil, teachers per pupil in ADA,
certified teachers per enrolled pupil, certified teachers per pupil in ADA, term length, and
average teacher salary. Reported measures vary by state and year, but definitions are con-
sistent across races within a state-year (and county-year). States had leeway in the metrics
they chose to document, and many changed the format and set of resources reported over
time. But, with rare exceptions, if a white-specific metric is reported in a given year, a
corresponding black-specific metric is as well. An inventory of school quality statistics
available for each state and year can be found in the appendix.
       Selecting a single metric to proxy overall school quality is an untenable strategy. Each
metric represents a different view of school resources and, more practically, varying avail-
ability of data across states within years and across years within states limits the scope of a
  20
     We note that the 1930s were a decade of extremely low internal migration in the United States; 12% of
our sample changed counties between 1935 and 1940, years when they were first entering the labor market.
To further gauge the mismeasurement in this assignment, we look to a sample of death records from North
Carolina generously shared with us by John Parman. The records include both county of birth and county of
death for deaths reported prior to 1976. We examine a subset of males who were born in the relevant years
(1914 to 1923) and died between the ages of 7 and 20. For these individuals, we find that 30% lived in a
state other than their home state by age 7 as indicated on their death certificate and 38% did the same by age
20. (The numbers are 26% and 42% using a 3-year moving average.) Thus, by assuming that an individual
observed at age 13-20 in 1935 lived in the same location at age 7 when they would have entered school, our
methodology will falsely identify the county of education for up to 8% of individuals in the sample (16%
using the moving average). The unfortunate assumption in this, and the only one we can reasonably make, is
that individuals only move once so that the number who have relocated from their birth county by age 20 less
the number who did the same by age 7 captures all migration. Note also that we undertake sensitivity tests on
the county-of-schooling assumption in the appendix, finding little change in wage or occupation score gaps
when we restrict the sample to respondents whose state of birth matches their 1935 state of residence.



                                                     11
given metric. Instead, for each quality measure, we calculate a Z-score relative to all other
counties in the data that report the same quality metric for the same academic year. The
index computation is:
                                                 Mjctr − M¯jt
                                            Zjctr =
                                                     σjt
where Mjctr     is the value of metric j (e.g., teachers per enrolled pupil) in county c in year t
for race r. M¯jt and σjt are the mean and standard deviation of measure j across all county-
race observations reporting the same metric in year t. We emphasize that the conversion is
relative to all county years reporting the same statistic and is across, not within, race. Zjctr
converts statistic Mjctr to a scale with mean zero and unit standard deviation that can be
compared across counties and races in year t. In state-years where more than one measure
of school quality are reported, we use the average value of Zjctr across all available j’s.
                                                      ∑
                                                      J
                                             Qctr =          Zjctr /J
                                                       j=1

where J is the total number of available metrics for county c in year t.21 In cases where
data on both enrolled pupils and pupils in ADA are available, we use only the measure per
enrolled pupil (i.e., J ≤ 5).
       The index, Qctr , allows us to aggregate information about school quality across quality
metrics that differ in their distribution and coverage. A Z-score index computed across,
rather than within, years would provide a more accurate representation of counties’ relative
growth in school resources over time. However, a pooled index such as this would suffer
more from missing data.22 We note, however, that if the index is calculated across, rather
than within, years, our results are little changed.23
  21
      Computing Qctr in this way implicitly weights each available school quality metric evenly. In the ap-
pendix we present results from a permutation exercise that tests the sensitivity of results to 1,000 randomly
generated alternative weighting schemes. We find that conditional gap estimates to follow are not exceptional
within the distribution of possibilities, and moreover, are remarkably close to gap estimates from specifica-
tions that minimize the Akaike Information Criterion. Other robustness checks described in the appendix
control for the quantity of school data: (i.e., J and J 2 ) and for the frequency with which each metric was
reported during an individual’s potential years of schooling.
   22
      The current Qctr , since it does not allow for shifts over time in the entire distribution of school quality,
will overstate the true quality of school resources earlier in the panel. Age fixed effects ameliorate this issue,
and our primary source of identifying variation in school quality is variation within cohorts, across segregated
school systems.
   23
      See Section 5 of the appendix.


                                                       12
       Table 2 gives the average within-state variation in Qctr across all years in the school
panel, both overall and separately by race.24 The sample-wide standard deviation in this
measure is 0.85, with higher variability for black schools (0.89) than for white (0.57), and
with considerable variation within states as well as across. Even for white schools, where
overall variation in the school quality index is smaller, within-state variation approaches or
exceeds that for the full sample in the deep South (from Louisiana to Georgia).
       In order to assign school quality measures to individuals, we must make a final assump-
tion. We observe individuals’ ages and years of schooling in 1940, but not their precise
years of enrollment, and age-in-grade distributions varied substantially. We assume that all
individuals are “at risk” for school enrollment between the ages of 7 and 18 and measure
average school quality across those years.25 As an example, an individual observed in the
1940 Census who is 25 years of age was a potential enrollee from the 1922/1923 school
year through 1933/1934. For each individual, then, we assign a school quality measure
which is the average of the school quality index in the county where he resided in 1935
over the years he could have been in school. Years for which there are missing data on
school quality are excluded from both the numerator and denominator of Qctr . The result-
ing school quality index varies across race, cohorts, and counties and is best thought of as
the typical amount of public school resources available to each respondent when they were
ages 7 to 18.
       The data linkage generates a base sample of 11,394 men aged 18-25 who report earn-
ings, reside in ten southern states in 1940, report a discernible residence in 1935 for which
school quality metrics are available, and report race of either “white” or “black” to the cen-
sus enumerator. A critical issue for the empirical strategy described below is whether there
is enough overlap in the school quality index of black and white respondents to justify a
pooled regression and a simulated counterfactual. Non-linearities in returns to education
are included in the analysis, but a lack of common support across black and white school
  24
      The index is the average of several variables that are mean zero and standard deviation one but is not,
itself, distributed accordingly. The unit of observation is a county-race-year unit.
   25
      In practice, across-county variation in school quality measures are far more substantial than-within
county differences across cohorts and attendance years, making the county of schooling assignment more
important than the years of schooling one.


                                                    13
quality indices would hinder our ability to simulate black outcomes under a true “separate
but equal” schooling system. Figure 1 compares kernel density estimates for black and
white school quality indices and illustrates the distribution of black and white educational
attainment. In both cases, distributions are distinct but overlapping. Areas of overlap lend
support to the empirical strategy described in the next section, although we acknowledge
that results will rely heavily on extrapolation. Robustness checks described in the appendix
show that restricting our analysis to the common support of these two human capital mea-
sures (effectively omitting the bottom half of the black subsample) noticeably increases the
conditional wage gap, which is consistent with greater degrees of discrimination among
higher-skilled black men.


4        Empirical Strategy and Results
Table 3 contains summary statistics of labor market outcomes, human capital measures, and
other controls.26 Columns 1 and 2 of the table give average values for all men in the sample,
by race.27 As noted before, a large number of men in the census have no available income
data and Columns 3 and 4 give the average value of these same characteristics for the
sample used in the estimation. Due to the loss of non-wage agricultural workers, measures
of school quality are slightly higher in the estimating sample, as is manufacturing value-
added in counties of residence. In addition, the estimation sample is more urban than the
underlying population. Section 4.1 contains baseline results for this working sample. In the
appendix, we estimate the impact of pre-market factors on employment per se, agricultural
employment, and New Deal work relief employment, all of which can be estimated on a
larger sample of individuals.
    26
      Labor force participation is measured in the reference week of 1940 while income references all of 1939.
Some wage earners in 1939 became non-participants by 1940. Results are robust to their exclusion, as well
as the exclusion of a small number of self-employed men who report earning wages in 1939.
   27
      The universe is all black and white men from the 1940 IPUMS sample aged 18 to 25 with a (discernible)
county and state of residence in both 1935 and 1940 within our ten-state school quality region.




                                                     14
4.1 Baseline Results

Among the available labor market measures, it is clear that racial differences in labor force
participation and employment rates from Table 3 are relatively small. Labor market wages,
on the other hand, differ substantially by race on both an annual and weekly basis.
    To evaluate the impact of human capital measures on these labor market gaps, we rely
on the following estimating equation, with primary focus on the gap in black and white
wages, δ:
                          lnYicra = α + δBLACKi + βXicra + ϵicra .                                   (1)

Yicra is the labor market outcome of interest for individual i educated in county c residing
currently in county r of age a. In this setting, Yicra measures one of four labor market
outcomes: weekly wages, occupation score, annual wages, or weeks worked. BLACKi
is a binary indicator, and the estimated wage gap is negative when black respondents have
lower (conditional) labor market outcomes than whites. In all specifications, we cluster
standard errors by the 1940 county of residence.
    When Xicra is excluded from the estimation of Equation 1, the parameter δ measures an
unadjusted gap in earnings or occupational scores across races, or the difference in means
across blacks and whites. The unconditional mean, reported in Table 4 under the heading
for each outcome, is 52.9 log points for weekly wages among the 11,394 individuals in the
sample. The weekly wage gap reflects the combination of an unadjusted annual wage gap
of 51.3 log points and a weeks worked gap of 1.6 (log) weeks favoring blacks, leading to
a weekly wage gap that exceeds the annual income gap. The unconditioned occupational
score gap measures 35.9 log points.28
    Unconditional gaps may be attributable to many things: differences in labor market pro-
ductivity and price levels across locations, differences in observable human capital between
black and white workers, unobserved racial differences in human capital and, finally, labor
market discrimination. We first control for differences in labor market productivity and
   28
      We limit the occupational score analysis to those who also report wages to keep samples consistent,
although they differ somewhat due to individuals who do not report an occupation, but do report wages. We
relax this constraint in robustness tests discussed in the appendix.


                                                   15
price levels across locations and age fixed effects in order to isolate the role of human capi-
tal in the next step. In this case, δ represents the racial gap in labor market outcomes net of
differences in the age structure and counties’ economic profiles. Our preferred model does
not include county fixed effects since we expect the intensity of wage discrimination to
have varied spatially (Sundstrom, 2007),29 although, as we show in the appendix, the con-
ditional wage gap we estimate is robust to the inclusion of county (or state) fixed effects.
Instead, we control for characteristics of the individual’s 1940 county of residence which
may have impacted wage levels in a marginal product sense: urbanicity of the county of
residence (to proxy for cost of living differences) as well as per capita manufacturing value
added, per capita retail sales, and per capita crop value to represent average productivity in
manufacturing, services, and agriculture, respectively. These variables are summarized in
Table 3. These controls, along with age fixed effects, lower wage and occupational score
gaps, albeit very slightly, while raising the gap in weeks worked (Columns 1, 5, 9, and 13
of Table 4).
       Next, we include a third-degree polynomial function of educational attainment in Xicra
to capture non-linearities in the impact of years of schooling on labor market outcomes
(Columns 2, 6, 10, and 14). We round out respondents’ human capital profiles in Columns
3, 7, 11, and 15 with cubic functions of both attainment and school quality. Because our
model continues to include age fixed effects, human capital controls account for within-
cohort variation in years of schooling and in school quality across counties and races. Ta-
ble 2 indicates that school quality variation is broad-based and is present both within and
between states. The importance of school quality as a predictor of labor outcomes is read-
ily apparent. Comparing Columns 1, 2, and 3, for instance, the weekly wage gap narrows
by 36 percent when we condition on years of schooling alone, versus 63 percent when we
condition on attainment as well as school quality.
       Though human capital may have narrowed wage gaps, their closure was inhibited by
occupational sorting. Results for occupation scores (Columns 5-7) indicate that human cap-
  29
     A county fixed effect is an unobserved factor that affects average wages in that county, which will include
the degree of discrimination for that county. The same can be said for state fixed effects.



                                                      16
ital differences explained only 55 percent of the Column 5 black-white gap in occupational
standing.
         We note that school quality and individual attainment are highly correlated, and it is
not clear from δ estimates alone which measure of human capital is primarily responsible
for attenuating the black-white earnings gap. Adding covariates sequentially – as we do
in the second and third specifications for each outcome in Table 4 – is one approach to
disentangling the contribution of school quality from that of attainment. But Gelbach (in
press) shows that this procedure can lead to misleading results and that such decomposi-
tions depend on the order in which controls are added to the model. We use Gelbach’s
decomposition framework to estimate the relative contribution of years of schooling and
school quality (both in cubic functions) to wages and occupational scores.30 In Table 4, the
contribution of each term (in log points) is displayed beneath the δ coefficient in Columns
3, 7, 11, and 15. Differences in educational attainment account for 16.8 log points of the at-
tenuation of the black-white gap between Columns 1 and 3, while school quality accounted
for a somewhat smaller 14.0 log points. Similar results obtain for annual wages. In con-
trast, educational attainment accounts for a clear majority of attenuation in the occupational
score gap.
         The primary threat to the internal validity of results is that of a classic omitted variable,
correlated with both human capital and earnings in a way that falsely attributes labor mar-
ket gaps to human capital or (implicitly) to discrimination. The foremost concern on this
dimension is that school quality measures embodied in Xicra in Equation 1 are proxies for
county race relations in general. If so, it is not at all surprising that including school quality
in a wage equation goes a long way towards explaining the racial wage gap. Black south-
erners could have experienced discrimination in both the labor market and in decisions that
affected school quality. If those two factors are highly correlated, local school resources
available to blacks may simply be proxies for overall relations and Table 4 results under-
                                                                                  ′         ′
    Gelbach’s (in press) procedure stems from the identity β̂1base = β̂1f ull (X1 X1 )−1 X1 X2 β̂2 , where β̂1base
    30

(β̂1f ull )
        is a vector of X1 coefficients in the limited (fully conditioned) model and β̂2 is a vector of X2
coefficients. In our context, X1 is a race indicator, and X2 factors are years of schooling and school quality,
two contributing factors to race-based differences in labor outcomes.


                                                       17
state the role of labor market discrimination in explaining the earnings gap and overstate
the role of school resource provision. A second and related possibility is that public agen-
cies provided sub-standard black schools because they had reason to be pessimistic about
blacks’ relative earnings later on.
    In recognition of these concerns, our preferred specification includes both domains of
human capital as well as a full interaction between the cubic in school quality and the cubic
in educational attainment. This allows us to assess the relative contributions of school
quality on its own and school quality as it serves to enhance educational attainment, the
former being more indicative of omitted discrimination in the presence of the latter.31 These
results are located in Columns 4, 8, 12 and 16. In each case, the conditional gap is little
changed and the isolated contribution of school quality toward changing the unconditional
wage gap is small, imprecise, and/or positive. The majority of the school quality effect
for weekly and annual wages comes through its interaction with educational attainment.32
This model, which generates larger conditional gaps than the uninteracted model, is our
preferred specification for the remainder of the paper.
    In Table 5, we report the estimated return to educational attainment and school quality
by evaluating the marginal effect at the mean of each variable (which enters the preferred
specification as an interacted cubic) and bootstrapping standard errors. A one unit increase
in the school quality index, evaluated at the mean, brings labor market returns of between
22 and 26 log points with respect to earnings and 9 log points with respect to occupational
standing. The return to years of education reflects standard measures of the same from else-
where in the literature: 6 log points of increased earnings and 4 log points of occupational
standing. For a more detailed illustration of coefficients on school quality and attainment,
we refer readers to surface plots and related discussion in Section 1 of the appendix. Plots
indicate that gains in school quality (attainment) conditional on one’s attainment (school
  31
     We further address the underlying identification threat by limiting our analysis to migrant blacks whose
county of residence was not their county of schooling (Section 4.2), by conditioning on imputed AGCT
scores (Section 4.3), by conditioning on fixed effects for state of residence, county of residence or county of
schooling (appendix), and by examining an Oaxaca decomposition of the black-white gap (Section 5).
  32
     This is also consistent with work by Card & Krueger (1992a), who find that higher school quality,
measured at the state level, is associated with enhanced returns to schooling.


                                                     18
quality) lead to greater earnings and occupational status, as expected. Coefficients on other
Equation 1 controls are also given in Section 1 of the appendix.
    From our preferred specification, we conclude that differences in human capital mea-
sures account for the majority of the black-white wage and occupational score gaps in 1940.
The remaining racial gaps, 19.1 log points for weekly wages and 13.7 log points for annual
wages, represent 64 and 73 percent reductions, respectively, from the unconditional wage
gaps. To put these residual differences in perspective, note that 11 log points is the modal
conditional wage gap estimate listed in Table 1, and that 19.1 log points lies at the higher
end of the range of these post-Civil Rights estimates.

4.2 Collinearity in Public and Labor Market Discrimination

One major impediment to interpreting conditional wage gaps as wage discrimination is the
possibility that local wage discrimination is collinear with local school quality. If so, then
the measured contribution of school quality to the overall wage gap may be misattributed.
As a first step in assuring this attribution is appropriate, we showed in Section 4.1 that
school quality impacts wages primarily through its interaction with years of schooling as
would be expected if school quality was not simply proxying for wage discrimination. In
this section, we take additional steps to ensure the same. Because decisions about local
school quality may have reflected local discriminatory attitudes, we shift our attention to
the relative labor market outcomes of black inter-county migrants – those who were likely
educated in counties other than their 1940 county of residence. Focusing on these black
migrants breaks any collinearity between school quality and labor market discrimination in
each individual’s 1940 county of residence (although it adds the question of selection into
migration).33 If human capital measures are less successful at explaining the earnings gap
of new resident blacks relative to all resident whites (i.e., if the conditional gap is much
   33
      One concern with this exercise is that migrants are not moving far enough to actually decouple labor mar-
ket and school quality discrimination. The average distance migrated between 1935 and 1940 for black males
in the analytical sample is 83 miles with a standard deviation of 107. Roughly 15 percent of inter-county
black migrants in this sample moved between states. The correlation coefficient between school quality in
migrants’ 1935 and 1940 county of residence is 0.54, a subjectively intermediate rate of co-movement. We
remind the reader that there is substantial intrastate variation in school quality.


                                                     19
larger between these two groups than between blacks and whites more broadly), then we
would suspect that estimates in Table 4 are driven by local race relations more so than local
school quality.
       About one in ten blacks from the main sample changed counties between 1935 and
1940. Migrating blacks had higher wages than their non-migrating peers, and this generates
lower baseline wage gaps as evidenced in Table 6, Columns 1 (weekly wage) and 7 (annual
wage).34
       The remainder of Table 6 reports results from Equation 1 with non-migrating blacks
excluded. If collinearity between school quality and labor market discrimination was driv-
ing our main results, we would expect human capital controls to register little change in
the wage gap between whites and migrant blacks. But Column 3 lists a nearly equivalent
conditional weekly wage gap as the one reported in Table 4 (19.2 versus 19.1 log points).
The conditional black-white gap in annual wages falls to 6.2 log points (Column 9, versus
13.7 log points in the baseline) and is statistically indistinguishable from zero.
       We do find some evidence that the conditional occupation score gap grows after elim-
inating non-migrant blacks, from 16.8 in Table 4 to 27.6 log points in Table 6, Column
6. The implication is that the baseline occupational score gap closure we observed for
this outcome – with variance limited by occupational sorting – may have been driven by
unobserved variables more so than human capital.
       Still, we take wage results in Columns 3 and 9 of Table 6 to indicate that school quality
measures are not simply serving as a proxy for local race relations in determining pay.
The fact that human capital controls result in a null annual pay gap when we limit the
black population to inter-county migrants is itself an interesting conclusion, with the caveat
that migrating blacks are very small in number and perhaps positively selected, even after
controlling for observable human capital.35
  34
    Summary statistics for the migrating sample are available in the appendix, Table 9.
  35
    A corollary to our logic here is that school quality from migrants’ 1940 county of residence should
be unimportant conditional on school quality from assumed counties of schooling. In an extended analysis
of migrants’ wages and human capital (available on request), we limit the analytical sample to black and
white migrants and control for cubic functions of school quality from 1935 and 1940 counties of residence,
both fully interacted with a cubic in years of schooling. For all but weeks worked, Wald tests support the


                                                   20
4.3 Adding Proxies for Unobserved Ability

A common concern in the discrimination literature is unobserved human capital hetero-
geneity that manifests as a wage gap. For example, if unobserved average ability, condi-
tional on observable human capital, differs across blacks and whites, the conditional wage
gap does not accurately reflect the depth of labor market discrimination. Using modern
data, Lang & Manove (2011) show that black students tend to have more years of schooling
for a given AFQT-measured ability. If the same holds true in the pre-war period, omitting
ability measures – as we do in Section 4.1 – may misstate the conditional pay gap. It may
well have been the case that only the highest ability black students would have achieved
higher levels of educational attainment given the pervasive impediments to attendance. On
the other hand, it may be that blacks were conditionally less productive due to differences
in the intergenerational transmission of human capital or other pre-market investments out-
side of schooling (access to health care, for example). If so, we understate the role of
human capital and overstate the potential role of labor market discrimination.
    A leading proxy for unobserved ability used in the modern literature is performance on
a standardized exam.36 Several studies examining features of the wage gap in the NLSY
panel utilize AFQT scores as pre-market proxies for ability (see Table 1 for examples).
Through a historical fluke, standardized test scores are available for a subset of World War
II enlistees.37 Unfortunately, directly linking our 1940 IPUMS sample of males to the
WWII enlistment data for this window of time, matching on name and county of residence,
generates too small a sample for meaningful analysis. Instead, we assign human capital
measures to each individual in the WWII records where AGCT is recorded, utilizing the
importance of migrants’ assumed school quality and rule out the importance of school quality in their 1940
locations.
   36
      Parental education or family background indicators are other candidate proxies for unobserved ability. In
the 1940 census, however, this information is only available for respondents who were still living with their
parents (57 percent of the analytical sample of 18 to 25-year-old males).
   37
      For a limited time in 1943, WWII enlistment cards contained AGCT scores in place of weight. We know
of no evidence that this test was racially unbiased. Enlistment in the armed forces, however, was conditional
on a minimum literacy standard so that the test results would not have been racially biased for literacy reasons.
Like the modern AGCT, the test appears to measure acquired ability rather than inherent cognition (Zeidner
& Drucker, 1983). See Troesken et al. (2012) for additional details.



                                                      21
fact that WWII records include a measure of highest grade completed, much like the 1940
census sample, as well as an exact county and state of residence at enlistment. For these
WWII enlistees, then, we have a measure of race, educational attainment, school quality,
and estimated ability.38
       We can use this sample to impute AGCT scores for men in the 1940 census condi-
tioning on educational attainment, school quality, and race. Although these are imputed
measures, they do address the fundamental omitted variable question: conditional on ob-
servable human capital, does ability add explanatory power to the wage model, and therein,
the estimated wage gap? We wish to remain as agnostic as possible about the relationship
between race, school quality, attainment, and AGCT scores, recognizing that black-white
differences in AGCT conditional on other human capital metrics may differ across the dis-
tribution of those metrics. After limiting the age range of WWII enlistees to mirror that of
our census sample, we use three different methods to impute AGCT for the baseline sample
of census respondents.39

    • Method 1: We subdivide school quality into 10 deciles and calculate enlistees’ aver-
         age AGCT scores within each race/educational attainment/school quality decile bin
         (R2 = 0.518). We then assign an imputed AGCT score to each individual in the cen-
         sus sample accordingly, with the restriction that bins with fewer than 25 observations
         in the enlistee data are omitted.

    • Method 2: We specify that enlistee AGCT is a function of a 5th-order polynomial in
         school quality within each race/educational attainment bin (R2 = 0.547). We then
         use the parameter estimates to impute AGCT for the census sample.
  38
      The assumption that allows us to link school quality to individuals is that their county of residence at
enlistment is the county where they were educated. This assumption is more likely to produce bad matches
than the assumption used in the main analysis due to migration between schooling and enlistment.
   39
      Neal & Johnson (1996) are careful to limit the AGCT scores in their analysis to those taken prior to
entrance in the labor market arguing that “[j]ob experience and post-secondary education surely enhance
human capital and will therefore increase test scores. If discrimination limits access to these human capital
investments, then postentry discrimination contaminates the test scores (p.873).” Because the AGCT test
was reported at enlistment, the youngest age at which we observe this score is age 18 with a large mass
of observations at age 19. Seventy-five percent of the individuals in the WWII enlistment records used for
ability imputation are 20 and younger.


                                                     22
    • Method 3: We estimate enlistee AGCT by building a regression tree with up to 400
       “leaves,” twice as many as implied by Method 1 (R2 = 0.534). Branches are de-
       termined by a machine learning algorithm that minimizes the mean squared error of
       predicted versus actual AGCT.

    With these three methods for imputing AGCT scores, we revisit Equation 1 with im-
puted AGCT as an additional control variable. Each of the control variables from which
AGCT is imputed is present elsewhere in the Mincer model, and it is reasonable to ques-
tion whether this approach adds any new information to the model above.40 The estimates
presented thus far make it clear that there is a relationship between race and labor market
earnings that cannot be explained by school quality or educational attainment. Without ad-
ditional information, we cannot discern whether this relationship is due to discrimination
or due to unobserved human capital. The additional information from AGCT scores allows
us to control for the average ability of men in the WWII enlistment records with similar
measures of observable human capital, separately by race, narrowing the scope for omitted
human capital variables in our wage models.
    Results for weekly and annual wages are located in Table 7. The black-white wage gap
falls substantially when we control for estimated ability. The weekly wage gap falls to 12.5
- 14.6 log points, depending on the imputation method. For annual wages, residual gaps
range from 1.1 to 11.1 log points.
    As a falsification exercise, we repeat the second imputation method for WWII enlis-
tees’ weight in the same months of 1942, when the weight field should have contained
physical weight and not AGCT scores. That is, we estimate enlistees’ physical weight as
a function of the school quality polynomial by race/attainment bin (Method 2), and then
map parameter estimates to the 1940 census sample, “predicting” respondents’ weight. Re-
sults are found in Columns 5 and 10 of Table 7. The conditional wage gap rises slightly
from the baseline to 20.1 log points and the annual wage gap to 14.2. The contrasts be-
tween Columns 4 and 5 and between Columns 9 and 10 are telling: estimating ability by
  40
     A technical note is that the effect of AGCT would not be separately identifiable in Equation 1 if AGCT
scores were imputed with the same functional form.


                                                    23
its known relationship to observables adds important information to the model, whereas
adding an anthropometric measure has little bearing on the wage gap.41
         A final caveat on the imputation of AGCT scores is that the sample of individuals in
the 1943 enlistment records may be selected in some way. This would impact the estimate
of δ only if selection differed across blacks and whites. We do observe higher educational
attainment in the WWII enlistment records than in the Census sample for both blacks and
whites, perhaps due to the literacy restrictions on enlistment. The difference in (log) aver-
age educational attainment between the enlistment records and the census records is larger
for blacks than whites, indicating more positive selection on observables amongst blacks.
Educational attainment is explicitly accounted for in the imputation, but if the same selec-
tion pattern is true for AGCT scores as well, then we overestimate the ability of blacks in
the census sample and our estimates of δ in Table 7 are biased away from zero.


5         Racial Differences in the Returns to Skill
We have thus far restricted the role of race in determining labor market outcomes to a con-
stant intercept shift captured by the δ coefficient in the wage regression. In practice, race
may interact with other controls to determine wages in ways not accounted for in the pre-
ferred specification and, if so, our estimates of discrimination may be understated.42 In this
section, we use Oaxaca decompositions to value racial differences in endowments, racial
differences in the returns to human capital, and the interactions of these two in determining
    41
      In addition, actual weight is insignificantly predictive of wages in the estimation for 1942 but predicted
AGCT is positively, significantly correlated in 1943, further indication that the 1943 “weight” data do measure
ability.
   42
      We also note that there is some evidence that the absolute value of δ rises with worker skill, indicating
that controls have less explanatory power over racial wage gaps at higher vales of human capital. In Appendix
Table 5, we calculate conditional wage gaps at the common support of black and white human capital, i.e.,
the highest skilled blacks. The gap in weeks worked disappears at this skill level, so that the conditional gaps
in weekly and annual wages are indistinguishable from each other. The conditional wage gap rises to 25
log points for this subset of men. A similar pattern obtains if we restrict the analysis to blacks who report
an occupation of “operative,” a more skilled category than the modal “laborer.” (Results not shown.) The
preferred specification allows for differences in the return to skill across the skill distribution, but not for
differences in the return to skill by race. The cost of this simplification is summarized in the analysis in this
section.




                                                      24
the overall wage gap.43
       We begin by estimating Equation 1, separately by race:

                                     lnYicra = α + βXicra + ϵicra ,

where Xicra , as before, controls for school quality, years of schooling, the interaction of
quality and years of schooling, age fixed effects, and local characteristics.
       Black-white gaps in annual and weekly wages are decomposed as follows:

        X¯W βW − X¯B βB = (X¯W − X¯B )βB + X¯B (βW − βB ) + (X¯W − X¯B )(βW − βB )

The first right-hand-side term is the contribution of endowments to the wage gap, the sec-
ond is the contribution of coefficients (i.e., race-specific differences in returns to Xicra
elements including human capital), and the third is the contribution of the interaction of the
two.44 The value of each is reported in Table 8 for both weekly and annual wages, with
the contribution of coefficients broken down further by the contribution of school quality,
educational attainment, and the remaining covariates.
       Table 8 indicates that differences in endowments are the predominant determinant of
racial differences in weekly and annual wages, each accounting for 59 percent of their
respective unconditional gap. That leaves 21.8 and 20.9 log points to be explained by co-
efficients and the interaction of gaps in endowments and coefficients, or 2 - 7 log points
on top of baseline conditional wage gaps reported in Table 4. Results for coefficient differ-
ences, however, leave us with little guidance as to which (if any) endowments are valued
for blacks differently than for whites. Standard errors are large enough to render point esti-
mates statistically insignificant at conventional levels, and coefficient differences for some
covariates (e.g., school quality with regards to annual wages, local characteristics with re-
gards to both outcomes), if they were precise, would indicate that returns to these variables
  43
     We also evaluate whether the addition of race interactions with each of the covariates improves the
predictive capabilities of the model. These results, available upon request, demonstrate that this more general
model offers little predictive advantage (as measured by reductions in mean squared error) over our preferred
specification.
  44
     For more discussion of this methodology, see the detail in Biewen (2014).



                                                     25
work against the wage gap. Beyond endowment gaps per se, much of the wage gap is
explained by the interaction of endowment and coefficient gaps.
         Racial differences in the returns to human capital, or lack thereof, also speak to the out-
standing question of whether modest 1940 wage gaps are simply the result of endogenous
choices by workers (choosing attainment) or school agencies (choosing school resources
for segregated systems). Equivalent returns to skill implied by Table 8 are consistent with
an optimized simultaneity between the human capital gap accumulated in the 1930s and the
wage gap realized in the 1940s, i.e., one where black and white human capital investments
are made up to the point that marginal discriminatory returns are the same across races.
This particular optimization is more plausible for individual workers choosing how long to
stay in school than school systems facing the objectives of a political economy. We return
to the issue of endogenous attainment in the following section.
         Because differences in the returns to human capital appear to be a minor portion of the
overall decomposition in Table 8, we do not expect allowances for differences in returns to
be critical for inference. When we evaluate a counterfactual “separate but equal” scenario
in Section 7, we allow returns to school quality and educational attainment to differ by
race, motivated by the discussion above. In this exercise, our results are not much changed
relative to inference from pooled coefficients, indicating a small role for racial differences
in the return to skill across the distribution of school quality and educational attainment
modeled below. Whether this is true at even higher levels of skill (i.e., as the quality and
quantity of black education rose in the years following 1940) is an important area of future
inquiry.


6         Within-Occupation Wage Gap Results
The fact that human capital explains relatively less of the occupational standing gap than
the wage gap raises the question of whether occupational sorting itself was the predominant
driver of the black-white wage gap (Higgs, 1977).45 Figure 2 plots the distribution of black
    45
     According to Higgs (1977), racially dependent sorting across high-wage and low-wage firms is another
likely source of the overall black-white gap. We do not observe respondents’ employers in the 1940 census.


                                                   26
and white workers across nine broad occupation categories, along with average log annual
wages for each category. There are substantial differences in earnings across occupation
categories, and the wage measures layered on the histogram indicate, unsurprisingly, that
wages are higher in the occupations where whites are disproportionately represented.
       Results for occupation score in Table 4 reflect the expected size of the racial wage gap
if there was no within-occupation wage discrimination and discrimination happened via
sorting alone. To calculate the size of the within-occupation gap, we add fixed effects for
occupation categories to Equation 1 and measure the resulting conditional gap in weekly
and annual wages and in weeks worked.46 We continue to condition on county covariates,
cubics in educational attainment and school quality, and the interaction of school qual-
ity with attainment measures. Estimates of δ in Table 9 show that the within-occupation
weekly wage gap is reduced from 28.8 to 15.1 log points following the addition of human
capital controls, and that the annual income gap falls from 21.2 log points to an insignificant
6.7 log points. The difference between Columns 4 and 8 is reconciled by the conditional
gap in weeks worked, which expands with controls for occupation fixed effects. Within
occupations, black and white men of equivalent schooling had similar annual earnings, but
given that blacks worked 8.4 percent more than whites with a similar human capital profile,
the weekly earnings gap remains significant at 15.1 percent. These findings support the
idea that discrimination manifested in part via occupational sorting, but not so much as to
result in equal pay within occupations.
       Echoing findings for earnings across occupations, Gelbach (in press) decompositions
in Table 9 indicate that school quality narrowed the within-occupation wage and annual
income gaps through its interaction with attainment. This further weakens the case for
endogenous school resources but does not speak to the possibility that blacks chose their
time in school with the understanding that, at some point, discriminatory labor markets
would temper the returns to another grade. If so, we may overstate the portion of the wage
gap attributable to the attainment gap.
       The existence and extent of this form of endogeneity cannot be assessed with available
  46
       Results are robust to finer occupation definitions.


                                                         27
pre-war data (nor can the extent of whites’ response to discriminatory returns to schooling),
but we can use wage decompositions in conjunction with assumptions about the nature of
discrimination to “add back” or decondition the portion of pay disparities that potentially
overvalue human capital. Note that attainment, on its own, accounts for 5.3 log points of the
28.8-point weekly wage gap within occupations (Table 9, Column 4) and 16.4 log points
overall (Table 4, Column 4). The difference, 11.1 log points, is the estimated contribution
of attainment to occupational upgrading.47 If, on the margin, discriminatory sorting into
jobs would have been inflexible to advances in black educational attainment, then 30.2 log
points (19.1+11.1) is a truer reflection of the conditional weekly wage gap, rather than 19.1
log points as reported in Table 4. The same set of assumptions would serve to increase the
annual income gap from 13.7 to 25.3 log points.48


7         Counterfactual Estimates
The implicit counterfactual exercise in our baseline results calculates the 1940 wage gap if
blacks had achieved the same level of education in schools of comparable quality to whites.
Columns 4 and 12 of Table 4 indicate that the remaining gap would have been roughly 19.1
log points of weekly wages and 13.7 log points of annual wages.
         But this inherent counterfactual ignores historical realities. First, education budgets dif-
fered substantially across counties, as did the geographic distribution of blacks and whites
across the South. Assigning all blacks the average education quality of whites presumes
perfect mobility of households and education funds when, in reality, education funding was
highly decentralized at the county or sub-county level. Second, there were many reasons
for differing educational attainment by race, only some of which were within the purview
of policy makers. Finally, we again allow for the possibility that the returns to human cap-
ital differed by race so that equalizing endowments without equalizing yields would have
    47
     This is not very different from the contribution of attainment to the occupational score gap (12.9 log
points in Table 4, Column 8), although occupational score is derived from the 1950 white analogue to a given
1940 occupation.
  48
     Comparing these 25 - 30-point conjectured wage gaps to Table 1 estimates from the post-Civil Rights era
would require analogous assumptions regarding discrimination in occupational sorting later in the century.
This remains a fruitful area for future work.


                                                    28
generated more muted wage impacts.
       To address these issues all together, we present a series of counterfactual estimates in
Table 10. Means and unconditional gaps are located in Panel 1. We allow for a balanced
budget constraint within counties and equalize black and white school quality at the county
average (weighted by black and white school enrollment).49 We then predict wage out-
comes using Equation 1 and report results in Panel 2.50 Results in Row 2a indicate that
counterfactual racial wage gaps would have fallen to between 38 and 41 log points, a re-
duction of 24 - 27 percent relative to the unadjusted baseline. Note here that although the
binding budget constraint effectively lowers the school quality experienced by whites, very
modest changes in white earnings between Panels 1 and 2 are indicative of diminishing
returns to school quality.
       In Row 2b we allow for race-specific returns to human capital in constructing the sep-
arate but equal counterfactual. Echoing decomposition analyses in the previous section,
we show here that this more flexible model has limited effects on the weekly wage gap
and actually lowers the estimated annual gap by 7 log points.51 Over this range of school
quality, then, racial differences in the returns to human capital are biasing our estimates of
the racial wage gap upwards.
       As a second step to estimate impacts of separate but equal schooling, we allow educa-
tional attainment to be endogenous, recognizing that time in school is a function of school
quality (Margo, 1987), and that equalized school resources would have affected earnings
through the years of schooling channel as well as the input quality channel. Of course,
  49
      The imposed restriction is that the weighted average of the Z-scores within a county cannot change where
the weights are from enrollment in black and white schools. This weighted average Z-score is then assumed
to be the counterfactual level of school quality for both black and white students. This is a practical way to
equalize the complete profile of black and white school systems without making ad hoc judgments about how
nonmonetary quality domains would be converted to equivalent dollars.
   50
      Our preferred specification of Equation 1 conditions on third-degree polynomial functions of attainment,
school quality, and full interactions therein. This model describes the wage-setting process well (as we
demonstrate in Section 4.1) but does not perform consistently when we extrapolate black earnings under
substantially higher school quality. Therefore, we prefer a restricted model – without attainment-quality
interactions – for this projection, reminding the reader that the residual wage gap is little changed between
the restricted and fully interacted specification (Table 4).
   51
      To implement race-specific returns to human capital, we re-estimate Equation 1 with interactions between
human capital variables and a race indicator. We then equalize school quality, predict counterfactual wages,
and report the levels and racial difference.


                                                     29
these changes, in turn, likely affected cognitive ability, but we do not seek to model this
pathway here.
       We rely on quasi-experimental evidence of the effect of school quality from other work.
Aaronson & Mazumder (2011) estimate the effect of exposure to Rosenwald schools – in
terms of classroom capacity per black school-aged youth – on individual years of schooling,
among other outcomes. We convert their Rosenwald exposure measure into a change in our
calculated Z-score, and then convert the elasticity of educational attainment with respect
to Rosenwald schools to an elasticity per unit of school quality in our sample. We then
use this elasticity to calculate the counterfactual level of educational attainment after a
“separate but equal” mandate. On average, estimated attainment increases by 1.19 years
for blacks and falls by 0.43 years for whites.52 Results are presented in Panel 3 of Table
10. With endogenous years of schooling and race-neutral coefficients, the wage gap falls
to between 29 and 32 log points (Row 3a), a reduction relative to the baseline of between
40 and 45 percent. In Row 3b, we again allow for race-specific returns to education quality
and attainment and, again, this distinction matters little for our result as estimates differ by
3 log points or less.
       Overall, we conclude that a separate but equal mandate would have reduced labor mar-
ket inequalities substantially, reducing the unconditional weekly wage gap by up to 40
percent and the annual wage gap by up to 51 percent.
  52
     Aaronson & Mazumder (2011) express the effect of school quality on years of schooling with respect
to their quality measure “Rosenwald exposure,” that is, the number of classrooms per 45 rural blacks aged 7
to 17 in a county. Because classrooms are not one of our resource metrics, we assume that each classroom
is associated with one new black teacher (as it was intended to be) and then calculate the average change in
the (race-specific) Z-score for teachers per pupil when we change Rosenwald exposure from 0 to 1. Equiva-
lently, this raises teachers per pupil over the historic, reported figure by an amount implied by full coverage
according to Aaronson & Mazumder (2011)’s metric. We lack access to the same population measures, but
we substitute the product of the black population aged 10 to 20 in a county and the percent of the overall
county population that is rural. We divide the Aaronson & Mazumder (2011) reported elasticity, which is
relative to their exposure measure, by this change in Z-score to get the average change in years of schooling
per Z-score unit and use this as our quasi-experimental elasticity of educational attainment with respect to
school quality (in standardized Z units).




                                                     30
8 Conclusion
Recent labor market studies have highlighted the importance of human capital in explaining
the black-white wage gap. We ask the same question for 1940 workers - how far can human
capital inequalities go in explaining the large pre-war racial wage disparity? Incorporating
new data on race-specific school quality in ten southern states, we document a predominant
role of school quality and educational attainment in determining wage inequality for young
men. Human capital accounts for 73 percent of the gap in annual wages and 64 percent of
the gap in weekly wage rates. Once we control for estimated AGCT scores imputed from
WWII enlistment records, human capital accounts for up to 97 percent of the gap in annual
wages and 80 percent of the weekly wage gap.
   The power of education to drive labor market wages is echoed in a counterfactual ex-
ercise whereby school quality is equalized across races in the South. Under this “separate
but equal” standard, we estimate a counterfactual gap of between 25 and 32 percent, far
smaller than the 51-53 percent gap observed in 1940. Education equality would have been
a powerful tool for raising black economic standing in the South; by our estimates, the lost
opportunity reduced the earnings capacity of this generation of black southerners by up to
50 percent. In the end, 20th century racial wage convergence prior to Civil Rights came
through shifts in the national income distribution that favored blacks (Margo, 2015), sub-
stantial interregional migration (Collins & Wanamaker, 2014; Boustan, 2007), and gradual
increases in the relative quality of black human capital (Card & Krueger, 1992b).
   Because some portion of human capital and the mechanisms determining local school
quality remain largely unobserved, we must be careful in labeling residual wage gaps as
the upper limit of discrimination. And our conclusion that wage gaps were relatively small
among young men in 1940 does not rule out larger wage gaps and a larger – or perhaps,
different – role for discrimination among subgroups of men of the same or later eras. The
modern labor market’s key departures from Jim Crow include a much smaller or null wage
gap among higher-skilled men and the emergence of a large, lower-skilled employment




                                            31
and pay gap favoring whites.53 Alternative sample constructions within the 1940 census,
discussed in the appendix, are consistent with wider wage gaps among higher-skilled men.
If the market for higher skilled men was thinner and less competitive in the pre-war South
than in later years, these subgroups could have been more vulnerable to wage discrimina-
tion and thus more affected by equal protection laws of later decades. Understanding the
factors that contributed to racial wage gaps among unskilled workers in 1940 versus today
remains an interesting, and open, area of inquiry. Since part of today’s racial wage gap has
roots in falling skill prices (Chandra, 2000), one notable conclusion to be drawn from this
paper and others is that the racial inequities arising from skill-biased economic transitions
may have been even greater in the absence of converging black-white school quality and
attainment.
       By our estimates, conditional wage gaps were perhaps 42 percent smaller in 2000 than
in 1940.54 We cannot partition the relative contributions of federal intervention, returns
to skill, and rising black school quality across the intervening years, nor do we have a
comparable metric for the years between World War II and the Civil Rights era. This
motivates further research on the dynamics of conditional wage and employment gaps over
the transition from Jim Crow to Civil Rights and beyond, particularly by skill level. What
we have shown is that the southern labor market of 1940 and the labor market of 2000
suffered a similar disease: vastly different human capital accumulation among black and
white workers. In both cases, ameliorating the human capital gap would have substantially
reduced racial wage gaps.
       Turning back to the time period in question, subjectively narrow wage gaps seem in-
compatible with what we know about the Jim Crow South. Black southerners were ex-
cluded from civil life through a variety of measures that eviscerated their participation in
the political process. One result was a denial of black public schooling at the same quality
as that available to whites, presenting an enormous roadblock to the accumulation of black
  53
     See Chandra (2000), Heckman et al. (2000), Lang (2007), and Johnson & Neal (2011) for details and
Bound & Freeman (1992), Chay & Lee (2000), Weinberger & Joy (2007), and Heywood & Parent (2012) for
evidence on the limits of these generalizations.
  54
     This compares the modern literature’s modal 11 log point gap to our 19 log point result for weekly wages.



                                                     32
human capital. Yet, as we show, blacks participated in economic life, exhibiting labor force
participation and employment rates not dissimilar from those of whites and (conditional)
earnings ratios not remarkably different from blacks later in the century. Employers of
1940 may have held animus or equality aversion toward black individuals, but the effect of
these attitudes on black wages would have been offset to some degree by profit-maximizing
objectives. These profit-maximizing values, not necessarily shared by largely white voting
constituencies, explain why severe racial discrimination in the provision of public goods
could coincide with a more equal (conditional) labor market.


References
Aaronson, D., & Mazumder, B. (2011). The Impact of Rosenwald Schools on Black
  Achievement. Journal of Political Economy, 119(5), 821–888.

Altonji, J. G., & Blank, R. M. (1999). Race and Gender in the Labor Market. In O. Ashen-
  felter, & D. Card (Eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, (pp. 3143–3259).
  North-Holland.

Altonji, J. G., & Pierret, C. R. (2001). Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1), 313 – 350.

Ashenfelter, O., Collins, W. J., & Yoon, A. (2006). Evaluating the Role of Brown v. Board
  of Education in School Equalization, Desegregation, and the Income of African Ameri-
  cans. American Law and Economics Review, 8(2), 213 – 248.

Becker, G. S. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press.

Bertrand, M., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). Are Emily and Greg More Employable than
  Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination. American
  Economic Review, 94(4), 991 – 1013.




                                            33
Betts, J. R. (2010). School Quality and Earnings. In P. Peterson, E. Baker, & B. McGaw
  (Eds.) International Encyclopedia of Education, (pp. 313–320). Oxford: Elsevier, 3 ed.

Biewen, M. (2014). A General Decomposition Formula with Interaction Effects. Applied
  Economics Letters, 21(9), 636–642.

Bound, J., & Freeman, R. (1992). What Went Wrong? The Erosion of the Relative Earn-
  ings and Employment among Young Black Men in the 1980s. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 107(1), 151–200.

Boustan, L. P. (2007). Black Migration, White Flight: The Effect of Black Migration on
  Northern Cities and Labor Markets. The Journal of Economic History, 67(02), 484–488.

Card, D., & Krueger, A. B. (1992a). Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education
  and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States. The Journal of Political
  Economy, 100, 1–40.

Card, D., & Krueger, A. B. (1992b). School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings:
  A Direct Assessment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 201–232.

Carneiro, P., Heckman, J. J., & Masterov, D. V. (2005). Labor Market Discrimination and
  Racial Differences in Premarket Factors. Journal of Law and Economics, 48(1), 1 – 39.

Carruthers, C. K., & Wanamaker, M. H. (2013). Closing the Gap? The Effect of Private
  Philanthropy on the Provision of African-American Schooling in the U.S. South. The
  Journal of Public Economics, 101, 53–67.

Carruthers, C. K., & Wanamaker, M. H. (2015). Municipal Housekeeping: The Impact
  of Women’s Suffrage on Public Education. The Journal of Human Resources, 50(4),
  837–872.

Cascio, E. U., & Washington, E. L. (2013). Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution of Voting
  Rights and State Funds Following the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 129(1), 379–433.

                                           34
Chandra, A. (2000). Labor-Market Dropouts and the Racial Wage Gap: 1940-1990. The
  American Economic Review, 90(2), 333–338.

Charles, K. K., & Guryan, J. (2008). Prejudice and wages: An empirical assessment of
  Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination. Journal of Political Economy, 116(5), 773–
  809.

Chay, K., & Lee, D. (2000). Changes in Relative Wages in the 1980s: Returns to Observed
  and Unobserved Skills and Black-White Wage Differentials. Journal of Econometrics,
  78(1), 1–38.

Collins, W. J., & Margo, R. A. (2006). Historical Perspectives on Racial Differences in
  Schooling in the United States. In E. A. Hanushek, & F. Welch (Eds.) Handbook of the
  Economics of Education, (pp. 107–154). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Collins, W. J., & Wanamaker, M. H. (2014). Selection and Economic Gains in the Great
  Migration of African Americans: New Evidence from Linked Census Data. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1), 220–252.

Darity, Jr., W. A., & Mason, P. L. (1998). Evidence on Discrimination in Employment:
  Codes of Color, Codes of Gender. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(2), 63–90.

Donohue, J. J., & Heckman, J. (1991). Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of
  Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks. Journal of Economic Literature,
  29(4), 1603 – 1643.

Fishback, P. V. (1989). Can Competition among Employers Reduce Governmental Dis-
  crimination? Coal Mines and Segregated Schools in West Virginia in the Early 1900s.
  Journal of Law and Economics, 32, 311–328.

Fryer, R. (2011). Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of
  Discrimination. In D. Card, & O. Ashenfelter (Eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics,
  vol. 4B. North-Holland.


                                          35
Gelbach, J. B. (in press). When Do Covariates Matter? And Which Ones, and How Much?
  Journal of Labor Economics, 34(2).

Goldin, C. (1990). Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American
  Women. New York: Oxford University Press.

Goldin, C. (2001). The Human Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues of the
  Past. Journal of Economic History, 61(2), 263–92.

Goldin, C., & Katz, L. F. (2000). Education and Income in the Early Twentieth Century:
  Evidence from the Prairies. Journal of Economic History, 60(3), 782 – 818.

Goldin, C., & Margo, R. A. (1992). The Great Compression: The Wage Structure in the
  United States at Mid-century. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 1 – 34.

Hanushek, E. A., Rivkin, S. G., & Taylor, L. L. (1996). Aggregation and the Estimated
  Effects of School Resources. Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(4), 611–627.

Heckman, J. J., Lyons, T. M., & Todd, P. E. (2000). Understanding black-white wage
  differentials, 1960-1990. American Economic Review, (pp. 344–349).

Heckman, J. J., & Payner, B. S. (1989). Determining the Impact of Federal Antidiscrimi-
  nation Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South Carolina. American
  Economic Review, 79(1), 138 – 177.

Heywood, J. S., & Parent, D. (2012). Performance Pay and the Black-White Wage Gap.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 30(2), 249–90.

Higgs, R. (1977). Firm-specific Evidence on Racial Wage Differentials and Workforce
  Segregation. American Economic Review, 67(2), 236–245.

Johnson, G. E., & Stafford, F. P. (1973). Social Returns to Quantity and Quality of School-
  ing. The Journal of Human Resources, 8(2), 139–155.




                                            36
Johnson, W. R., & Neal, D. (2011). Basic Skills and the Black-White Earnings Gap. In
  C. Jencks, & M. Phillips (Eds.) The Black-White Test Score Gap, (pp. 480–498). Wash-
  ington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Kose, E., Kuka, E., & Shenhav, N. (2015). Women’s Enfranchisement and Children’s
  Education: The Long-Run Impact of the U.S. Suffrage Movement. Working Paper.

Lang, K. (2007). Poverty and Discrimination. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Lang, K., & Lehmann, J.-Y. K. (2012). Racial Discimination in the Labor Market: Theory
  and Empirics. Journal of Economic Literature, 50(4), 959–1006.

Lang, K., & Manove, M. (2011). Education and Labor Market Discrimination. American
  Economic Review, 101(4), 1467–96.

Lazear, E. P. (1991). Discrimination in labor markets. In E. P. Hoffman (Ed.) Essays on
  the economics of discrimination, (pp. 9 – 24). Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for
  Employment Research.

Link, C., Ratledge, E., & Lewis, K. (1976). Black-White Differences in Returns to School-
  ing: Some New Evidence. The American Economic Review, 66(1), 221–223.

Link, C. R., & Ratledge, E. C. (1975). Social Returns to Quantity and Quality of Education:
  A Further Statement. The Journal of Human Resources, 10(1), 78–89.

Margo, R. A. (1984). Teacher Salaries in Black and White: The South in 1910. Explo-
  rations in Economic History, 21, 306–326.

Margo, R. A. (1986). Race, Educational Attainment, and the 1940 Census. The Journal of
  Economic History, 46(1), 189–198.

Margo, R. A. (1987). Accounting for Racial Differences in School Attendance in the Amer-
  ican South, 1900: The Role of Separate-but-Equal. Review of Economics and Statistics,
  69(4), 661–666.


                                            37
Margo, R. A. (1990). Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History.
  Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Margo, R. A. (2015). Presidential Address: Obama, Katrina, and the Persistence of Racial
  Inequality. The Journal of Economic History, Forthcoming.

Morgan, J., & Sirageldin, I. (1968). A Note on the Quality Dimension in Education. Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 76(5), 1069–1077.

Morgenstern, R. D. (1973). Direct and Indirect Effects on Earnings of Schooling and
  Socio-Economic Background. Review of Economics and Statistics, 55(2), 225–233.

Neal, D. A., & Johnson, W. R. (1996). The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
  Wage Differences. Journal of Political Economy, 104, 869–895.

Nechyba, T. J. (1990). The Southern Wage Gap, Human Capital and the Quality of Educa-
  tion. Southern Economic Journal, 57(2), 308–322.

Oaxaca, R. L., & Ransom, M. R. (1994). On discrimination and the decomposition of wage
  differentials. Journal of Econometrics, 61(1), 5–21.

Oettinger, G. S. (1996). Statistical Discrimination and the Early Career Evolution of the
  Black-White Wage Gap. Journal of Labor Economics, 1(14), 52–78.

O’Neill, D., Sweetman, O., & Van de gaer, D. (2006). The Impact of Cognitive Skills on
  the Distribution of the Black-White Wage Gap. Labour Economics, 13(3), 343 – 356.

Orazem, P. F. (1987). Black-White Differences in Schooling Investment and Human Capi-
  tal Production in Segregated Schools. The American Economic Review, 77(4), 714–723.

Rizzuto, R., & Wachtel, P. (1980). Further Evidence on the Returns to School Quality. The
  Journal of Human Resources, 15(2), 240–254.

Ruggles, S., Alexander, J. T., Genadek, K., Goeken, R., Schroeder, M. B., & Sobek,
  M. (2010). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 (Machine-Readable
  Database). University of Minnesota.

                                           38
Smith, J. P. (1984). Race and Human Capital. American Economic Review, 74(4), 685–98.

Smith, J. P., & Welch, F. (1986). Closing the Gap: Forty Years of Economic Progress for
  Blacks. Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation.

Smith, J. P., & Welch, F. (1989). Black Economic Progress After Myrdal. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 27, 519–564.

Sundstrom, W. A. (2007). The Geography of Wage Discrimination in the Pre-Civil Rights
  South. Journal of Economic History, 67(2), 410 – 444.

Troesken, W., Ferrie, J. P., & Rolf, K. (2012). Cognitive Disparities, Lead Plumbing,
  and Water Chemistry: Prior Exposure to Water-Borne Lead and Intelligence Test Scores
  Among World War Two Army Enlistees. Economics and Human Biology, 10(1), 98–112.

Wachtel, P. (1975). The Effect of School Quality on Achievement, Attainment Levels, and
  Lifetime Earnings. Explorations in Economic Research, 2, 502–536.

Wachtel, P. (1976). The Effect on Earnings of School and College Investment Expenditures.
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 58, 326–331.

Weinberger, C., & Joy, L. (2007). Relative Earnings of Black College Graduates, 1980-
  2001. In M. Kim (Ed.) Race and Economic Opportunity in the Twenty-First Century,
  (pp. 50–72). New York: Routledge.

Welch, F. (1974). Education and Racial Discrimination. In O. Ashenfelter, & A. Rees
  (Eds.) Discrimination in Labor Markets. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Whatley, W., & Wright, G. (1994). Race, Human Capital, and Labour Markets in American
  History. In G. Grantham, & M. MacKinnon (Eds.) Labour Markets in History, (pp. 270–
  91). Toronto: Routledge.

Wright, G. (2013). Sharing the Prize: The Economics of the Civil Rights Revolution in the
  American South. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.


                                           39
Zeidner, J., & Drucker, A. J. (1983). Behavioral Science in the Army: A Corporate History
  of the Army Research Institute. Alexandria, VA: U. S. Army Research Institute for the
  Behavioral and Social Sciences.




                                           40
Tables and Figures




                                                                                   .15
  1
  .8




                                                                                   .1
  .6
  .4




                                                                                   .05
  .2
  0




                                                                                   0
       −2         −1               0              1              2          3
                                           x                                             0      5                 10                15       20

                           Average school quality − black respondents                                School attainment − white respondents
                           Average school quality − white respondents                                School attainment − black respondents




F IGURE 1: School quality and educational attainment kernel densities for black and white
                               1940 census respondents.



                                                  White                                      Black
                      .5




                                                                                                                           7
                                                                                                                           6
            Density




                                                                                                                           5
                      0

                          of l
                        C ial
                                  al
                      ra es
                Se Op an

                 Fa wo e
                         la er
                        La rer

                                   r



                          of l
                        C ial
                                  al
                      ra es
                Se Op an

                 Fa wo e
                         la er
                        La rer

                                   r
                      or na




                      or ona
                                re




                                re
                       e tiv




                       e tiv
                              ric




                              ric
                    rm rk




                    rm rk
                             fic




                             fic
                    C Sal




                    C al
                             m




                             m
                            bo
                            bo




                            bo
                            bo
                   gr sio




                  rv era




                  rv era
                           le




                           le

                           S
                            i
                         fts




                         fts
                 M ss
                       es




                       e
                    of




                    of
                    ic




                    ic
                   gr
                  Pr




                  Pr
                       M




                                                                     Occupation Category
                                                                           Ave. ln(income)
                      Graphs by RACE



   F IGURE 2: Occupation distributions for black and white 1940 census respondents.
  Average (log) wages within those occupations, across both races, are reported on the
                                     second axis.




                                                                            41
                                       TABLE 1: Decomposition of the Black-White Pay Gap: The Role of Human Capital
     Study                      Data                            Proxy for human capital                                                Percentage of total wage gap   Log gap remaining after
                                                                                                                                       explained by human capital     controlling for human capital

     Altonji & Blank (1999)     1980 CPS, all workers           years of schooling                                                     25%                            -0.11
     Altonji & Blank (1999)     1996 CPS, all workers           years of schooling                                                     43%                            -0.12
     Altonji & Blank (1999)     NLSY1979, age 29 - 37 in 1994   years of schooling, AFQT                                               61%                            -0.06
     Altonji & Pierret (2001)   NLSY1979, age 27 - 34 in 1992   years of schooling, AFQT, father’s education, labor force experience   n/a                            -0.133
     Card & Krueger (1992b)     1960-1980 Census, age 21 - 60   years of schooling, state-level school quality                         20% of gap narrowing           n/a
     Carneiro et al. (2005)     NLSY1979, age 26 - 28 in 1990   years of schooling,   8th -grade   equivalent AFQT                     53-65%                         -0.144 - -0.241
                                and 36 - 38 in 2000
     Fryer (2011)               NLSY1979, age 42 - 44           AFQT                                                                   women: all                     women: 0.127




42
                                                                                                                                       men: 72%                       men: -0.109
     Fryer (2011)               NLSY1997, age 21 - 27           AFQT                                                                   women: 71%                     women: -0.044
                                                                                                                                       men: 39%                       men: -0.109
     Fryer (2011)               College and Beyond 1976,        SAT                                                                    women: 53%                     women: 0.286
                                approx. age 38                                                                                         men: 44%                       men: -0.152
     Lang & Manove (2011)       NLSY1979, age 32 - 38           AFQT, years of schooling, school inputs                                70%                            -0.11
     Neal & Johnson (1996)      NLSY1979, age 26 - 29           AFQT                                                                   100%                           women: insig.
                                                                                                                                       men: 70%                       men: -0.072
     Oaxaca & Ransom (1994)     1988 CPS, age 25 and up         years of schooling                                                     43%                            -0.125
     O’Neill et al. (2006)      NLSY1979, age 29 - 31           AFQT, father’s education, non-cognitive skills                         46-114%,                       falls with quantile
                                                                                                                                       rising with wage quantile
TABLE 2: School Quality Index — Mean Values and
              Standard Deviation

                        All                   Black                   White
                      Schools              Schools Only            Schools Only

                  Mean       S.D.          Mean      S.D.         Mean      S.D.

All States         0.029    0.853         -0.415    0.889         0.431     0.574

Alabama           -0.361    0.775         -0.943    0.472         0.225     0.548
Arkansas          -0.169    0.649         -0.462    0.782         0.064     0.384
Georgia           -0.206    0.971         -0.792    0.947         0.381     0.549
Kentucky          -0.018    1.206         -0.094    1.652         0.056     0.448
Louisiana          0.095    1.002         -0.774    0.451         0.964     0.543
Mississippi       -0.223    1.274         -0.677    1.089         0.273     1.278
North Carolina     0.095    0.426         -0.186    0.310         0.374     0.333
South Carolina     0.085    0.889         -0.759    0.241         0.929     0.312
Tennessee         -0.046    0.625         -0.037    0.820        -0.055     0.362
Texas              0.328    0.750         -0.147    0.802         0.679     0.462

 Notes: Authors’ calculations from annual reports of state education departments.
 The table gives the mean and standard deviation of Qct , as defined in the text.
 The unit of observation is a county-race-year, and statistics are calculated across
 all years in the panel (1922-1940).




                                      43
                                TABLE 3: Summary Statistics

                                                         (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)

                                                                             BASELINE        BASELINE
                                                        ALL        ALL        SAMPLE          SAMPLE
                                                       BLACK      WHITE        BLACK           WHITE

Individual
Average Annual Wage Income (1939) in natural log        5.42       5.93        5.42            5.93
Average Weekly Wage (1939) in natural log               1.87       2.40        1.87            2.40
% Reporting                                            58.8       56.0       100.0           100.0

Occupational Score‡ in natural log                      6.99       7.35         6.99           7.35
% Reporting                                            87.0       82.2         97.5           96.4

Average Weeks Worked (1939)                            40.9       40.8         39.0           38.8

Unemployment Rate‡                                      9.2        9.5          9.9            8.9

If Unemployed, Duration (continuous weeks)†            38.8       45.4         35.4           43.8

Labor Force Participation Rate‡                        88.9       85.0         98.2           97.5

Highest Grade Completed                                 5.6        8.9          5.6            8.9

School Quality Index (Standardized (0,1))              -0.55       0.48        -0.50           0.55

State of Residence in 1940
   Alabama                                             12.8        9.0         12.3            8.7
   Arkansas                                             5.6        6.5          4.0            6.0
   Georgia                                             15.5        9.6         18.1            9.7
   Kentucky                                             2.7       12.2          3.0           10.9
   Louisiana                                           11.4        7.5         12.4            7.5
   Mississippi                                          6.6        2.2          3.8            2.2
   North Carolina                                      14.3       12.6         14.3           12.7
   South Carolina                                      13.9        5.6         14.0            6.2
   Tennessee                                            5.8       11.6          6.4           11.0
   Texas                                               11.6       23.3         11.8           25.0

County of Residence
Percent Rural                                          68.4       67.2         64.2           62.0

Per Capita Manufacturing Value ($1940)                 69.6       73.6         80.1           86.7

Per Capita Retail Sales ($1940)                         0.19       0.20         0.21           0.22

Per Capita Crop Value ($1940)                          59.3       53.0         53.4           46.3

Number of observations                                  5,423     14,849        3,141           8,253
 Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1940 IPUMS data (Ruggles et al., 2010) and annual reports of state
 education departments. All variables measured in 1940 unless otherwise noted. Includes all black and white
 males from the 1940 IPUMS sample aged 18 to 25 who lived within the ten southern states covered by our
 school quality data with reported years of schooling and 1935 county of residence. Columns 3 and 4 contain
 only those individuals for whom earnings data are available. † Up to March 30, 1940. ‡ As of reference
 week (March 24-30, 1940).




                                                  44
          TABLE 4: Estimates of Black-White Labor Market Outcome Gaps


Column                           (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)

Outcome                                  ln(Weekly Wage)                                ln(Occupation Score)
Unconditional gap (st. err.)               -0.529 (0.024)                                  -0.359 (0.016)

BLACK-WHITE GAP                -0.490    -0.315     -0.181      -0.191        -0.334     -0.203     -0.160     -0.168
                               (0.022)   (0.022)    (0.031)     (0.032)       (0.014)    (0.015)    (0.021)    (0.022)
Contribution of                  –          –       -0.140      -0.011           –          –       -0.044      0.136
School Quality                   –          –       (0.022)     (0.046)          –          –       (0.016)    (0.041)
Contribution of                  –          –       -0.168      -0.164           –          –       -0.129     -0.129
Educ. Attainment                 –          –       (0.010)     (0.011)          –          –       (0.007)    (0.008)
Contribution of                  –          –          –        -0.123           –          –          –       -0.174
Interaction                      –          –          –        (0.043)          –          –          –       (0.038)
Age and County Controls?         X         X           X           X             X          X          X          X
Years of schooling?                        X           X           X                        X          X          X
School quality?                                        X           X                                   X          X
Interacted HC Controls?                                            X                                              X
N                              11,394    11,394     11,394      11,394        11,021     11,021     11,021     11,021
Adjusted R-Squared              0.24      0.29       0.30        0.30          0.18       0.25       0.25       0.26


Column                           (9)      (10)        (11)       (12)           (13)       (14)       (15)       (16)

Outcome                                  ln(Annual Wages)                                ln(Weeks Worked)
Unconditional gap (st. err.)               -0.513 (0.027)                                   0.016 (0.014)

BLACK-WHITE GAP                -0.467    -0.265     -0.116      -0.137         0.023      0.050      0.065      0.054
                               (0.024)   (0.027)    (0.037)     (0.038)       (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.024)    (0.024)
Contribution of                  –          –       -0.155       0.080           –          –       -0.014      0.092
School Quality                   –          –       (0.026)     (0.050)          –          –       (0.018)    (0.043)
Contribution of                  –          –       -0.196      -0.184           –          –       -0.027     -0.020
Educ. Attainment                 –          –       (0.013)     (0.014)          –          –       (0.007)    (0.010)
Contribution of                  –          –          –        -0.226           –          –          –       -0.102
Interaction                      –          –          –        (0.046)          –          –          –       (0.040)
Age and County Controls?         X         X           X          X              X          X          X          X
Years of schooling?                        X           X          X                         X          X          X
School quality?                                        X          X                                    X          X
Interacted HC Controls?                                           X                                               X

N                              11,394    11,394     11,394      11,394        11,394     11,394     11,394     11,394
Adjusted R-Squared              0.22      0.26       0.27        0.28          0.04       0.05       0.05       0.06
 Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1940 IPUMS data (Ruggles et al., 2010) and annual reports of state education de-
 partments. Unconditional gaps are found under outcome headings. Columns 1, 5, 9, and 13 represent coefficients from
 an regression of log weekly wages, log occupational score, log annual wage, and log weeks worked, respectively, on
 race indicators as well as age fixed effects and county covariates. Columns 2, 6, 10, and 14 add a cubic function of
 educational attainment to the regression. Columns 3, 7, 11 and 15 include cubic functions of educational attainment
 and school quality. Columns 4, 8, 12, and 16 include controls for cubic functions of human capital and their complete
 interaction. Gelbach (in press) contributions of school quality and years of schooling in attenuation of the black-white
 gap (i.e., the difference between the age and location-adjusted wage gap in columns 1, 5, 9, and 13 and the human
 capital-adjusted model in columns 3-4, 7-8, 11-12, and 15-16) are listed below coefficient estimates. County covariates
 include the percent urban population, crop value per capita, retail sales per capita, and manufacturing value added per
 capita.




                                                           45
           TABLE 5: Returns to Human Capital in Equation 1


                     ln(Weekly Wage)       ln(Occ Score)    ln(Annual Wage)       ln(Weeks Worked)

Marginal Effect of    0.223                 0.088            0.263                 0.041
School Quality       (0.056)               (0.038)          (0.071)               (0.049)

Marginal Effect of    0.055                 0.038            0.063                 0.008
Educ. Attainment     (0.010)               (0.008)          (0.013)               (0.010)

 Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1940 IPUMS data (Ruggles et al., 2010) and annual reports of state
 education departments. The table contains estimated marginal effects for school quality or educational
 attainment, evaluated at the mean. Bootstrapped standard errors (from 1,000 replications within 10
 percent random subsamples) are in parentheses.




                                                46
               TABLE 6: Estimates of Black-White Labor Market Outcome Gaps, Excluding Non-Migrant Blacks


     Column                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)

     Outcome                              ln(Weekly Wage)                 ln(Occupation Score)                    ln(Annual Wages)                 ln(Weeks Worked)

     BLACK-WHITE GAP              -0.411      -0.428    -0.192        -0.360    -0.354     -0.276         -0.415      -0.439    -0.062        -0.004     -0.011      0.130




47
                                  (0.048)     (0.055)   (0.072)       (0.038)   (0.036)    (0.050)        (0.065)     (0.072)   (0.097)       (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.057)

     Age and County Controls?                   X           X                      X          X                          X           X                     X          X
     Interacted HC Controls?                                X                                 X                                      X                                X

     N                            8,464       8,464     8,464         8,166     8,166      8,166          8,464       8,464     8,464         8,464      8,464      8,464
     Adjusted R-Squared            0.01        0.17      0.26          0.01      0.12       0.23           0.00        0.20      0.27          0.00       0.06       0.07
      Notes: See notes to Table 4. Black males who did not migrate between counties over 1935-1940 are excluded from the estimation. See further discussion in Section 4.2.
     TABLE 7: Estimates of Black-White Labor Market Outcome Gaps, Including Unobserved Ability Estimates


     Column                                            (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)     (5)           (6)        (7)         (8)          (9)    (10)

     Outcome                                                           ln(Weekly Wage)                                           ln(Annual Wages)
     Unconditional gap (st. err)                                         -0.529 (0.024)                                            -0.513 (0.027)

     BLACK-WHITE GAP                                 -0.191    -0.125      -0.138    -0.146     -0.201        -0.137     -0.011      -0.037    -0.111     -0.142
                                                     (0.032)   (0.041)     (0.043)   (0.037)    (0.033)       (0.038)    (0.049)     (0.047)   (0.042)    (0.037)




48
     Baseline: fully interacted HC                     X                                                         X
     Method 1: binned AGCT estimates                              X                                                         X
     Method 2: AGCT predicted by polynomial                                   X                                                         X
     Method 3: AGCT predicted by regression tree                                          X                                                         X
     False AGCT                                                                                   X                                                         X

     N                                               11,394    11,261      11,394    11,394     11,394        11,394     11,261      11,394    11,394     11,394
     Adjusted R-Squared                               0.30      0.30        0.30      0.30       0.30          0.28       0.28        0.28      0.27       0.28
      Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1940 IPUMS data (Ruggles et al., 2010), World War II enlistment records, and annual reports of state education departments.
      See specifications and further discussion in Section 4.3.
 TABLE 8: Decompositions of the Black-White Wage Gap


Column                                                    (1)                  (2)

Outcome                                          ln(Weekly Wage)      ln(Annual Wage)

Black-White Gap
Baseline Difference                              -0.529               -0.513
Oaxaca Decomposition
   Difference due to endowments                  -0.311               -0.304
                                                 (0.044)              (0.053)
    Difference due to β’s                        -0.104                0.246
                                                 (0.099)              (0.129)
          On Cubic in Educational Attainment     -0.128               -0.531
                                                 (0.294)              (0.381)
          On Cubic in School Quality             -0.043                0.753
                                                 (0.392)              (0.508)
          All Other Covariates                    0.067                0.025
                                                 (0.139)              (0.173)
    Difference due to interaction                -0.114               -0.455
                                                 (0.108)              (0.139)

 Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1940 IPUMS data (Ruggles et al., 2010) and annual
 reports of state education departments. See Section 5 for discussion. Standard errors in
 parentheses.




                                         49
                  TABLE 9: Estimates of Black-White Labor Market Outcome Gaps, With Occupation Fixed Effects


     Column                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)           (9)        (10)        (11)      (12)

     Outcome                                          ln(Weekly Wage)                                ln(Annual Wages)                               ln(Weeks Worked)

     BLACK-WHITE GAP                       -0.288     -0.294     -0.140     -0.151        -0.212     -0.221     -0.046     -0.067         0.077      0.073        0.094     0.084
                                           (0.018)    (0.018)    (0.028)    (0.029)       (0.023)    (0.022)    (0.035)    (0.035)       (0.015)    (0.015)      (0.026)   (0.026)

     Contribution of                          –          –       -0.090     -0.027           –          –       -0.094      0.040           –          –         -0.004     0.067
     School Quality                           –          –       (0.020)    (0.042)          –          –       (0.023)    (0.050)          –          –         (0.017)   (0.042)
     Contribution of                          –          –       -0.061     -0.053           –          –       -0.077     -0.068           –          –         -0.016    -0.016




50
     Educ Attainment                          –          –       (0.006)    (0.008)          –          –       (0.008)    (0.009)          –          –         (0.005)   (0.007)
     Contribution of                          –          –          –       -0.060           –          –          –       -0.122           –          –           –       -0.061
     Interaction                              –          –          –       (0.039)          –          –          –       (0.043)          –          –           –       (0.038)

     Occupation Category Fixed Effects?       X         X          X          X              X          X         X          X              X          X           X         X
     Age and County Controls?                           X          X          X                         X         X          X                         X           X         X
     HC Controls?                                                  X          X                                   X          X                                     X         X
     Interacted HC Controls?                                                  X                                              X                                               X

     N                                     11,021     11,021     11,021     11,021        11,021     11,021     11,021     11,021        11,021     11,021       11,021    11,021
     Adjusted R-Squared                     0.33       0.36       0.38       0.39          0.27       0.33       0.35       0.35          0.03       0.06         0.06      0.07
      Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1940 IPUMS data (Ruggles et al., 2010) and annual reports of state education departments. See discussion in Section 6.
TABLE 10: Counterfactual Estimates of Black and White
                     Earnings


 Column                                        (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)

 Outcome                                      ln(Weekly Wage)       ln(Annual Wage)
                                              Black    White        Black    White

 (1) As measured in 1940

                                              1.868     2.403       5.414    5.937
                        Black-White Gap             -0.535               -0.522
                                                   (0.023)              (0.025)
 (2) Counterfactual “separate but equal” estimates

     (2a) With pooled coefficients            1.967     2.372       5.508    5.889
                      Black-White Gap               -0.405               -0.381
                                                   (0.013)              (0.016)
     (2b) With race-specific coefficients     1.996     2.375       5.578    5.885
                      Black-White Gap               -0.379               -0.307
                                                   (0.013)              (0.019)
 (3) Counterfactual “separate but equal” estimates with endogenous attainment

     (3a) With pooled coefficients            2.024     2.345       5.575    5.860
                      Black-White Gap               -0.321               -0.286
                                                   (0.014)              (0.017)
     (3b) With race-specific coefficients     2.024     2.344       5.593    5.850
                      Black-White Gap               -0.320               -0.256
                                                   (0.014)              (0.019)


  Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1940 IPUMS data (Ruggles et al., 2010), annual
  reports of state education departments, and Aaronson & Mazumder (2011) results
  for the quasi-experimental impact of school quality on years of schooling. The ta-
  ble compares black and white weekly and annual wages under counterfactual levels
  of school quality and educational attainment. Counterfactuals are estimated by es-
  timating Equation 1, with controls for individual and county covariates, and then
  altering covariates of interest, and predicting outcomes. The remaining differences
  are estimated as the coefficient on RACE in an equation with the predicted values as
  the dependent variable and no other controls. For each outcome, row (2a) lists the
  counterfactual values under equalized school quality for black and white students
  at the county average, holding years of schooling constant. Row (2b) equalizes
  school quality, but also allows for race interactions in school quality coefficients in
  the prediction equation. Row (3a) allows black years of schooling to increase with
  school quality according to the elasticity of time in school with respect to school
  quality as reported by Aaronson & Mazumder (2011), Table 5, column 1 (1.186
  years per Rosenwald exposure). Row (3b) again allows for race-specific returns to
  attainment and school quality.




                                         51
