NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRATION TO THE U.S.:
A PROBLEM FOR THE REPUBLICANS OR THE DEMOCRATS?
Anna Maria Mayda
Giovanni Peri
Walter Steingress
Working Paper 21941
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21941

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016

The authors would like to thank Claudia Goldin, Daniel Hopkins and seminar participants at Vanderbilt
University and at the OECD 5th Annual International Conference "Immigration in OECD Countries"
for useful suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not
reflect those of the Banque de France. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21941.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Anna Maria Mayda, Giovanni Peri, and Walter Steingress. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Immigration to the U.S.: A problem for the Republicans or the Democrats?
Anna Maria Mayda, Giovanni Peri, and Walter Steingress
NBER Working Paper No. 21941
January 2016
JEL No. F22,Z28
ABSTRACT
We empirically analyze the impact of immigration to the U.S. on the share of votes to the Republicans
and Democrats between 1994 and 2012. Our analysis is based on variation across states and years
– using data from the Current Population Survey merged with election data – and addresses the endogeneity
of immigrant flows using a novel set of instruments. On average across election types, immigration
to the U.S. has a significant and negative impact on the Republican vote share, consistent with the
typical view of political analysts in the U.S. This average effect – which is driven by elections in the
House – works through two main channels. The impact of immigration on Republican votes in the
House is negative when the share of naturalized migrants in the voting population increases. Yet, it
can be positive when the share of non-citizen migrants out of the population goes up and the size of
migration makes it a salient policy issue in voters' minds. These results are consistent with naturalized
migrants being less likely to vote for the Republican party than native voters and with native voters'
political preferences moving towards the Republican party because of high immigration of non-citizens.
This second effect, however, is significant only for very high levels of immigrant presence.

Anna Maria Mayda
Dept. of Economics, ICC 552
Georgetown University
37th and O Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20057
amm223@georgetown.edu
Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

Walter Steingress
Banque de France
31 Rue Croix des Petites Champs
Paris 75001, France
Walter.Steingress@banque-france.fr

“... the enormous flow of legal immigrants to the country has remade and
continues to remake the nation’s electorate in favor of the Democratic
Party.”(Center for Immigration Studies (CIS) Background by James G.
Gimpel, April 2014)
“Many white Americans see that America is changing, believe that immigration is driving many of the negative changes and know that one party
stands largely on the side of immigrants while the other party stands
largely in opposition. For many whites, this is a powerful motivation to
vote Republican.”(New York Times Op Ed article, November 20, 2014)

1

Introduction

The topic of international migration and its consequences frequently occupies the
headlines of newspapers and television news shows in many rich countries. Political
leaders’ stand vis-a-vis this issue can be a very important determinant of their electoral success or failure. In the United States the presidential debates have focussed
over time on all issues related to migration – ranging from illegal migrants to the birth
right to citizenship. That migration has a defining effect on political outcomes has
already been pointed out in the literature (see for example Ortega (2005) and other
works discussed in Section 2) and, as noted above, is definitely taken into account
by politicians. Yet, to our knowledge, no study relative to the U.S. case has looked
directly and systematically at one crucial aspect of the political effect of immigrants,
namely their impact on the U.S. election outcomes and specifically on the share of
votes to the two main political parties (Republicans and Democrats).1 Against this
background, this paper contributes to the literature by analyzing the link between
migration to the U.S. and the vote share for the Republican and Democratic parties
in every election between 1994 and 2012. To that goal, we exploit the large variation
in immigration across states and years and the corresponding electoral outcomes.
We use data from the Current Population Survey merged with the National Library
of Congress Election data and, relying on a new identification strategy, we estimate
the causal effect of immigrants on the share of votes to the two parties.
The number and share of immigrants in the U.S. adult population and labor force
have been rising steadily over the last four decades. Based on data from the U.S.
1

The only exception is a recent paper, Baerg et al. (2014), which estimates a negative impact of
the share of unauthorized workers on the proportion of votes going to the Democrats in the U.S.
state of Georgia, using variation across counties.

2

Census, there were 6.2 million foreign-born adults in the labor force in the U.S. (7.1
percent of that group) in 1980, their number grew to 10.3 million (10.1 percent) in
1990, to 15.6 million (14.4 percent) in 2000 and to 22.4 million (19.1 percent) in
2010.2 Given its magnitude, immigration to the U.S. is likely to have sizable effects
on its economy and society, through several different channels. Immigrants may
affect native workers’ opportunities in the labor market, as investigated by a large
literature (see, for example the book by Borjas (2014) and the surveys by Blau and
Kahn (2012) and Lewis and Peri (2014) as overviews of this literature). Immigrants
are also likely to impact the destination country’s government budget, by paying
taxes, receiving public welfare and transfers and using public goods (see for instance
Edmonston et al. (1997) and Boeri et al. (2002)). In addition, the literature points
out several potential social effects of immigration on culture, social norms and on
crime and security3 . Finally, immigrants can also produce political changes in the
destination country. The impact through the political channel is very important since
it has the potential to affect the democratic support for institutions and policies in
the destination country and hence to produce long lasting effects.
One crucial element to understand the effect of immigrants on vote shares is
to recognize that election outcomes can be affected by immigration through two
channels, captured by the presence of two different groups of immigrants. The first
channel is related to the indirect political effect of immigration working through
migrants’ impact on existing voters, who are mainly natives. It is voters’ perceived
impact of immigrants that affects how they cast their vote – and this perceived effect
is likely to be stronger the more numerous migrants are. Votes can shift towards a
political party if its policies, related to migration, increase voters’ utility and if voters
perceive immigration as an important issue. The second channel, instead, is related
to the direct political role of immigrants as voters. As they become naturalized,
immigrants affect elections, to the extent that they vote differently from natives.
As far as the first (indirect) effect of immigrants is concerned, voters can perceive
the local presence of immigrants as associated with local amenities or dis-amenities
– such as cultural effects – or with changes in economic variables – such as wages,
employment, taxes and public goods – that they care about and that parties’ poli2

For both natives and immigrants, the sample includes wage-earning, civilian employees, age
18-64.
3
Examples are Giuliano (2007), Alesina and Giuliano (2011) which show how immigrants affect
the transmission of social norms. Butcher and Piehl (1998), Chalfin (2015) and Spenkuch (2013)
analyze the effect of immigration on crime rates in U.S. cities.

3

cies can influence. These policies may be directly related to migration, like migration
policy, or may be other types of government interventions. In the latter case, for example, if native voters think that immigrants generate a net fiscal transfer from them,
they might be pushed to vote for the Republican party which favors less redistribution and less safety-net policies.4 As far as the second (direct) effect of immigrants is
concerned, instead, once they are naturalized, immigrants will also cast their vote expressing their electoral preferences, which are usually different from those of natives:
This will affect the aggregate election outcome. In the U.S., where naturalization
rates are high5 , this second channel is likely to be important. Immigration, therefore, may have different impacts depending on the balance of immigrant citizens and
non-citizens and on how strong the voting response of citizens is to their presence.
The U.S. press and media, as well as political analysts (e.g. Gimpel (2014)), have
for the most part focused on the direct effect (the second described above), pointing
out the potential adverse impact that migrants can have on the electoral success of
the Republican party, as immigrants seem more likely to vote for the Democratic
Party.6 Many political commentators even see an inevitable demise of the Republican party, in the long-run, as first- and second-generation immigrants become more
numerous. Our analysis confirms this prediction by showing that, on average, immigration to the U.S. has a significant and negative impact on the Republican vote
share. In particular, we find this effect in the House elections but not in other types
of elections (Senate, Presidential and Gubernatorial). However an important aspect
of the political effect of migration, which has received less attention, is that natives’
votes, too, could be affected by the increase in the share of immigrants, as mentioned
above.7 Our empirical analysis shows that this is the case. When we distinguish between the effect of naturalized and non-naturalized immigrants we find a significant,
negative and linear effect of those naturalized on the share of Republican votes in the
House elections. On the other hand, when the share of non-naturalized immigrants
increases, there is a small negative or insignificant linear effect on the share of Republican votes but, if we allow for a non-linear (quadratic) effect, we actually find a
positive impact for large levels of immigrants’ shares (above 0.132). In other words,
native voters’ political preferences move towards the Republican party because of
4

At the same time, if immigrants have only limited access to the welfare state, as can be the
case with illegal immigrants, native voters might vote for the party in favor of redistribution and
safety-net policies, if they believe that immigration is negatively affecting their incomes.
5
In our data set (1994-2012), naturalized immigrants are about 40% of total immigrants.
6
See first quote at the beginning of the paper.
7
See second quote at the beginning of the paper.

4

high immigration of non-citizens. This is interesting and plausible given that, when
non-naturalized immigrants – many of whom are new immigrants and some undocumented – become a large share in a state, perceptions by voters become acute, making
immigration a salient feature in the voting decision of natives. Our estimates reveal
that in states characterized by a very high non-naturalized immigrant share of the
population (6 states in 2012: California, District of Columbia, Nevada, New Jersey,
New York and Texas), the Republican vote share in House elections is positively and
significantly affected by an increase in new (non-naturalized) immigrants. However,
when the share of non-naturalized immigrants in the population is less than 13.2%,
the impact of an increase in this share on Republican votes is null to negative. In this
case, the main effect of immigration is to add voters to the electorate, who tend to
vote for the Democratic party. Overall our results are consistent with the hypothesis
that naturalized immigrants are less likely to vote for the Republican party than
native voters, and that native voters’ political preferences are shifted towards the
Republicans, but only in states where the presence of non-naturalized immigrants is
high. Also note that the average U.S. state is one in which the negative direct impact
on Republican votes from naturalized immigrants prevails. For example, in the year
2012, the average share of non-citizen immigrants was 6.8% significantly below the
13.2% threshold value.
As mentioned above, we find that on average immigration to the U.S. has a
significant and negative impact on the Republican vote share. Yet, empirical evidence
from some European countries is exactly the opposite as it shows that immigrant
inflows improve the electoral success of right-wing parties (see Barone et al. (2014)
and Halla et al. (2012)). Our results, differentiating between citizen and non-citizen
migrants, suggest one possible explanation of the difference between the European
and U.S. findings. We find that the political effect of immigration crucially depends
on the extent to which migrants can participate in the political process. To the extent
that in Europe naturalization rates and/or political participation of immigrants are
low, the indirect political effect of migration working through migrants’ impact on
existing voters’ preferences should be the main one at work. In the U.S., where
naturalization rates are large, the direct effect of immigrants on votes is sizable
and dominates on average. However, when we differentiate across states/years cells
according to their share of non-naturalized migrants, we also find that six states
have a high enough share of non-naturalized immigrants such that this group has a
positive effect on Republican votes, consistent with the European findings.8
8

According to the American Community Survey (ACS), in 2008 the U.S. naturalization rate was
43%. In many European countries naturalization rates were lower in the same year, for example in

5

Our analysis is both theoretical and empirical. We first develop a simple model,
which provides intuition about the main channels at work and which allows us to
derive theory-based empirical specifications. Our empirical analysis addresses the
key identification issue. A least square estimate of the correlation between votes and
immigration could be biased by spurious correlation due to the fact that immigrants
self-select into geographical areas – and might go where natives are more favorable
to their presence. We use a novel set of instruments for our main explanatory variables, which are the overall share of migrants and, respectively, the naturalized and
non-naturalized shares in a state. Shift-share instruments ı̈¿œ la Card (2001) – based
on the size of past settlement of immigrants from a given country of origin across
U.S. states – have been widely used in the literature, based on the idea that one
important determinant of migration is family and friends networks (Munshi (2003)).
However, one concern that has been raised is that the past location of immigrants
across destinations might be correlated with past local economic and political conditions. To the extent that these conditions are persistent and hence correlated over
time, this would invalidate the exclusion restriction of shift-share instruments ı̈¿œ la
Card (2001). We address this concern. The unifying theme of our novel instruments
is that the distance between a country of origin of immigrants and a U.S. state is
likely to be an exogenous determinant of the size of settlements of immigrants from
that source and, likely, not correlated with other factors affecting the political climate in the state. To construct the instrument for the overall share of immigrants in
a U.S. state, we use a shift-share IV, where predicted migration shares are inversely
proportional to the state’s distance from the country of origin. Similarly, to construct
the instrument for the naturalized migrant share, we use data on aggregate yearly
inflows of naturalized immigrants from a given country of origin and apportion these
data across states according to shares that are inversely proportional to the distance
measure. For the non-naturalized migrant share – which includes, especially in years
after 1990, illegal migrants – we combine data on national-level yearly border apprehensions, that provide a proxy for total undocumented immigration in a year, with
information on distance of each U.S. state from the U.S.–Mexico border. One can argue that the instrument for non-naturalized immigrants mainly captures the changes
in the group of undocumented Mexicans and Central Americans. We think of this
point as a strength of our identification. First, this is a very large and significant
group among the non-naturalized immigrants. Second, this is the group that likely
Italy (14%) and in Austria (34%) (Reichel (2012)). The analysis of the difference in the political
impact of migration in the U.S. vs. Europe is beyond the scope of this paper and is the focus of
Mayda et al. (2015).

6

encourages the strongest political response of citizens in terms of their vote. After
all, it is by leveraging the discomfort of citizens at the presence of large numbers
of undocumented immigrants that several Republican candidates try to rally their
base.
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 surveys the existing literature
related to this paper. In Section 3, we develop a theoretical model that characterizes
the indirect effect of new migrants (through changes in existing voters’ voting behavior) separately from their direct effect (through the inclusion of naturalized migrants
as new voters). We then describe the data and how we construct the key variables in
Section 4. In Section 5 we present, respectively, a naive and a model-based empirical
specification that we use for estimation. We also discuss identification and present
the main empirical results. In section 6 we calculate the effect of different policies on
the vote share of the Republican party as predicted by our estimates. We also use
data on immigration and voting behavior in some representative U.S. states in 2008
and 2012 to illustrate the relevance and plausibility of the estimated effects. In Section 7, we investigate potential channels through which non naturalized immigrants
affect the voting behavior of existing voters. Finally, Section 8 concludes.

2

Related Literature

Our analysis is related to the theoretical and empirical contributions in the economics
literature that analyze the effect of immigrants on voting behavior.9
A large part of the theoretical economic literature has focused on voting behavior
on immigration policy as a function of the skill composition of immigrants and natives. The seminal paper in this literature is Benhabib (1996), which derives the skill
composition requirements that would be imposed on potential immigrants, under majority voting, assuming that the only effect of migration is through the labor market.
Ortega (2005) analyzes the trade-off arising in a dynamic version of Benhabib (1996)
model in which immigrants gain the right to vote and, therefore, affect the political
balance of the destination country. The arrival in the destination country of immigrants, whose skill composition depends on the existing immigration policy, alters
the skilled-to-unskilled labor ratio of the work force in the destination country. This,
9

While our work is related to contributions in the political science literature on the same topic, for
the sake of space our survey focuses on economics papers. Importantly, though, to our knowledge,
no works in the political science literature carry out the same type of analysis as we do.

7

in turn, affects the current-period skill premium as well as the skill composition of
next period’s electorate, and thus the political balance and migration policies in the
future. On the one hand, skilled (unskilled) natives prefer an immigration policy
that admits unskilled (skilled) immigrants to their country because of their wage
effects. On the other hand, the arrival of unskilled (skilled) immigrants potentially
shifts the political equilibrium by increasing the number of unskilled (skilled) voters
in the next period. These two opposite effects could produce a cycle equilibrium in
which the political majority switches from one group to the other. Alternatively, a
quota equilibrium could prevail in which the group in the majority – either skilled or
unskilled – admits immigrants of the opposite type but limits their number through
quotas, in order to retain future political power. Finally, Razin et al. (2011) focus on
the joint decision of voters on immigration and redistribution policies, respectively.
They emphasize how, in terms of immigration and redistribution, a democratic state
would produce policies that are consistent with each other so that, when immigration
is more open, natives restrict redistribution for fear of net transfers to immigrants,
while when immigration is more restricted, they are willing to allow more redistribution. The theoretical models provide predictions on how natives of different skills
prefer more or less immigrants, also as a function of the amount of redistribution
provided by the state.
The existing empirical literature for the U.S. provides indirect evidence for the
effect of immigrants on voting behavior, mainly by analyzing what determines the
preferences of U.S. individuals about immigrants. For example, Scheve and Slaughter
(2001) analyze the labor-market drivers of individual preferences on immigration
policy – using the 1992 NES survey – and find that more-skilled respondents are
significantly less likely to be anti-immigration.10 Hanson et al. (2007) extend the
previous analysis by accounting for the impact of public-finance considerations on
U.S. migration attitudes. This paper shows that the negative impact of individual
skill on anti-migration preferences is weaker in states characterized by high exposure
to immigrant fiscal pressures.11 Looking at similar surveys for European countries,
Card et al. (2012) show that while the perception of economic gains from immigrants
vary across skills of natives, it is the perception of the impact of immigrants on local
10

Given that in the U.S. immigrants are on average less skilled than natives, respondents’ perceptions are in line with the predictions of the multi-cone HO model (without factor-price insensitivity)
and of the factor-proportions-analysis model.
11
For papers analyzing the labor-market and welfare-state determinants of public opinion on
migration across countries, see for example Mayda (2006), Facchini and Mayda (2009) and O’rourke
and Sinnott (2006)).

8

communities, culture and amenities that drives the policy preference of natives on
immigration (stricter or looser immigration policies).12 .
More directly related to our work are some papers that analyze, for different
European countries, how the inflow of immigrants impacts the electoral success of
right-wing parties. In particular, Barone et al. (2014) empirically analyze the effect of
immigration to Italy on political outcomes in the 2001, 2006 and 2008 national elections. This paper finds that the inflows of immigrants into a municipality increased
the share of votes going to the centre-right party, which was more conservative on
immigration issues than the centre-left one. Similarly, Halla et al. (2012) estimate
the impact of immigrant inflows in Austria on the share of votes for a far-right-wing
party (the Freedom Party of Austria). They find evidence of a positive and significant effect at the neighborhood level. Both papers use shift-share instruments
ı̈¿œ la Card (2001). Finally, Otto and Steinhardt (2014) analyze the impact of the
share of foreign citizens on election outcomes, using variation over time across city
districts in Hamburg between 1987 and 2000. The authors find evidence of a positive
correlation between the district’s immigrant share and the share of votes for extreme
right-wing parties – with a clearly anti-immigration stand – and of a negative correlation between the district’s immigrant share and the share of votes for the Green
Party – which had a pro-migration position. The authors give a causal interpretation
to these results based on a fixed-effects empirical strategy and additional robustness
checks, which account for the endogeneity of the location decision of natives and
immigrants. They do not instrument the immigrant flows.
Relative to these papers, our paper is the first to analyze separately the effect
of naturalized and non naturalized immigrants. It is also the first to focus on U.S.
elections, using variation across U.S. states instrumented with a distance-based proxy
for immigration from different countries.

3

Theoretical model

In this section we present a simple model that allows us to investigate the direct
and indirect effects of immigrants on parties’ voting shares. Each of the two effects
depends on a well identified group of immigrants. The direct effect of immigrants is
12

A related line of research looks at how U.S. politicians vote on topics related to immigration
policies, as a function of characteristics of their districts. Interesting examples of this literature are
Conconi et al. (2012) and Facchini and Steinhardt (2011).

9

due to the inclusion of new voters, i.e. citizen migrants13 , who may have a different
voting behavior than natives but, for several demographic characteristics, are similar
to natives. Hence a change in the fraction of voting immigrants in the electorate may
affect the share of Republican votes because of their different political preferences.
Non-voting immigrants (who are not citizens, and often temporary or undocumented)
do not affect election outcomes through this channel. The second channel is the
indirect effect of new immigrants who are not citizens at first on the vote of citizens.
The arrival of new (non-citizen) immigrants may induce voters to respond by altering
their party preference in the polls in response to what they perceive as a threat or
an opportunity.
To formalize this point, we present a very simple theoretical model that delivers
a theory-based estimating equation, showing how each party’s percentage of votes
depends on the shares of citizen and non-citizen immigrants. Let’s define the variable
rit as the share of votes going to the Republican party in state i in a given election
in year t. The following relation holds:
rit = ritN AT

 CMit
CMit
Nit
+ ritIM M I
= ritN AT + ritIM M I − ritN AT
Vit
Vit
Vit

(1)

where the variable ritN AT represents the average probability that a U.S.-born individual votes for the Republican party in state i and year t and corresponds to the
share of Republican voters among natives in that state and year. For each state i and
year t, the variable Nit denotes the number of natives, the variable CMit indicates
the number of citizen migrants while Vit represents the total voting population, equal
to Nit + CMit . The term ritIM M I is the average probability that a citizen immigrant
votes for the Republican party in state i and year t. Equation (1) implies that the
presence of naturalized immigrants can affect the vote share for the Republicans if
they have a different average probability than natives to vote for the Republican
party (ritIM M I − ritN AT 6= 0). If for example their propensity to vote Republican is
lower than natives’, i.e. ritIM M I − ritN AT < 0, possibly because the Democratic party
is perceived as more friendly towards immigrants14 , then equation (1) shows that a
it
, lowers the fraction
larger share of citizen immigrants in the voting population, CM
Vit
of votes to the Republicans, rit .
Next we assume that the probability an individual (native or immigrant) votes for
13

We will also call them naturalized immigrants or voting immigrants.
Empirical evidence by Conconi et al. (2012) suggests that indeed Democratic legislators are
significantly more likely than Republicans to vote for pro-immigration policies.
14

10

the Republican party depends on a comparison of his/her expected utility if either
the Republican or the Democratic party is elected. This utility is affected by the
impact of the different policies that the parties will implement as well as by individual
idiosyncratic preferences for each party. An easy way of describing the probability
of individual j of type T (which can be native or citizen immigrant) in state i and
year t of voting Republican is as a choice between the utility of two alternatives:


D
D
R
R
1 if U (Ij,it
, N Pj,it
, εTj,it ) < U (Ij,it
, N Pj,it
)
T
(2)
rj,it =
R
R
D
D
)
, N Pj,it
, εTj,it ) ≥ U (Ij,it
, N Pj,it
0 if U (Ij,it
In expression (2), U is the utility function of an individual: We assume that it
depends on her/his total income (net of taxes and inclusive of transfers and public
R
D
if
if the Democratic party is elected and to Ij,it
services) which will be equal to Ij,it
the Republican party is. It is also a function of the non-pecuniary utility of electing
D
R
either party N Pj,it
or N Pj,it
. Non-pecuniary utility can be thought of as reflecting
preferences for how the public budget should be spent (e.g. for schools or for national
defense, for highways or for national parks) or preferences on policies associated with
different ideologies (such as foreign policy, policy towards inequality, discrimination
or diversity and so on). Different parties will generate different non pecuniary utility
for different people. Finally, it depends on an idiosyncratic preference for the Democratic party εTj,it which can be negative and varies across individuals with a normal
distribution. We assume that the idiosyncratic preference for the Democratic party
has average 0 for natives and average d6= 0 for citizen immigrants. In other words,
CM
both εN
j,it and εj,it − d equal a standard normal distribution, which we denote εj,it .
Linearizing the utility function U above in its arguments and taking the expected
T
value of rj,it
over the realizations of εj,it for the natives, we obtain the expected share
of votes for the Republican party by native individuals, namely :



N AT
R
D
R
D
ritN AT = E rj,it
= Pr[εj,it < α1 Ij,it
− Ij,it
+ α2 N Pj,it
− N Pj,it
]



R
D
R
D
= Φ α1 Ij,it − Ij,it + α2 N Pj,it − N Pj,it

(3)

In the above expression Φ denotes the cumulative density function of a standard
R
D
R
D
normal, which is strictly increasing in the arguments (Ij,it
− Ij,it
) + (N Pj,it
− N Pj,it
).
Hence, the share of natives’ votes to the Republican party in state i and year t is
increasing in the utility differential generated by the election of the Republican party
R
D
vis-a-vis the Democratic party either through an income effect Ij,it
− Ij,it
or through
R
D
a non-pecuniary effect N Pj,it − N Pj,it . The parameters α1 and α2 capture, respectively, the marginal utility of after tax income and of the non-pecuniary amenities.
11

The expected share of votes for the Republican party among citizen immigrants is
similarly computed but has the extra term −d capturing their average idiosyncratic
preference for the Democrats, as follows:



IM M I
D
R
D
R
− d] (4)
− N Pj,it
+ α2 N Pj,it
− Ij,it
ritIM M I = E rj,it
= Pr[εj,it < α1 Ij,it




R
D
R
D
= Φ α1 Ij,it − Ij,it + α2 N Pj,it − N Pj,it − d
Comparing expressions (3) and (4) reveals that immigrants and natives have
similar terms in determining their probability of voting for the Republican party,
except for the term −d, which will induce a wedge in the probability that similar
natives and citizen immigrants vote Republican. If naturalized immigrants have a
stronger idiosyncratic preference for the Democratic party, i.e. d > 0, they will be
more likely than natives to vote for the Democrats – as long as the effects on income
and non-pecuniary utility are equal. In other words, ritIM M I − ritN AT < 0. Pushing
our simplification a step further, we can assume that the policies of each party affect
the income and non-pecuniary utility of natives and citizen immigrants in similar
ways, given their broadly similar demographic characteristics. Citizen immigrants
are long-term immigrants and their skill and income profile is similar to that of
natives.15 Hence the difference between the probability of voting Republican of,
respectively, natives and citizen immigrants, can be obtained by linearizing (3) and
(4) and simplifying the equal terms. This will produce the following approximation
for the differential probability of voting Republican:
ritIM M I − ritN AT ' −g(d)

(5)

In expression (5), the term g() represents a linear function of d only and hence it
can be considered as constant across policies.
Republicans enact policies, generate expectations and communicate messages
which are different from Democrats. This shapes their effect on income and nonpecuniary amenities, as perceived by citizens. First, we posit that the perception
of income and non-pecuniary effects of immigrants depends on the recent inflow
of immigrants (as a share of the population) and note that recent immigrants are
non-citizens. Voters in states that have recently experienced a large inflow of new
15

The average years of education for citizen immigrants is 14.01 compared to 14.07 of natives and
the average income of citizen immigrants is $37609 in 1999 prices compared to $34228 of natives.
On the other hand, the average years of education (12.6) and the average income ($25614) of
non-citizens immigrants differs significantly from the native population.

12

it
(non-citizen) immigrants as a share of the local population – denoted by MNitCM
+N it
– are likely to perceive strong effects of these immigrants on their income and
non-pecuniary amenities. Hence both terms are a function of the non-citizen miD
R
it
it
and
− Ij,it
grant share: Ij,it ( MNitCM
) and N Pj,it ( MNitCM
). This in turn affects Ij,it
+N it
+N it
R
D
N Pj,it − N Pj,it . Next, we assume that Republicans are associated with more restrictive immigration policies in general, therefore they also admit fewer new (non-citizen)
immigrants as a share of the population. Therefore if, for example, the image of
“immigrants stealing jobs and reducing wages” or “immigrants being a fiscal drain”
0
0
< 0 and the Demoprevails, then voters’ perception would imply Ij,it < 0 and N Pj,it
N CM it
cratic party – associated with further increases in M it +N it – could be punished in
the elections. On the other hand, if the perception is that recent (non-citizen) immigrants revitalize the local economy, help firms grow and pay their way, it could
0
0
be that () Ij,it > 0 and N Pj,it
> 0 and the Democratic party would be favored by a
large number of new immigrants through this channel.

The non-pecuniary effect of immigrants, in particular, may operate in a nonlinear way. When there are few new immigrants, voters may like the diversity and
variety they bring or may not consider it too relevant. Local shops, restaurants, and
services may benefit from it and their small number is not perceived as a threat to
local traditions. However, the perception may become negative and stronger once
non-citizen immigrants grow beyond a certain share of the population, as voters
might feel that their culture and local environment can be changed and threatened.
it
) could have a concave shape, i.e. be increasing or relatively flat
Hence N Pj,it ( MNitCM
+N it
close to 0 and decreasing at high values of the non-citizen migrant share. Note that
it
) could have a concave shape if there are phenomena of crowding
also Ij,it ( MNitCM
+N it
and saturation that reduce income of voters as a consequence of new immigrants,
but only once the non-citizen migrant share passes a given threshold. By introducing
this potential nonlinearity of the effect of non-citizen immigrants on income and
non-pecuniary utility, we also want to capture the issue of “salience” of the topic
of migration in voters’ minds. Immigration may become a salient political issue for
natives only when its size is large enough and immigrant presence becomes apparent.
In that case the immigration policy of each party can become a deciding factor in
voting. On the other hand, migration is likely to always be a salient issue for citizen
immigrants who care more about immigration policies that affect family and close
friends.
Therefore the share of non-citizen immigrants can affect the utility of voters
it
it
) and N Pj,it ( MNitCM
) and, as a consequence, the share of the
through Ij,it ( MNitCM
+N it
+N it
13

Republican vote. Whether this effect is negative, null or positive depends on the
relative intensity of the above effects which can change, because of the described nonlinearity, at different values of the share of non-citizen immigrants. Hence compacting
the expression (3), we can write:


N CM it
N AT
, Xit
(6)
= fN AT
rit
M it + N it
where the function fN AT (.) captures the overall impact of new (non-citizen) immigrants and of other policy and economic factors Xit in state i and year t, on the
probability of voting Republican, through the effect on perceived income and nonpecuniary utility. Substituting expressions (5) and (6) into the definition of rit given
in expression (1), we obtain:


CMit
N CM it
, Xit − g(d)
(7)
rit = fN AT
M it + N it
Vit
Linearizing (7) and capturing with fixed effects a set of state (si ) and year (qt )
specific factors which affect the vote share of Republicans, we can derive the following
specification for rit :
N CM it
CMit
+ β2
+ βx Xit + εit
(8)
M it + N it
Vit
In this specification, we are assuming a linear effect, β1 , of new non-citizen immigrants on the share of Republican votes. However, as mentioned above, it is
important to allow for the non-linearity that captures the increased salience of immigration in elections, as the share of new immigrants increase. We can do this in
the following linear-quadratic specification:
rit = si + qt + β1

N CM it
+ βQ
rit = si + qt + βL
M it + N it



N CM it
M it + N it

2
+ β2

CMit
+ βx Xit + εit
Vit

(9)

Equations (8) and (9) above are the basis for our main empirical analysis.
Finally note that the perceived effect of Republicans on voters’ income can work
through several channels. For example, new immigrants can be thought of, by voters,
as the cause of favorable or adverse labor-market effects. According to theory, the
latter ones depend on the skill composition of non-citizen immigrants relative to
voters and on how skilled voters are. New immigrants are also likely to be associated
14

with changes in the welfare state, which can be favorable or adverse depending on
how rich non-citizen migrants are relative to voters. In particular, if non-citizen
migrants are poorer than voters, they are likely to be a fiscal burden. The opposite
is true if they are richer than voters. The welfare-state impact of non-citizen migrants
will also imply income distribution effects which depend on the type of adjustment of
the welfare state to migration (see Facchini and Mayda (2009)) and how rich voters
are. Finally, the perceived effect of Republicans on voters’ non-pecuniary utility
can be linked to the cultural effects of new (non-citizen) migrants, which are likely
to depend on how different voters and migrants are in terms of language spoken,
religion, historical and institutional background. We will account for these channels
through which the non-citizen migrant share affects Republican votes in Section 7
below.

4

Data and key variables

As suggested by the model above, to analyze the electoral outcome of state i in year
t, we need to analyze three groups of individuals. First is the group of natives (whose
number is equal to Nit ) who constitute in all states the majority of voters. Second
is the group of citizen immigrants who can vote and may have different electoral
preference from natives. Finally is the group of non-citizen immigrants who cannot
vote but whose presence may affect the vote of citizens. Thus immigrants or foreignborn, whose total number in state i and year t is Mit , are divided into citizens,
whose number is equal to CM it and non-citizens, whose number is N CM it , so that
Mit = N CMit + CMit . We obtain data on natives, immigrant citizens and noncitizens from the Current Population Survey (CPS). The sample period consists of
the years between 1994 and 2012. We aggregate the individual-level data to the state
level using the CPS sampling weights. We estimate our model at the state level since
the CPS data set is not representative at a lower level of geographical disaggregation
such as county or electoral district16 . However, recognizing that it is important to
provide results at a finer level of geographical disaggregation, we assume in Section
5 below that the effect of different groups of immigrants on the share of Republican
votes, estimated at the state-level, holds at the Congressional district level. This
way we can provide the magnitude of the simulated effects of immigrants on votes
at this level of geography.
16

Alternative data sets we could have used are the Census data – but these data are only every
ten years – or the American Community Survey (ACS) data – but these data are only available
from 2000 on and are yearly representative at low geographical level (such as county) only from
2005.

15

We call mshit the immigrant share of the (working-age labor-force) population
which is defined as follows:
mshit =

Mit
Mit + Nit

(10)

It captures the number of foreign-born individuals (both males and females),
aged 18-64, as a share of the total labor-force population of that state (aged 1864).17 This is a measure of the overall presence of foreign-born individuals in state
i’s population in year t. We also define the immigrant citizen and non-citizen shares
of the population, cmshit and ncmshit , which are equal to CM it /(Mit + Nit ) and
N CMit /(Mit + Nit ), respectively. The sum of the immigrant citizen and non-citizen
shares equals mshit . To investigate more directly the channel through which citizen
immigrants as new voters affect the electoral vote, we also define the citizen migrants
voting share, cmvoteshit = CMit /Vit , which is the share of citizen migrants in the
voting population Vit = (Nit + CMit ). According to the theoretical model, it is the
citizen migrants voting share which has an impact on Republican votes proportional
to the difference in average propensity to vote Republican of native and immigrant
citizens. Finally, the voting population is related to the total population by the
following expression:
Mit + Nit = Vit + N CMit
i.e., the total population is equal to the number of voters plus the number of
non-citizen immigrants.
The election data are from the Congressional Quarterly data set and include
presidential, congressional (House and Senate) and gubernatorial elections from 1994
to the present. Our main outcome variable is the share of votes that goes to the
candidate affiliated with the Republican Party:
Republican V otesit
(11)
AVit
Republican V otesit represents the number of people that voted for the Republican
party, whereas AVit is the number of votes in state i and year t.
rit =

17

Note that Mit excludes individuals born abroad to American parents.

16

4.1

Summary statistics

After matching the election data with the CPS data at the state-year level, the final
sample contains 1306 state-year observations across four types of elections. Table 1
contains the summary statistics of the election and population data, including the
control variables which will be used in the empirical analysis. The election data shows
that, across all elections and years over the period 1994-2012, the average Republican
vote share was 49.0 percent, while the Democratic vote share was lower, at 46.9
percent. The remaining, small, share of votes accrued to third party candidates.
Figure 1 in the appendix shows a map of all U.S. states, with darker color for states
with larger average Republican vote share pooling all years and elections between
1994 and 2012. The Republican vote share has been higher in states of the South
and in the central United States while it has been relatively low in States of the West
Coast and of New England.
Figure 2 plots the corresponding spatial distribution of immigrants in the years
1994 and 2012. California had the highest share of immigrants in both years: 28
percent in the year 1994 and 35.4 percent in 2012. New England states, as well as
some southern states such as Texas, Arizona and Florida also had high shares. The
states with the lowest immigration share are Kentucky in 1994 (0.4 percent) and West
Virginia in 2012 (1.3 percent). Overall, the share of immigrants steadily increased
over time. The nation-wide average share of immigrants in the total population was
9.1 percent in year 1994 and it rose to 17 percent in the year 2012.
The overall share of immigrants in the population combines the two groups that
we want to consider separately. We see from Table 1 that about 39 percent of
immigrants are citizens and the remaining 61 percent are non-citizens. The share of
citizens has increased over time as the number of naturalized citizens increased by
more than the number of new immigrants. Over the past decade, while the share
of non-citizen immigrants in the U.S. population increased from 6.3 percent in 1994
to 9.5 percent in 2012, the share of citizen immigrants went from 2.8 percent in
1994 to 7.4 percent in 2012. As more and more citizens become naturalized, their
importance in the voting population increases as well. In year 1994, the average share
was 3 percent and climbed to 8.2 percent in the year 2012. The share of immigrants
that are eligible to vote varies greatly across states. Kentucky has the lowest share of
0.1 percent in 1994 and California the highest with 20.3 percent in 2012. Moreover
there is a strong correlation between the share of non-citizen immigrants and the
share of citizen immigrants across states. Those states with large presence of citizen
immigrants as a share of the voting population also had large presence of non-citizen
17

immigrants as a share of the population. While one may think that this correlation
makes it hard to separately identify the impact of each of these two groups on voting
outcomes, the correlation in the changes of these variables, which is the variation
used to identify the effects, is much smaller.
In terms of the control variables that we include in the voting equation, we follow
the existing literature, especially Della Vigna and Kaplan (2007) and include the
share of the voting population in each education group (high school dropouts, high
school graduates, some college, college graduates and more than college), the share
of African Americans and Hispanics, the unemployment rate, the share of the state
that is urban as well as the share of males, the marriage rate and the income level
(shown in Table 1).

5

Empirical Analysis

5.1

The naive regression

Before analyzing the causal relation between different types of immigrants and electoral outcomes, we show here some simple correlations. Considering total immigrants
as a share of the adult population, we analyze whether one detects a correlation in
the data between this variable and the share of votes to the Republican Party. As
preliminary evidence, in Figure 3 we show the scatterplot of the change between 1994
and 2012 in the fraction of Republican votes in the House of Representatives and the
change in the same period in total immigrants as a share of the adult population,
across states. The visual impression is clear and confirmed by the statistical significance of a regression line: there is a significant negative correlation between the
growth in the immigrant share of the population and the Republican vote share in the
House. In the scatterplot we focus on House elections since these are the elections for
which we find significant effects throughout the paper. Moreover immigration policy
is a federal issue and most of the important legislation on it has to be passed by the
House of Representatives. A more systematic way to show the negative correlation
between the overall share of immigrants and the fraction of Republican votes is to
pool all types of elections (Presidential (PE), Senate (SE), House of representatives
(HE) and Gubernatorial (GE)) and estimate the following specification:
rite = si + re + qt + βM mshit + βx Xit + εite

(12)

where the dependent variable rite is the number of votes for the Republican party,
18

out of the total number of votes, in state i (50 states), year t (10 years) and election e
(4 types of elections); mshit = Mit /(Mit +Nit ) is the share of foreign-born individuals
in state i and year t.18 Controls include a vector of state fixed effects si ; a vector
of election-type fixed effects re , and a vector of year fixed effects qt . These fixed
effects control for systematic differences in election outcomes across states, election
types and years which capture, respectively, persistent political differences across
states and year-specific or election-specific national tendencies. We also control for
variables which affect election outcomes according to the existing literature (see, for
example, Della Vigna and Kaplan (2007)). In particular, Xit is a vector of control
variables for state i in year t which includes the share in the voting population of each
education group (high school drop-outs, high school graduates, some college, college
graduates, more than college), of African-Americans and Hispanics, of those living
in urban areas, males, married individuals, the share of unemployed and, finally, the
average income. Note that we define all the control variables over the population of
(potential) voters in each state and year, i.e. natives plus citizen immigrants (aged
18-64, in the civilian labor force). We also estimate a regression separately for each
election type, where we include the same vector of control variables as well as year
and time fixed effects.
First, we estimate equation (12) with ordinary least-squares, which establishes the
correlation between the immigrant share and the Republican vote share controlling
for an array of confounding factors. Next, we push our “naive” regressions one step
further and instrument the share of immigrants, to avoid that unobserved timevarying state characteristics might attract immigrants and at the same time shift
votes away from (or in favor of) the Republican party. The instrumental-variable
methodology we use is based on Card (2001) but, importantly, differs from it as we
replace the past distribution of immigrants from a given origin country to a given
state with the inverse measure of distance between the origin and the state. More
precisely, let Mot be the number of immigrants from source country o who live in the
U.S. in year t and let Nt be the total number of natives in the U.S. in year t19 . We
then construct our shift-share instrument, that we call (mshit )IV as follows:
18

Note that the total number of votes includes those to parties other than the Republican and
Democratic parties.
19
To address the possible concern that Mot may be correlated with local conditions at the state
level, we also replicate our analysis by omitting the contribution of state i to Mot when constructing
the value of the instrument for state i. The results are unaffected.

19

(mshit )IV =

d
M
it
d
cit
Mit + N

(13)

where:
cit = λN i Nt
N

(14)

X

(15)

and
d
M
it =

λoi Mot

o

The terms λN i and λoi are the constant shares that we use to “apportion” to
each state i the natives and the immigrants from country o, in each year t. We
simply distribute the U.S. native population (Nt ) across states proportionally to
how it was distributed in 1980, based on data from the 5 percent sample of the U.S.
Census (Integrated Public Use Micro Samples compiled by Ruggles et al. (2004)) and
focusing on individuals in the civilian labor force, aged 18-64. This way we avoid
that (potentially endogenous) mobility of natives may affect the instrument. Hence
we define:
Ni,1980
λN i = P
i Ni,1980

(16)

We distribute the immigrant population from each country of origin o in year t
(Mot ) across states proportionally to how the U.S. native population was distributed
in 1980 and, at the same time, we account for the fact that immigrants are more
likely to settle in locations closer to their country of origin. Hence, the share λoi
of migrants from country o in state i depends inversely on the logarithm of the
distance between state i and the capital of the immigrants’ country of origin o, doi ,
and directly on state i’s native population in the year 1980, Ni,1980 .20 . Hence, the
share for state i and country of origin o is defined as follows:
Ni,1980 / ln(doi )
λoi = P
i Ni,1980 / ln(doi )

(17)

Note that we aggregate the countries of origin of immigrants into 20 origin-country
20

To calculate the bilateral distances, we follow Mayer and Zignago (2011), i.e. we define the
distance in kilometers and calculate it by the Great Circle Distance formula. We use 32.19 kilometers
as inner-city distance. All data on latitudes and longitudes are from the Global Administrative
Areas (GADM) database, see Hijmans et al. (2010).

20

groups (such as Western Europe or Eastern Africa), thus the index o in λoi varies
across these 20 different groups.
Importantly, the state by year variation of the instrument is only driven by
national-level trends in the number of migrants from each origin – some origins experienced large increases in migration to the U.S. (Central Americans, Chinese/East
Asians, Indians/Southwest Asians) while others experienced large declines (Western
and Southern Europeans, Central Eastern Europeans) relative to earlier years – and
by the geographic location of U.S. states relative to the countries of origin. The
time-varying aggregate migration trends and the geographic location of a state are
likely to be uncorrelated with the changes in political climate and preferences in the
state. If the instrument affects the share of migrants in a state over time, we assume
that this is the channel through which it affects political election outcomes.
Table 2 shows the OLS estimates of the coefficients in regression (12) including
the fixed effects and all the controls. The first column pools all types of elections,
while columns (2) through (6) include respectively Presidential, Senate, House and
Gubernatorial. Both specifications (4) and (5) focus on House elections, but regression (4) uses the share of votes to the Republicans as dependent variable, while
regression (5) uses the percentage of seats won by the Republicans. Table 3 shows
the same estimates based on the 2SLS strategy. Three results emerge. First, the
impact of the share of immigrants on Republican votes is negative in all estimates
but for one type of election (Gubernatorial). Second, the negative estimates are significant in both OLS and IV specifications only for the House elections, while for the
other elections the effects are not robust. Third the negative significant estimates in
the IV are larger than in the OLS, which indicates the presence of omitted variables
that, at the same time, increase immigration and the share of the Republican vote.
Such omitted variables could be economic shocks that increase local business income – immigrants are attracted by booming states and higher income is associated
with Republican votes – or demographic shifts of the local population – aging local
population create more jobs for immigrants and more votes for the Republicans.
Concerning the control variables the results show that, on average, states with a
higher share of high-school dropouts (the omitted reference group of education) tend
to have a lower Republican vote share (the significance level varies across types of
elections). The average income of voters does not have a significant impact in any
type of election. Finally, states with higher unemployment rates are more likely to
vote Democrat. Overall, these results are in line with the findings of the literature
21

on the determinants of elections and specifically similar to Della Vigna and Kaplan
(2007).
So, to a first inspection, the overall share of immigrants has a strong and quantitatively large negative correlation with the share of Republican votes and the IV
estimates suggest that such correlation is consistent with a negative causal effect. An
increase of immigrants by one percentage point of adult population is associated, in
the House elections, with a decrease of the Republican vote share of 1.36 percentage
points, which is not significantly different from 1. Such a large and negative coefficient is consistent with a situation in which the direct effect of citizen immigrants is
negative and strong and the indirect effect either works in the same direction as the
direct one, or does not favor Republicans enough to offset the direct effect. In order
to analyze those effects in more detail, we turn next to estimating an equation that
includes, separately, the variables considered by our model.

5.2

The model-based estimating equation

In this section we bring to the data, respectively, the linear and the linear-quadratic
specifications we derived from the model. We first estimate the models with all
elections pooled and, next, we focus on House elections, which are the only ones
where we found a significant correlation on average between the immigrant share
and the Republican vote share, both in the OLS and in the IV regressions.
In the linear specification (8), the coefficient β1 represents the indirect political
effect of immigration, which works through the impact of the non-citizen immigrant
share. The empirical evidence from some European countries (see Barone et al.
(2014), Halla et al. (2012) and Otto and Steinhardt (2014)) – where the indirect
political effect of migration is more relevant than the direct one, as naturalization
rates tend to be small – suggests that natives become more politically conservative
when migration increases. If a similar effect takes place in the United States, the
Republican vote share should increase when the fraction of non-citizen immigrants
goes up, in which case we expect β1 > 0. If, on the other hand, the indirect effect is
not very strong on average in the U.S., we may observe β1 = 0. Alternatively, the
indirect political effect may become relevant only for high values of the non-citizen
immigrant share, given that only then immigration becomes a visible and salient
political issue for voters. If this is the case, in specification (9) we should estimate a
zero or negative linear term and a positive quadratic, namely βL <= 0 and βQ > 0,
so that a higher share of non-citizen immigrants produces a boost to the Republican
22

vote only when non-citizen immigrants are a large group.
In both specifications (8) and (9), the coefficient β2 on the variable cmvoteshit =
represents the direct political effect of migration, i.e. the difference in average
voting propensity for the Republican party between naturalized immigrants and natives. According to anecdotal evidence (see for example the citation at the beginning
of the paper), naturalized immigrants in the U.S. tend to vote for the Democratic
party. Thus we expect to observe β2 < 0.
CMit
Vit

Finally note that, in the empirical analysis below, we will focus on regressions
that either pool all election types or that focus on House elections, for which we
found the most robust results. One possible explanation of the latter findings is the
following. In Presidential, Gubernatorial and Senate elections, very few candidates
are up for vote – this is of course true in Presidential elections for which there is only
one candidate per party common to all states, while in the other elections there are
either one (Gubernational) or two (Senate) candidates per party in each state. As a
result, Presidential, Gubernatorial and Senate election campaigns are more focused
on the program of the individual candidate rather than on the party program and,
importantly, the individual candidate’s program may differ from his/her party’s one
in relation to migration. On the contrary, in House elections, there are many seats
in each state – in the case of California, there are 53 seats – and therefore as many
candidates for each party and state. Voters may not be as aware of the individual
candidate’s program and will likely vote based on the party’s political agenda. This
suggests that House elections may be more affected by the overall program of each
party and may face less noise due to the individual program of the various candidates.
21

5.3

Instrumental Variables

Before implementing the IV strategy, we first estimate specifications (8) and (9) using
OLS and report these results in Table 4: Column (1) shows the estimates pooling all
elections together while the other columns focus on House elections.
In our 2SLS estimation, we use a novel set of instruments for, respectively, the
it
and non-citizen immicitizen immigrants as a share of the voting population CM
Vit
21

An alternative explanation might be that House candidates run a more extreme and polarizing
campaign because they have to appeal to local conditions.

23

grants as share of the adult population

N CM it
.
M it +N it

To construct the imputed number

[it , we apply a similar variation of the
of citizen immigrants in state i and year t, CM
shift-share method described in section 5.1 above. In this instance, we apportion the
aggregate time-varying number of citizen migrants from each origin country in the
U.S. in year t , denoted as CMot , to each state i according to the share λoi exactly
defined as in equation (17).22 We also construct the imputed number of native citicit , by apportioning the total national native population
zens in state i and year t, N
as in equation (14) above. Hence the shift-share instrument for citizen immigrants,
as a share of the voting population, which we call (cmvoteshit )IV , is as follows:
(cmvoteshit )IV =

[it
CM
cit
[it + N
CM

(18)

where:
[it =
CM

X

λoi CMot

(19)

o

Similarly to (13), the imputed share (18) varies across years because of the
national-level time-variation in immigration from each origin-country-group and in
their naturalization rate. It varies across states because of the distance of each U.S.
state from the country of origin of the immigrants. Distance from the origin affects
the share of immigrants – from that country present in the state – because of mobility
costs. Differently from the standard instrument based on Altonji and Card (1991), in
this case the distribution of immigrants only depends on distance from the country of
origin. Hence preferences of early settlers which threaten the exclusion restriction –
they may have been correlated with economic and political characteristics of a state
and be persistent over time – do not play any role in this instrument.
Separately we proxy non-citizen immigrants with another novel instrument. A
large part of those immigrants in the last two decades is represented by the group
of undocumented immigrants. Undocumented non-citizen immigrants are also quite
different from natives in their demographics (less educated, younger, poorer) and
they are more likely to affect the vote of citizens. Hence we construct a proxy for
the inflow of undocumented immigrants to each U.S. state through the border with
22

As in the shift-share instrument used for the naive specification, we address the possible concern
that CMot may be correlated with local conditions at the state level and replicate our analysis by
omitting the contribution of state i to CMot when constructing the value of the instrument for
state i. The results are unaffected.

24

Mexico and we use this imputation as an instrument for non-citizen immigrants.
Let’s call U Mt the total inflow of undocumented immigrants to the U.S. through the
Mexican border in year t23 . Since we do not have a measure of this flow, we use
the number of apprehensions at the border with Mexico, that we call APt , which
captures a share of all individuals who tried to cross illegally. These data are from
the U.S. Border Patrol Agency. Looking at the period, which goes from 1990 to
2014, there was first a large increase in the number of apprehensions between 1990
and 2001 and, next, a long and steady decline, only inverted for a one-year increase
in 2003-2004. We assume that the number of apprehensions APt is proportional to
the number of illegal immigrants (APt = θU Mt ) who passed the border that year. If
there is a certain number of individuals trying to cross the border and only a fraction
(constant over time) is apprehended, then our formula is accurate. While the share
of undocumented people passing the border and being apprehended can depend on
several variables (economic and enforcement related), as a first approximation we
consider these variables as constant over time. We then apportion the estimated
number of undocumented immigrants passing the border, across U.S. states, using
shares that depend inversely on the logarithm of the distance from the Mexican
border, distbordi , and directly on the state native population in 1980, N1980,i . Hence
the imputed share for state i is:
ci = P N1980,i / ln(distbord)i
sh
i (N1980,i / ln(distbord)i )

(20)

Hence, the imputed change in undocumented immigrants in state i between year
ci (APt ) /θ. We can use the latter to predict the change in nont and t + 1 is sh
citizen immigrants in state i between t and t + 1 by running an OLS regression of
ci (APt+1 ) and using the predicted values ∆N
\
the variable ∆N CMit on sh
CMit to
t
P
\
(∆N
CMis ) and then construct:
estimate N\
CMit = N CMi,1990 +
s=1990

(ncmshit )IV =

N\
CMit
cit )
(N\
CMit + N

(21)

cit is defined as in (14). The instrument defined in (21) proxies the change
where N
in non-citizen immigrants in a state using the imputed inflow of undocumented based
on the total inflows (as inferred from apprehensions) and the proximity to the Mex23

While not all undocumented immigrants enter through the Mexican border, as some of them
overstay their visa, about 80% of undocumented immigrants are Mexican or Central American.
Hence our strategy focuses on this group.

25

ican border. This variable may capture only a part of changes in non-citizen immigrants, however if that part is a significant part of the overall changes, this strategy
provides a novel way to analyze the potential impact of the yearly flows of undocumented, and their presence across states, on the vote of U.S. citizens. Finally, as an
instrument for the square of the share of non-citizen immigrants, we simply square
the instrument of the non-citizen immigrant share.

5.4

Main results

Using both OLS and IV, we estimate a significant negative effect of immigrants on
the Republican vote share through the vote of citizen immigrants. As discussed
above, this result is consistent with anecdotal evidence and could be explained by
the fact that naturalized migrants favor a more open migration policy which would
allow them to be joined by family members abroad. An alternative explanation is
that migrants are often from countries where many political parties are to the left of
Democrats and few are as socially conservative as Republicans, thus they are voting
for the same type of ideology they grew up with.
We also find evidence of non-linear effects of the population share of non-citizen
immigrants so that the marginal impact of new immigrants on the Republican vote
turns positive when the share is very high, i.e. when recent immigration becomes
a salient feature at the polls.24 Columns (1) through (3) in Table 4 show the OLS
estimates corresponding to the linear specification using data for, respectively, all
elections (regression (1)) and House elections (regressions (2) and (3)). Columns (4)
and (5) present the OLS estimates of the quadratic specification for House elections.
While the coefficient on the share of citizen immigrants is very significant and negative in all specifications, the impact of the share of non-citizen immigrants is small
and negative or non significant when entered linearly, but has a significant convex
effect when entered as linear-quadratic.
Table 5 focuses on House elections only and shows the 2SLS estimates for the
linear specification (columns (1) and (2)) and for the linear-quadratic specification
(columns (3) and (4)). The top panel of Table 5 shows the second-stage estimates,
while the bottom panel shows the first-stage estimates. At the bottom of the top
panel, we include the Kleibergen-Paap F statistic, which provides an indication of
24

Note that this result is consistent with the finding in Baerg et al. (2014), that the negative
reaction in terms of Democratic votes to the presence of unauthorized immigrants is strongest
when this presence reaches a certain threshold.

26

the significance of the instrument. Note that since our estimation includes robust
standard errors, the standard critical values of Stock-Yogo do not apply (Stock and
Yogo (2002)). Due to the lack of alternative critical values, we apply the same rule
of thumb as suggested by Stock and Yogo, i.e. an F-statistic above 10 indicates that
the IV is acceptable. In addition, we also test for the joint significance of endogenous
regressors by including the Anderson Rubin Wald test. A p-value above 0.1 indicates
that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are jointly insignificant
and thus robust to the presence of weak instruments.
One result stands out. In each specification and for each method of estimation we
find strong evidence of the negative effect of citizen immigrants on the Republican
vote share. Specifically, we estimate a negative and significant value for the coefficient
β2 in all regressions. Using the share of Republican votes in the House elections, the
point estimate in Table 5 is 1.75 and 1.81, but not significantly different from one
(because of the large standard error). An increase in immigrant citizens as a share of
voters by one percentage point decreases the share of the Republican vote by 1.75 to
1.81 percentage points. As for the indirect political effect of immigration, when we
it
as linear, in specification (8), the estimated
model the impact of the variable MNitCM
+N it
coefficient is negative and (marginally) significant in column (1) but insignificant in
column (2). However, in the non-linear specification, the impact of the non-citizen
immigrant share is significant with a negative linear effect and a positive quadratic
effect, hence it is clearly convex. This implies that, while at low values of the share
of non-citizen immigrants, their impact on the share of Republican votes is likely
non-significant or even negative, for high values of that share their impact turns
positive. Such a convex relation between the share of non-citizen immigrants and
the Republican vote share suggests that the perceptions of new migrants affect voters’
behavior only when their share is large and their presence is rather conspicuous. In
the next section, we will show the relation between the marginal effect of the noncitizen share on Republican votes and the initial share and calculate the threshold
value at which the effect turns positive.
Thus the results in Table 5 emphasize the different effect of citizens and noncitizen immigrants. In Tables 2 and 3 we detected an overall negative association
between immigrants and Republican votes. However, the estimates in Tables 4 and
5 provide a more complex picture of the political impact of migration to the U.S..
We find that, while the share of citizen immigrants is a significant boost to the
Democratic party, the effect of non-citizen immigrants is somewhat more complex and
non-linear. In particular new immigrants, who are mainly non-citizen immigrants,
27

have a negative or non-significant effect on the Republican vote share when their
share is low, but a positive one at higher values of that share. These results are
consistent with naturalized migrants being less likely to vote for the Republican
party than native voters and with citizens’ political preferences moving towards the
Republican party because of high immigration, i.e. when migration is supposedly a
salient issue in voters’ minds.

6

Effect of Different Policies

To illustrate the implications of these estimates, it is useful to calculate how these
coefficients map into the effects of changes in different types of immigrants on the
share of Republican votes. Using the estimated coefficients of the linear specification
in Table 5 (βL = −0.80 and β2 = −1.81), we can evaluate which one of the following
policies is most beneficial/harmful for the Republican vote share25 .
1) Increase in newly arrived immigrants: An inflow of new immigrants, typically
entering the U.S. without citizenship rights (hence as non-citizens), by 1 percent of
the population will have an impact equal to βL on the Republican share of votes. This
could be driven by a more open immigration policy that admits extra immigrants.
The negative estimate of βL implies that, on average, the republican party will loose
0.8 percent of the votes per percentage point increase. However, once we recognize
the salient feature of non-citizen immigration, the impact on the republican vote can
turn positive. Given our estimates in Table 5, column 3, the marginal effect of a 1
it
. It is positive for
percent increase of non-citizen immigrants equals βL + 2βQ NNitCM
+Mit
values above 13.2%. Figure 4 illustrate the dependence of this effect on the share
of non-citizen immigrants. As of the last presidential election, in 2012, 6 states
(California, District of Columbia, Nevada, New Jersey, New York and Texas) had
values larger than this threshold. At the congressional-district level, using estimates
of the non-citizen migrant share based on the American Community Survey for the
114th Congress, we find that for 55 out of 434 congressional districts the impact of
the above share is positive. For 26 districts the effect is not significantly different
from zero and for the remaining 353 the effect is negative, see Figure 7(a). Figure
7(b) plots the geographical distribution of the impact on the Republican vote share
for each Congressional-district using (βL = −4.29, βQ = 16.27 and β2 = −1.75).
Hence for the majority of states and congressional districts, the potential positive
25
The detailed derivation of the marginal effects of each policy, using the definition of the variables
and shares, can be found in the Appendix 9

28

effect of new immigration on the Republican share does not occur at their current
level of non-citizen immigrants.
2) Pure composition (naturalization) effect: An increase in the share of citizen
immigrants, leaving the total number of immigrants and their share in the population
constant. In this case, an increase of citizen immigrants by 1 percentage point of
the population, accompanied by a corresponding decrease in the share of non-citizen
immigrants
will have an impact on the share of Republican vote equal to βL −

Mit +Nit Nit
. This change would be achieved by an increase in the naturalization
β2
V Pit V Pit
rate. Given the estimates of Table 5, the first term is negative and the second
 positive
Mit +Nit Nit
but β2 is smaller in absolute value than βL and as the term V Pit V Pit is close to
one, for every state in the 2012 election year, the overall effect of such policy on the
Republican share is negative.
3) Pure Scale effect: This is an increase (decrease) in the total number of immigrants (and hence increasing in their share of total voting population) keeping the composition of citizen versus non-citizen immigrants constant. Define as
nit = CMit /Mit the share of citizens among immigrants, then an increase in immigrants by 1 percentage of the population, keeping the
to non-citizen

 same citizens
2

it
on the share of the
ratio will have an impact equal to βL (1 − nit ) + β2 nit MVit +N
Pit
Republican vote. Using the estimates from Table 5, this marginal effect is negative
for any U.S. state in 2012.

Summarizing the main results, we can emphasize three findings. First, all our
estimates suggest that an increase in the share of naturalized immigrants increases
significantly the share of vote to the democratic party. This may be because they
tend to vote for the Democratic party more intensively than natives (which is the
explanation suggested by our framework) but we cannot rule out that part of the
effect proceeds from increases democratic preferences of natives in response to more
naturalized immigrants. Second, our findings also indicate that when the share of
non-citizen immigrants is large, further increases in the non-citizen migrants share
can increase the share of votes to the Republicans. Through this channel, large
populations of new immigrants (or non-citizen immigrants) in a state might increase
the chances of electoral success of the Republican party, when the share of non-citizen
migrants is high. As these immigrants do not vote, the effect we identify is consistent
with the idea that voters’ preferences can be moved towards a more conservative
immigration stand, especially in the House elections, when these immigrants become
29

a large and noticeable presence in the state. Third, and final, such adverse electoral
response to non-citizen immigrants is relevant only at very high population shares of
non-citizen immigrants, which in 2012 only characterized 12% of electoral districts.
If we focus on the combined effect through both channels, we now estimate it to be
negative in all districts. However, it is important to understand that this average
impact is the outcome of two opposing effects and that the relative strength of the
latter ones could change over time and reverse the sign of the combined effect. In
particular, to the extent that the indirect effect is considered as the relevant one,
when discussing how the presence of undocumented immigrants may affect the vote
of citizens, our mechanism may rationalize the frequent attempt of some republican
candidates to make this a salient issue for the elections. However, we also estimate
that the effect on Republican vote share in response to undocumented immigrants
would be positive only in very few districts.

7
7.1

Channels
Labor-market, welfare-state and non-economic channels

Our empirical results so far show that, on average, an increase of the share of noncitizen migrants has a negative or insignificant impact on Republican votes (see
regressions (1)-(2) in Table 5) when included linearly. In this section, we present
evidence that the average impact of the share of non-citizen migrants on the vote
of citizens is consistent with the operating of different channels. In particular, we
consider three of them – the labor-market one, the welfare-state one and a noneconomic one driven by a preference for people with a culture similar to one’s own.
We provide evidence on the operating of these channels by estimating the following
specification:

rit




N CMit
N CM it
CMit
U Si
+ β2
+ βLC
+
= si + qt + β1
M it + N it
Vit
Mit + Nit
Si




N CM it
N CM it
+ βW C
Ii + βN E
N Ei + βx Xit + εit
M it + N it
M it + N it

where USSi i is the unskilled-to-skilled labor ratio in state i in 1994 – measured as
the share of high school dropouts in the voting population – Ii is the average income
of voters in state i in 1994 – where income is measured in 1994 U.S. dollars – N Ei
represents a dissimilarity index (along several cultural traits) between immigrants
30

and natives in state i in 1994. We use beginning-of-the-period (1994) values for
citizens in a state to minimize endogeneity concerns.
We show that, consistent with non-citizen immigrants being (relatively) unskilled
in comparison to the native population,26 in states where voters are less educated,
an increase in the share of non-citizen migrants increases the Republican vote share
(βLC > 0). This result is consistent with citizens feeling the labor-market competition
of immigrants to a stronger extent, the less educated they are. Thus, an increase
in the immigrant share increases the electoral success of the party less favorable to
migration, i.e. the Republican party, more in states with a large population of low
educated (see columns 1 to 10 in Table 6 – βLC is significant in columns 1,3,4,5,9 and
10). We also find evidence that, controlling for education (share of low educated)
in states where voters are richer, an increase in the share of non-citizen immigrants
increases the Republican vote share. This result is consistent with a rational response
of citizens to welfare-state channel under the tax-adjustment model (Facchini and
Mayda (2009)). Non-citizen immigrants are (relatively) poor 27 , thus they are likely
perceived as a fiscal burden, being on the receiving end of the welfare state. The
tax adjustment model assumes that the welfare state adjusts to migration through a
change in tax rates. Given that migrants are poorer than voters, they give rise to a
deficit in the government’s budget constraint, which in the tax-adjustment model is
brought back to balance through an increase in tax rates. Higher tax rates hurt all
voters, but rich ones to a greater extent (because of progressive taxes). Therefore,
through the welfare-state channel under the tax adjustment model, we should find
that in states where voters are richer, an increase in the share of non-citizen migrants
should increase the Republican vote share. Our results in Table 6, (βW C > 0 in
all regressions and significant in columns 1,2,4,6, 7 and 8) is consistent with this
explanation. Finally the negative and significant estimate of the main effect of the
variable “Share of non-citizen immigrants” on the share of republican vote implies
that, in states where voters are relatively skilled and low income, the impact of the
non-citizen migrant share on Republican votes is negative and significant (β1 < 0).
This is again consistent with both the labor-market channel and with the welfarestate channel under the tax adjustment model. Educated voters do not perceive to
be in competition with immigrants in the labor market and, if their income os not
too high, they will not be as affected by increases in tax rates. Thus the response of
26

Over the considered period, the average number of years of education of non-citizens immigrants
was 12.6 while it was 14.1 for the voting population.
27
In the period we analyze, the average income at constant 1999 prices is 25614 USD for noncitizen migrants compared to 34228 USD for the voting population.

31

skilled and lower income voters to immigrants will decrease the electoral success of
the Republican party. All these results, on both economic channels, produce a picture
of the perceived economic impact of migration which matches well the evidence from
the literature on individual attitudes towards immigrants (see Scheve and Slaughter
(2001), Hanson et al. (2007), Mayda (2006), and Facchini and Mayda (2009)).
Note that, at the individual level, skill and income tend to be positively correlated,
therefore the labor-market and welfare-state channels (under the tax-adjustment
model) imply opposite effects. For example, the very same skilled and rich Californians will welcome non-citizen migrants, because of their (perceived) labor-market
effects, and oppose them, because of their (perceived) welfare-state effects. These
effects working in opposite directions could explain why the impact of the non-citizen
migrant share is small or not significant in the linear specification.
Finally, we analyze the non-economic channel by introducing several measures of
cultural dissimilarity between immigrants and natives and interacting each of them
with the non-citizen migrant share. The measures we consider focus on, respectively,
language, religious and historical differences (see columns 3 through 8, Table 6)
– by historical differences we mean lack of a common colonial relationship. We
also average these measures into a composite one (see columns 9 and 10). The
different measures of cultural differences deliver the same message captured by the
coefficient βN E , which is always positive and often significant: Cultural dissimilarity
with immigrants pushes votes to the Republican party, the higher is the non-citizen
migrant share.

7.2

Participation channel

Immigrants may also affect the decision of voters to participate in an election, particularly in states where the immigrant population changed a lot. Some of the effects
attributed to the direct and indirect channel could be due to attracting or discouraging some marginal voters. In particular if the main effect of citizen immigrants
is their own vote, while the main impact of non-citizen immigrants is in altering
the vote behavior of citizens we should observe such differential impact on voting
turnout. For this reason, we consider an additional specification, where we investigate the impact of citizen and non-citizen immigrants on the voter turnout. We
expect that, as the share of non-citizen immigrants increases, their indirect effect
may become stronger as they affect voter’s turnout. To the contrary the presence
of citizen immigrants should not affect citizens turnout much. To shed light on this
32

hypothesis, we estimate the following regression:
N CM it
CMit
+ β2
+ βx Xit + εit
(22)
M it + N it
Vit
where the dependent variable, Voter Turnout V Tit in state i at time t, is defined
as the ratio of the number of actual votes divided by the eligible voting population.
Note that the eligible voting population excludes non-citizen immigrants, prisoners,
people on probation as well as people on parole from the voting age population, i.e.
everyone residing in the United States, age 18 and older, as defined by the Census
Bureau.28 The independent regressors are the same variables as in the previous
regression specification. To account for the endogeneity of immigration on election
participation, we estimate equation 22 via 2SLS.
V Tit = si + qt + βL

The results in Table 7 show the linear and non-linear results. In the linear specification, Column (1), voter turnout increases in the share of non-citizen immigrants
by 0.8 percent, while the effect of citizen immigrants is not significant. Turning the
attention to the non-linear specification, the results in Column (2) show that noncitizen immigrants increase the voter turnout at a declining rate. Figure 6 plots the
marginal effects of 1 percentage point increase of the share of non-citizen immigrants
on the Voter Turnout. In the case of California, the state with the highest share
of non-citizen immigrants in the year 2012 (18%), the marginal effect can even be
negative. On the other hand, in all other states the share of non-citizen immigrants
has a positive impact on voters participation. Overall, our results are consistent with
the view that higher shares of non-citizen immigrants spur election participation of
natives, while having no effect on the participation of citizen immigrants.

8

Conclusion

Looking at the debate surrounding immigration policy reform in the U.S., one message is clear: For the most part Republicans are hesitant to push forward with
migration policy reforms, especially those that would give a path to citizenship to
currently undocumented immigrants. In addition, in electoral times, their average
attitude towards migrants is to talk “tough” about the presence of undocumented
immigrants. In this paper, we analyze the impact of immigrants on the vote to the
Republican party and find some regularities that may help understand this politi28
The voter turnout is public available data compiled by McDonald (2002) and freely available
at http://www.electproject.org/.

33

cal behavior. Political analysts often refer to the pro-Democrat electoral behavior of
naturalized immigrants (and second-generation ones) to explain the reluctance of the
Republican Party to push forward with migration policy reform. However, we note
that this view is inconsistent with recent research based on European data showing
that, actually, high immigrant shares might be driving votes towards conservative
parties, which promise a reduction in immigration. We shed light on the difference
between the European findings and the views of U.S. political analysts by separately
considering two groups of immigrants and their effects.
Our results lead us to two conclusions. First, non-citizen/undocumented immigrants are both the enemy and the raison d’être of some politicians: right-wing
parties in Europe and vocal anti-immigration Republicans in the U.S. flourish in
localities and times characterized by high non-citizen immigrant share. Focusing on
the U.S., Republicans can gain votes from (non-citizen/undocumented) migrants as
their presence seem to make U.S. citizen voters more conservative. Second, the latter
finding is consistent with Republicans talking tough about migration during electoral
times. However we note that the political returns to talking tough on migration by
Republicans may be limited since we find that the non-citizen migrant share has a
positive impact on Republicans’ political success only when this share is high, which
presumably makes the topic of migration salient in voters’ minds or increases the
concern of citizens. Based on data from 2012, the year of the last presidential election, six states (California, District of Columbia, Nevada, New Jersey, New York and
Texas) had values of the non-citizen migrant share high enough to make its impact
positive. As we only found the effect to be present in House elections, however,
it is more meaningful to look at congressional districts, rather than states. At the
Congressional-district level, using estimates of the non-citizen migrant share based
on the American Community Survey for the 114th Congress, we find that only 55 out
of 434 Congressional districts (less than 13% of them) had large enough non-citizen
share to produce a positive impact on the Republican vote.

34

References
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2011): “Family ties and political participation,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 9, 817–839.
Altonji, J. G. and D. Card (1991): “The effects of immigration on the labor market outcomes of less-skilled natives,” in Immigration, trade, and the labor
market, University of Chicago Press, 201–234.
Baerg, N., J. L. Hotchkiss, and M. Quispe-Agnoli (2014): “Unauthorized
Immigration and Electoral Outcomes,” Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Research Paper Series.
Barone, G., G. De Blasio, and P. Naticchioni (2014): “Mr. Rossi, Mr. Hu
and Politics: The Role of Immigration in Shaping Natives’ Political Preferences,”
IZA Discussion Paper, 8228.
Benhabib, J. (1996): “On the political economy of immigration,” European Economic Review, 40, 1737–1743.
Blau, F. D. and L. M. Kahn (2012): “Immigration and the Distribution of
Incomes,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Boeri, T., G. Hanson, and B. McCormick (2002): Immigration policy and the
welfare system: a report for the Fondazione Rodolfo Debenedetti, Oxford University
Press.
Borjas, G. J. (2014): Immigration economics, Harvard University Press.
Butcher, K. F. and A. M. Piehl (1998): “Recent immigrants: Unexpected
implications for crime and incarceration,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review
Labor Relations Review, 51, 654–679.
Card, D. (2001): “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows and the Local Labor Market
Impacts of Higher Immigration,” Tech. rep., Journal of Labor Economics.
Card, D., C. Dustmann, and I. Preston (2012): “Immigration, wages, and
compositional amenities,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10, 78–
119.
Chalfin, A. (2015): “The Long-Run Effect of Mexican Immigration on Crime
in U.S. Cities: Evidence from Variation in Mexican Fertility Rates,” American
Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings.
35

Conconi, P., G. Facchini, M. F. Steinhardt, and M. Zanardi (2012): “The
political economy of trade and migration: Evidence from the US Congress,” .
Della Vigna, S. and E. Kaplan (2007): “The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and
Voting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 1187–1234.
Edmonston, B., J. P. Smith, et al. (1997): The New Americans:: Economic,
Demographic, and Fiscal Effects of Immigration, National Academies Press.
Facchini, G. and A. M. Mayda (2009): “Does the welfare state affect individual
attitudes toward immigrants? Evidence across countries,” The review of economics
and statistics, 91, 295–314.
Facchini, G. and M. F. Steinhardt (2011): “What drives US immigration
policy? Evidence from congressional roll call votes,” Journal of Public Economics,
95, 734–743.
Gimpel, J. G. (2014): “Immigration’s Impact on Republican Political Prospects,
1980 to 2012,” Center of Immigration Studies Report.
Giuliano, P. (2007): “Living arrangements in western europe: Does cultural origin
matter?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 927–952.
Halla, M., A. F. Wagner, and J. Zweimüller (2012): “Does Immigration
into Their Neighborhoods Incline Voters Toward the Extreme Right? The Case of
the Freedom Party of Austria,” IZA Discussion Paper, 6575.
Hanson, G. H., K. Scheve, and M. J. Slaughter (2007): “Public finance
and individual preferences over globalization strategies,” Economics & Politics,
19, 1–33.
Hijmans, R., N. Garcia, and J. Wieczorek (2010): “GADM: database of
global administrative areas,” .
Lewis, E. and G. Peri (2014): “Immigration and the Economy of Cities and
Regions,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mayda, A., G. Peri, and W. Steingress (2015): “The political impact of
migration: A Cross-Country Perspective,” mimeo.
Mayda, A. M. (2006): “Who is against immigration? A cross-country investigation of individual attitudes toward immigrants,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 88, 510–530.
36

Mayer, T. and S. Zignago (2011): “Notes on CEPII’s distances measures: The
GeoDist database,” .
McDonald, M. P. (2002): “The turnout rate among eligible voters in the states,
1980–2000,” State Politics & Policy Quarterly, 2, 199–212.
Munshi, K. (2003): “Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the
US labor market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 549–599.
O’rourke, K. H. and R. Sinnott (2006): “The determinants of individual attitudes towards immigration,” European Journal of Political Economy, 22, 838–861.
Ortega, F. (2005): “Immigration quotas and skill upgrading,” Journal of Public
Economics, 89, 1841–1863.
Otto, A. H. and M. F. Steinhardt (2014): “Immigration and election outcomes: Evidence from city districts in Hamburg,” Regional Science and Urban
Economics, 45, 67–79.
Razin, A., E. Sadka, and B. Suwankiri (2011): “Migration and the welfare
state,” Political economy formation, MIT Press (Cambridge).
Reichel, D. (2012): “Regulating Political Incorporation of Immigrants – Naturalisation Rates in Europe,” ICMPD Working Paper, 4.
Ruggles, S., M. Sobek, T. Alexander, C. A. Fitch, R. Goeken, P. K.
Hall, M. King, and C. Ronnander (2004): “Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series (IPUMS): Version 3.0,” Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.
Available at: http://www. ipums. org. her, GA (1966).”.
Scheve, K. F. and M. J. Slaughter (2001): “Labor market competition and individual preferences over immigration policy,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
83, 133–145.
Spenkuch, J. L. (2013): “Understanding the impact of immigration on crime,”
American law and economics review.
Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2002): “Testing for weak instruments in linear IV
regression,” .

37

9

Appendix

This section calculates the derivatives for the different policy experiments.
1) Increase in newly arrived immigrants: An inflow of new immigrants,
typically entering the U.S. without citizenship rights (hence as non-citizens), by 1
percent of the voting population will have an impact equal to
R

ijt
∂ Vijt

N it
∂ NM
it +Mit

= βL

under the constraint that ∂Mit = ∂N CM , ∂Mit = 0 and ∂Nit = 0.
2) Pure composition effect: This is an increase in the share of citizen immigrants, leaving the total number of immigrants constant and hence their share of the
population also constant.
R

ijt
∂ Vijt
it
∂ MCM
it +Nit


= −βL + β2

Mit + Nit Nit
V P it V P it



under the constraint that ∂CMit = −∂N CMit , ∂Mit = 0 and ∂Nit = 0.
Proof:


∂N CM it
N CM it ∂M it
N CM it
− (M +N )2
∂ Mit +Nit
Mit +Nit
it
it


=
CM it
∂CM it
CM it ∂M it
∂ Mit +Nit
−
2
Mit +Nit
(M +N )
it

it

which can be simplified under to
N CM it
∂M
it +Nit
it
∂ MCM
it +Nit

= −1

because ∂Mit = 0 and ∂CMit = ∂N CMit . Similar, the derivative for the third
term equals


∂CM it
CM it ∂CM it
CM it
−
∂ CMit +Nit
CMit +Nit
(CMit +Nit )2


=
CM it
∂CM it
∂ Mit +Nit
M +Nit

which we can simplify to

38


=

Mit + Nit
CMit + N it


1−

CM it
CMit + Nit



∂CM it
∂CM it

and using the fact CMit + N it = V Pit , we finally get:



N it
Mit + Nit
=
V P it
V Pit
3) Pure Scale effect: This is an increase in the total number of immigrants
keeping the composition Citizen/Non-citizen constant.
R

ijt
∂ Vijt
it
∂ MitM+N
it


= βL (1 − nit ) + β2 nit

Mit + Nit
V P it

2

it
where the share of non-citizens immigrants nit = CM
is constant, i.e. ∂nit = 0.
Mit
Proof:


N CM it ∂M it
∂N CM it
N CM it
−
2
∂M
M +Nit
(Mit +Nit )
it +Nit

=
M it
M it
1
∂ Mit +Nit
−
∂M it
2
M +Nit
(M +N )
it

it

because ∂Nit = 0. Using the fact that N CMit = (1 − nit )Mit and ∂CMit =
nit ∂Mit , we can substitute


it )M it
∂M it
(1 − nit ) − (1−n
(Mit +Nit )


=
it
1 − (MitM+N
∂M it
it )
and simplify to
= (1 − nit )
.
Similarly, the derivative for the third term is:


CM it
1
CM it
− (CM +N )2 ∂CM it
∂ CMit +Nit
CMit +Nit
it
it


=
M it
M
1
it
∂ Mit +Nit
− (M +N )2 ∂M it
M +Nit
it

which we can simplify to

39

it


= β2

Mit + Nit
CMit + N it



N it
CMit +Nit
N it
(Mit +Nit )

!

∂CM it
∂M it

and using the fact ∂CMit = nit ∂Mit and CMit + N it = V Pit , we finally get:

= nit

Mit + Nit
V P it

40

2

Tables	  
Table	  1:	  Summary	  statistics	  
	  
	  
Obs.	  

Mean	  

Std.	  Dev.	  

Min	  

Max	  

	  
Republican	  
vote	  share	  

	  
1306	  

	  
49.0	  

	  
12.5	  

	  
0.0	  

	  
100.0	  

Democrat	  vote	  share	  

1306	  

46.9	  

13.1	  

0.0	  

92.5	  

	  Republican	  vote	  share	  

	  
500	  

	  
48.6	  

	  
10.7	  

	  
0.0	  

	  
81.6	  

Democrat	  vote	  share	  

500	  

48.1	  

11.4	  

0.0	  

87.8	  

	  Republican	  vote	  share	  

	  
334	  

	  
47.5	  

	  
14.1	  

	  
0.0	  

	  
100.0	  

Democrat	  vote	  share	  

333	  

48.6	  

14.6	  

0.0	  

80.0	  

	  Presidential	  	  

	  Republican	  vote	  share	  

	  
255	  

	  
46.9	  

	  
10.1	  

	  
6.5	  

	  
72.8	  

Election	  

Democrat	  vote	  share	  

255	  

49.9	  

9.8	  

24.8	  

92.5	  

	  Gubernatorial	  
Election	  

	  
Republican	  vote	  share	  

	  
217	  

	  
49.3	  

	  
10.8	  

	  
18.7	  

	  
79.2	  

Democrat	  vote	  share	  

217	  

45.7	  

11.3	  

0.0	  

74.0	  

	  
Demographic	  
data	  	   	  Share	  of	  immigrants	  

	  
1306	  

	  
8.9	  

	  
7.6	  

	  
0.4	  

	  
36.1	  

	  

Share	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  

1306	  

5.4	  

4.5	  

0.0	  

22.4	  

Share	  of	  citizen	  immigrants	  

	  
	  
Election	  
data	  

	  

	  
	  House	  Election	  
	  
	  Senate	  Election	  
	  

	  

	  

in	  voting	  population	  

1306	  
	  

4.2	  
	  

4.5	  
	  

0.1	  
	  

25.6	  
	  

	  

HS	  dropouts	  	  

1306	  

8.1	  

2.7	  

3.1	  

17.9	  

	  

HS	  graduates	  

1306	  

32.6	  

4.8	  

16.0	  

47.5	  

	  

Some	  college	  

1306	  

21.3	  

3.5	  

9.7	  

34.2	  

	  

College	  graduates	  

1306	  

29.0	  

4.9	  

14.6	  

44.7	  

	  

More	  than	  college	  

1306	  

9.0	  

2.9	  

3.6	  

35.7	  

	  

African	  American	  

1306	  

9.8	  

9.8	  

0.0	  

62.3	  

	  

Hispanic	  	  

1306	  

3.6	  

6.1	  

0.0	  

44.4	  

	  

Share	  of	  urban	  population	  

1306	  

51.5	  

28.7	  

0.0	  

100.0	  

	  	  

Average	  income	  

1306	  

34243	  

5258	  

22313	  

52464	  

	  

Unskilled	  to	  Skilled	  ratio	  

1306	  

11.17	  

3.94	  

5.56	  

21.06	  

52.3	  

1.5	  

46.0	  

57.6	  

Males	  

1306	  

	  

Married	  

1306	  

58.3	  

4.3	  

24.7	  

70.1	  

	  

Unemployment	  rate	  

1306	  

5.6%	  

2.1%	  

1.3%	  

14.2%	  

	  	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  
Note:	   	   The	  electoral	  variables	  are	  from	  the	  Congressional	  Quarterly	  data	  set,	  while	  the	  Demographic	  data	  are	  from	  
the	  CPS.	  The	  averages,	  standard	  deviations	  and	  other	  statistics	  are	  taken	  across	  50	  states	  and	  all	  years	  between	  1994	  
and	  2012.	  
	  

	  	  

	  

	  

41	  

Table	  2:	  Republican	  vote	  share	  and	  immigrant	  share	  
OLS	  estimates,	  all	  elections	  1994-­‐2012	  
	  	  
Election	  Types	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  Immigrants	  

(1)	  
Pooled	  
	  	  
-­‐0.385**	  
[0.160]	  
	  Other	  Controls:	  
	  
Share	  of	  HS	  graduates	  
0.492**	  
[0.236]	  
	  
Share	  
of	  some	  college	  
0.485**	  
[0.242]	  
	  
Share	  
of	  college	  graduates	   0.659***	  
[0.249]	  
	  
Share	  
of	  more	  than	  college	   0.722**	  
[0.315]	  
	  
Share	  
of	  African	  American	  
0.0208	  
[0.229]	  
	  
Share	  
of	  Hispanics	  
0.0499	  
[0.0612]	  
	  
Share	  
of	  urban	  population	  
0.0584	  
[0.0454]	  
	  Share	  of	  unemployed	  
-­‐0.489*	  
[0.267]	  
	  
Share	  
of	  males	  
0.157	  
[0.278]	  
	  
Share	  
of	  married	  
-­‐0.225	  
[0.140]	  
	  
Voter	  
income	  
0.102	  
[0.202]	  
	  
Constant	  
0.181	  
[0.265]	  
	  
	  State	  fixed	  effects	  
	  
yes	  
Year	  fixed	  effects	  
	  
Observations	  
R-­‐squared	  

(2)	  
PE	  
	  	  
-­‐0.183	  
[0.125]	  
	  
0.140	  
[0.202]	  
0.190	  
[0.191]	  
0.254	  
[0.204]	  
0.186	  
[0.211]	  
0.257	  
[0.156]	  
-­‐0.124***	  
[0.0437]	  
0.130***	  
[0.0357]	  
-­‐0.301*	  
[0.167]	  
0.214	  
[0.172]	  
-­‐0.0623	  
[0.105]	  
-­‐0.0595	  
[0.119]	  
0.190	  
[0.195]	  

(3)	  
SE	  
	  	  
-­‐0.588*	  
[0.344]	  
	  
0.576	  
[0.566]	  
0.948	  
[0.584]	  
0.739	  
[0.592]	  
2.163**	  
[0.885]	  
0.0973	  
[0.579]	  
0.141	  
[0.110]	  
-­‐0.0392	  
[0.126]	  
-­‐0.441	  
[0.661]	  
-­‐1.339**	  
[0.667]	  
0.0775	  
[0.337]	  
-­‐0.0978	  
[0.463]	  
0.645	  
[0.671]	  

(4)	  
HE	  
	  	  
-­‐0.686***	  
[0.179]	  
	  
0.747***	  
[0.259]	  
0.641**	  
[0.269]	  
0.747***	  
[0.271]	  
0.454	  
[0.344]	  
-­‐0.0425	  
[0.282]	  
0.0990	  
[0.0606]	  
0.157***	  
[0.0518]	  
-­‐0.520**	  
[0.250]	  
0.398	  
[0.262]	  
-­‐0.426***	  
[0.153]	  
0.176	  
[0.206]	  
-­‐0.0114	  
[0.276]	  

(5)	  
HE	  
	  	  
-­‐2.097***	  
[0.544]	  
	  
1.972**	  
[0.797]	  
2.286***	  
[0.710]	  
2.393***	  
[0.708]	  
1.318	  
[0.928]	  
-­‐0.556	  
[0.748]	  
0.360*	  
[0.195]	  
0.0340	  
[0.154]	  
-­‐1.951**	  
[0.784]	  
1.064	  
[0.824]	  
-­‐0.620	  
[0.472]	  
0.600	  
[0.763]	  
-­‐1.217	  
[0.778]	  

(6)	  
GE	  
	  	  
0.820	  
[0.537]	  
	  
0.699	  
[0.990]	  
0.482	  
[0.978]	  
0.489	  
[0.939]	  
1.959	  
[1.185]	  
0.257	  
[0.769]	  
0.108	  
[0.445]	  
-­‐0.0603	  
[0.117]	  
0.153	  
[1.080]	  
2.884***	  
[0.940]	  
-­‐0.425	  
[0.390]	  
-­‐0.107	  
[0.751]	  
-­‐1.346	  
[1.047]	  

yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
1,306	  
0.518	  

	  
255	  
0.961	  

	  
334	  
0.638	  

	  
500	  
0.802	  

	  
500	  
0.728	  

	  
217	  
0.444	  

Note: With the expection of Column (5), the dependent variable is the Republican vote share. The dependent
variable in Column (5) is the share of seats obtained by the Republican party. We distinguish between four
types of elections: Presidential election (PE), Senate elections (SE), House elections (HE) and Gubernatorial
elections (GE). Sample period is 1994 to 2012. Each regression is weighted by the population of the state. All
regressions include state as well as year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses: ***, **, * indicate
the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

	  
	  

	  

	  

42	  

Table	  3:	  IV:	  Republican	  vote	  share	  and	  immigrant	  share	  
2SLS	  estimates,	  all	  elections	  1994-­‐2012	  
	  
	  
	  	  
Election	  Types	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  Immigrants	  
	  Other	  Controls	  
Share	  of	  HS	  graduates	  
	  
Share	  
of	  some	  college	  
	  
Share	  
of	  college	  graduates	  
	  
Share	  
of	  more	  than	  college	  
	  
Share	  
of	  African	  American	  
	  Share	  of	  Hispanics	  
	  Share	  of	  urban	  population	  
	  Share	  of	  unemployed	  
	  Share	  of	  males	  
	  Share	  of	  married	  
	  Voter	  income	  
	  
State	  fixed	  effects	  
Year	  fixed	  effects	  
	  
Observations	  
R-­‐squared	  
IV	  F-­‐stat	  
Anderson	  Rubin	  Wald	  test	  

(1)	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
(4)	  
Pooled	  
PE	  
SE	  
HE	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
-­‐0.0808	  
-­‐1.058*	  
-­‐0.359	  
-­‐1.362**	  
[0.488]	  
[0.561]	  
[0.797]	  
[0.540]	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.549**	  
0.107	  
0.724	  
0.662***	  
[0.240]	  
[0.190]	  
[0.536]	  
[0.249]	  
0.535**	  
0.182	  
1.030*	  
0.574**	  
[0.245]	  
[0.176]	  
[0.533]	  
[0.262]	  
0.697***	  
0.286	  
0.763	  
0.701***	  
[0.247]	  
[0.210]	  
[0.531]	  
[0.264]	  
0.732**	  
0.289	  
2.206***	  
0.447	  
[0.306]	  
[0.213]	  
[0.794]	  
[0.325]	  
0.0215	  
0.199	  
0.0590	  
-­‐0.0413	  
[0.223]	  
[0.148]	  
[0.523]	  
[0.268]	  
0.0302	  
-­‐0.0772	  
0.0711	  
0.133**	  
[0.0629]	   [0.0604]	  
[0.120]	  
[0.0654]	  
0.0500	   0.159***	   -­‐0.0748	   0.177***	  
[0.0457]	   [0.0351]	  
[0.114]	  
[0.0530]	  
-­‐0.544**	  
-­‐0.189	  
-­‐0.690	  
-­‐0.441*	  
[0.267]	  
[0.190]	  
[0.633]	  
[0.252]	  
0.196	  
0.0101	   -­‐1.224**	  
0.336	  
[0.276]	  
[0.214]	  
[0.602]	  
[0.250]	  
-­‐0.231*	  
-­‐0.0774	  
0.113	  
-­‐0.402***	  
[0.137]	  
[0.100]	  
[0.305]	  
[0.146]	  
0.0512	  
0.0478	  
-­‐0.317	  
0.265	  
[0.219]	  
[0.137]	  
[0.465]	  
[0.200]	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
1,306	  
255	  
334	  
500	  
0.516	  
0.949	  
0.630	  
0.795	  
116,10	  
8,13	  
42,55	  
33,46	  
0,873	  
0,24	  
0,686	  
0,149	  

(5)	  
HE	  

(6)	  
GE	  
	  	  
	  	  
-­‐6.816***	  
2.782	  
[1.951]	  
[1.673]	  
	  
	  
1.380*	  
1.403	  
[0.839]	  
[0.975]	  
1.818**	  
1.308	  
[0.744]	  
[1.012]	  
2.067***	  
1.224	  
[0.768]	  
[0.974]	  
1.268	  
2.750**	  
[0.954]	  
[1.204]	  
-­‐0.547	  
0.452	  
[0.806]	  
[0.681]	  
0.598**	  
-­‐0.0146	  
[0.243]	  
[0.388]	  
0.169	  
-­‐0.0862	  
[0.154]	  
[0.104]	  
-­‐1.398*	  
-­‐0.455	  
[0.819]	  
[1.016]	  
0.628	  
3.089***	  
[0.813]	  
[0.798]	  
-­‐0.451	  
-­‐0.483	  
[0.470]	  
[0.332]	  
1.222	  
-­‐0.599	  
[0.772]	  
[0.765]	  
	  
	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
	  
	  
500	  
217	  
0.678	  
0.395	  
33,46	  
36,23	  
0,211	  
0,0825	  

	  
Note: With the expection of Column (5), the dependent variable is the Republican vote share. The dependent
variable in Column (5) is the share of seats obtained by the Republican party. We distinguish between four
types of elections: Presidential election (PE), Senate elections (SE), House elections (HE) and Gubernatorial
elections (GE). Sample period is 1994 to 2012. Each regression is weighted by the population of the state. All
regressions include state as well as year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses: ***, **, * indicate
the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

	  

	  

	  

	  

43	  

Table	  4:	  Republican	  vote	  share,	  Citizen	  and	  non-­citizen	  immigrants	  
OLS,	  House	  Elections,	  1994-­2012	  
	  
	  
	  	  
VARIABLES	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  
	  
Share	  
of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  	  
squared	  
Share	  of	  citizen	  immigrants	  in	  
voting	  population	  
	  Constant	  

(1)	  
All	  election	  
types	  
	  	  
-­‐0.0444	  
[0.217]	  

(2)	  

(3)	  

(4)	  

HE	  
	  	  
-­‐0.381	  
[0.236]	  

HE	  -­‐	  seats	  
	  	  
-­‐1.457**	  
[0.735]	  

	  
	  
-­‐0.741***	  

	  
	  
-­‐0.939***	  

	  
	  
-­‐2.523***	  

HE	  -­‐	  quad	  
	  	  
-­‐1.424***	  
[0.459]	  
5.394***	  
[1.756]	  

(5)	  
HE	  seats	  -­‐	  
quad	  
	  	  
-­‐4.603***	  
[1.398]	  
16.27***	  
[5.443]	  

-­‐1.047***	  

-­‐2.848***	  

[0.232]	  

[0.198]	  

[0.555]	  

[0.202]	  

[0.562]	  

0.251	  

0.0683	  

-­‐1.051	  

0.117	  

-­‐0.903	  

[0.268]	  

[0.280]	  

[0.778]	  

[0.275]	  

[0.773]	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
1,306	  
0.517	  

	  
500	  
0.803	  

	  
500	  
0.730	  

	  
500	  
0.806	  

	  
500	  
0.734	  

	  
	  Control	  variables	  
State	  fixed	  effects	  
Year	  fixed	  effects	  
	  Observations	  
R-­‐squared	  

	  
Note: The dependent variable in Column (1), (2), (4) is the Republican vote share, while in Column (3) and (5)
the share of seats obtained by the Republican party. Sample period is 1994 to 2012. Each regression is weighted
by the population of the state. All regressions include state as well as year fixed effects. Robust standard errors
in parentheses: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10%
levels respectively.

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

44	  

Table	  5:	  2SLS	  Estimates:	  Republican	  vote	  share	  in	  House	  Elections	  (HE)	  between	  1994	  and	  2012	  	  
IV	  are	  based	  on	  inverse	  distance	  and	  border	  apprehensions	  
(1)	  
Rep	  Vote	  
percentage	  
-­‐0.801*	  
(0.453)	  
-­‐1.810**	  
(0.741)	  

	  
SECOND	  
STAGE	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  
Share	  of	  citizen	  immigrants	  in	  voting	  population	  
Share	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  squared	  

	  
	  
yes	  

Control	  variables	  
State	  fixed	  effects	  
Year	  fixed	  effects	  
Observations	  
R-­‐squared	  
IV	  F-­‐stat	  
Anderson	  Rubin	  Wald	  test	  

yes	  
yes	  
500	  
0.795	  
10.31	  
0.298	  

	  	  	  
FIRST	  STAGE	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  non-­‐citizens	  instrumented	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  by	  border	  apprehension	  
Share	  of	  citizen	  immigrants	  instrumented	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  by	  distance	  
Share	  of	  non-­‐citizens	  instrumented	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  by	  border	  apprehension	  squared	  
Observations	  
R-­‐squared	  

(2)	  
Rep	  seats	  won	  
percentage	  
-­‐1.260	  
(1.350)	  
-­‐8.365***	  
(3.001)	  
	  	  
	  	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
500	  
0.685	  
10.31	  
0.298	  

	  
(1)	  
non-­‐citizen	  
immigrant	  share	  
0.361***	  
[0.0542]	  
0.329***	  
[0.119]	  
	  
	  

500	  
0.974	  

	  
(2)	  
citizen	  
immigrant	  share	  
-­‐0.119	  
[0.0747]	  
0.655***	  
[0.173]	  
	  	  
	  	  
500	  
0.966	  

	  	  
	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  

(3)	  
non-­‐citizen	  
immigrant	  share	  
0.241***	  
[0.0853]	  
0.283**	  
[0.122]	  
0.479*	  
[0.280]	  
500	  
0.974	  

(3)	  
Rep	  Vote	  
percentage	  
-­‐4.287***	  
(1.274)	  
-­‐1.749**	  
(0.736)	  
16.27***	  
(4.724)	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
500	  
0.786	  
6.415	  
0.128	  

(4)	  
Rep	  seats	  won	  
percentage	  
-­‐13.45***	  
(3.340)	  
-­‐8.153***	  
(2.869)	  
56.90***	  
(12.62)	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
500	  
0.681	  
6.415	  
0.128	  

	  
(4)	  
citizen	  
immigrant	  share	  
-­‐0.153*	  
[0.0810]	  
0.642***	  
[0.178]	  
0.137	  
[0.312]	  
500	  
0.966	  

	  
(5)	  
non-­‐citizen	  
immigrant	  share	  
-­‐0.0102	  
[0.0139]	  
0.0346	  
[0.0258]	  
0.351***	  
[0.0625]	  
500	  
0.975	  

Note: The dependent variable in Column (1) and (3) is the Republican vote share, while in Column (2) and (4) the share of seats obtained by the Republican party. Sample period
is 1994 to 2012. Each regression is weighted by the population of the state. All regressions include state as well as year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in
parentheses: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

	  

45	  

Table	  6:	  2SLS	  estimates:	  Labour	  market	  and	  Welfare	  Channel	  specification,	  Republican	  vote	  share	  in	  House	  Elections	  (HE)	  1994-­	  2012	  	  
IV	  are	  based	  on	  inverse	  distance	  and	  border	  apprehensions	  
	  	  	  

	  

	  
VARIABLES	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  
Share	  of	  citizen	  immigrants	  
	  in	  voting	  population	  
Unskilled	  to	  skilled	  1994	  x	  share	  of	  
non-­‐citizens	  immigrants	  
Income	  1994	  x	  share	  of	  	  
non-­‐citizens	  immigrants	  
Language	  differences	  x	  share	  of	  
non-­‐citizens	  immigrants	  
Religious	  differences	  x	  share	  of	  
	  non-­‐citizens	  immigrants	  
Colonial	  past	  differences	  x	  share	  of	  
	  non-­‐citizens	  immigrants	  
Average	  differences	  x	  share	  of	  	  
	  non-­‐citizens	  immigrants	  
Control	  variables	  
State	  fixed	  effects	  
Year	  fixed	  effects	  
Observations	  
R-­‐squared	  
IV	  F-­‐stat	  
Anderson	  Rubin	  Wald	  test	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	   (10)	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
(4)	  
(5)	  
(6)	  
(7)	  
(8)	  
(9)	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
Rep	  Vote	  
percentage	   percentage	   percentage	   percentage	   percentage	   percentage	   percentage	   percentage	   percentage	   percentage	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
-­‐14.60**	  
-­‐47.18**	  
-­‐24.30***	  
-­‐62.57**	  
-­‐20.59**	  
-­‐63.09**	  
-­‐42.82	  
-­‐62.68	  
-­‐21.71***	   -­‐69.35***	  
(6.566)	  
(22.40)	  
(9.178)	  
(25.29)	  
(8.189)	  
(28.46)	  
(52.35)	  
(71.02)	  
(7.470)	  
(24.89)	  
-­‐2.422**	  
-­‐11.01**	  
-­‐0.811	  
-­‐8.449	  
-­‐2.152*	  
-­‐10.29**	  
-­‐2.477**	  
-­‐11.04**	  
-­‐1.773	  
-­‐8.982**	  
(1.173)	  
(5.283)	  
(1.763)	  
(5.762)	  
(1.136)	  
(4.791)	  
(1.263)	  
(5.129)	  
(1.111)	  
(4.344)	  
19.79*	  
48.08	  
32.54*	  
68.32*	  
17.56*	  
42.16	  
24.54	  
50.68	  
22.03*	  
55.08*	  
(11.03)	  
(32.55)	  
(17.20)	  
(40.48)	  
(10.68)	  
(30.92)	  
(18.86)	  
(39.80)	  
(11.34)	  
(29.61)	  
0.390*	  
1.361*	  
0.320	  
1.250*	  
0.306	  
1.137*	  
0.468**	  
1.404**	  
0.199	  
0.765	  
(0.201)	  
(0.749)	  
(0.207)	  
(0.657)	  
(0.189)	  
(0.667)	  
(0.205)	  
(0.644)	  
(0.193)	  
(0.621)	  
12.51	  
19.85	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
(8.165)	  
(20.84)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
14.57*	  
38.70	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
(7.775)	  
(28.55)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
27.33	  
15.01	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
(52.36)	  
(76.06)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
20.92**	  
65.27**	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
(8.187)	  
(27.61)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  
500	  
500	  
500	  
500	  
500	  
500	  
500	  
500	  
500	  
500	  
0.781	  
0.634	  
0.764	  
0.691	  
0.776	  
0.648	  
0.741	  
0.639	  
0.781	  
0.679	  
2.264	  
2.264	  
0.745	  
0.745	  
2.012	  
2.012	  
0.051	  
0.051	  
1.678	  
1.678	  
0,0040	  
0,0031	  
4.36e-­‐05	  
4.11e-­‐05	  
0,0040	  
0,0040	  
0,00035	  
0,00014	  
0,00017	  
0,00017	  

	  
Note: The control variables do not containt the education shares. Sample period is 1994 to 2012. Each regression is weighted by the population of the state. All
regressions include state as well as year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the
1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

	  

46	  

Table	  7:	  2SLS	  Estimates:	  	  Voter	  Turnout	  in	  House	  Elections	  (HE)	  1994-­2012.	  
IV	  are	  based	  on	  inverse	  distance	  and	  border	  apprehensions	  
	  
	  	  
	  	  

	  

	  	   	  
(1)	  

	  	  
	  	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  citizen	  immigrants	  in	  voting	  population	  
	  	  
Share	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  squared	  
	  	  
Constant	  
	  	  
	  	  
Control	  variables	  
State	  fixed	  effects	  
Year	  fixed	  effects	  
	  	  
Observations	  
R-­‐squared	  
IV	  F-­‐stat	  

	  
	  
-­‐0.388	  
(1.200)	  

(2)	  
Voter	  
Turnout	  
percentage	  
	  	  
2.419***	  
(0.764)	  
0.300	  
(0.505)	  
-­‐7.404**	  
(3.072)	  
-­‐0.273	  
(1.165)	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
yes	  
yes	  
yes	  

	  
500	  
0.916	  
9.321	  

	  
500	  
0.901	  
5.869	  

Voter	  Turnout	  
percentage	  
	  	  
0.812**	  
(0.322)	  
0.141	  
(0.488)	  

Note:
turnout). Sample
	   The dependent variable is the share of actual voters among 	  the voting populalion (voter
	  
period is 1994 to 2012. Each regression is weighted by the population of the state. All regressions include state
as well as year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses: ***, **, * indicate the statistically
significant difference from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

47	  

Figure	  1:	  Average	  Republican	  vote	  share,	  pooling	  all	  elections	  	  
Years	  1994-­2012.	  	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  
Note:	  The	  Map	  represents	  the	  average	  share	  of	  republican	  vote	  pooling	  all	  elections	  from	  1994	  to	  2012,	  
using	  a	  darker	  color	  for	  larger	  shares.	  	  	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

48	  

	  

	  
	  
Figure	  2:	  The	  share	  of	  immigrants	  per	  U.S.	  state	  in	  the	  year	  1994	  and	  2012.	  
	  
	  
Panel	  a:	  Year	  1994	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

Panel	  b:	  Year	  2012	  
	  

	  
	  

	  

Note:	  	  The	  maps	  represent	  the	  share	  of	  foreign	  born	  in	  the	  state	  as	  of	  1994	  (panel	  A)	  and	  in	  2012	  (panel	  
B).	  We	  use	  a	  darker	  color	  for	  larger	  shares	  of	  immigrants,	  dividing	  their	  values	  in	  bins	  capturing	  five	  
quintiles	  of	  the	  distribution	  

	  

	  

	  

49	  

Figure	  3:	  Correlation	  between	  the	  change	  in	  the	  Republican	  vote	  share	  and	  the	  
change	  in	  the	  immigrant	  population	  share	  
	  

Note:	   Each	  point	  represents	  a	  US	  state.	  The	  vertical	  axis	  shows	  the	  change	  in	  the	  share	  of	  republican	  vote	  in	  
the	  house	  elections,	  and	  the	  horizontal	  axis	  shows	  the	  change	  in	  immigrants	  share	  in	  the	  adult	  population.	  

	  

	  
Figure	  4:	  Marginal	  effect	  of	  non-­citizen	  immigrants	  on	  the	  republican	  vote	  share	  	  
	  
Effects	  of	  1pp	  increase	  in	  NCM	  on	  the	  republican	  vote	  
share,	  2SLS	  estimates	  
6	  
5	  
4	  
3	  
2	  
1	  
0	  
-­‐1	  

0	  

0,05	  

0,1	  

0,15	  

0,2	  

0,25	  

0,3	  

-­‐2	  
-­‐3	  
-­‐4	  
-­‐5	  

	  

Note:	   The	   graph	   shows	   the	   schedule	   of	   the	   marginal	   effect	   due	   to	   an	   increase	   of	   non-­‐citizen	   immigrants	   on	  
the	   republican	   vote	   share	   at	   different	   values	   of	   the	   non-­‐citizen	   immigrant	   share.	   The	   graph	   is	   obtained	  
using	  the	  estimated	  coefficients	  of	  Table	  5.	  

	  
	  
	  

50	  

	  
	  
Figure	  5:	  Marginal	  effect	  of	  non-­citizen	  immigrants	  on	  the	  republican	  share	  of	  
seats	  	  
	  
Effects	  of	  1pp	  increase	  in	  NCM	  on	  the	  republican	  seat	  
share,	  	  
2SLS	  estimates	  
24	  
21	  
18	  
15	  
12	  
9	  
6	  
3	  
0	  
-­‐3	  
-­‐6	  
-­‐9	  
-­‐12	  
-­‐15	  

0	  

0,05	  

0,1	  

0,15	  

0,2	  

0,25	  

0,3	  

	  	  

Note:	   The	   graph	   shows	   the	   schedule	   of	   the	   marginal	   effect	   due	   to	   an	   increase	   of	   non-­‐citizen	   immigrants	   on	   the	  
republican	   vote	   share	   at	   different	   values	   of	   the	   non-­‐citizen	   immigrant	   share.	   The	   graph	   is	   obtained	   using	   the	  
estimated	  coefficients	  of	  Table	  5.	  

	  
	  
Figure	  6:	  Marginal	  effect	  of	  non-­citizen	  immigrants	  on	  voter	  turnout.	  	  
	  
Effects	  of	  1pp	  increase	  in	  NCM	  on	  voter	  turnout,	  	  
2SLS	  estimates	  
3	  
2,5	  
2	  
1,5	  
1	  
0,5	  
0	  
-­‐0,5	  

0	  

0,05	  

0,1	  

0,15	  

0,2	  

0,25	  

0,3	  

-­‐1	  
-­‐1,5	  
-­‐2	  
-­‐2,5	  

	  	  

	  
Note:	  The	  graph	  shows	  the	  schedule	  of	  the	  marginal	  effect	  due	  to	  an	  increase	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  on	  the	  voter	  
turnout	  at	  different	  values	  of	  the	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrant	  share.	  The	  graph	  is	  obtained	  using	  the	  estimated	  coefficients	  
of	  column	  3	  in	  Table	  7.	  

	  

51	  

	  

Figure	  7:	  Marginal	  effect	  of	  an	  increase	  in	  non-­citizen	  immigrants	  on	  the	  
republican	  vote	  share	  across	  congressional	  districts,	  2012	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
(a):	  Significant	  impact	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  on	  the	  	  
republican	  vote	  share	  with	  95%	  confidence	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
(b):	  Continuous	  impact	  of	  non-­‐citizen	  immigrants	  on	  the	  	  
republican	  vote	  share	  at	  point	  estimate	  
	  
	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

52	  

	  

	  

