NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE AGGREGATE IMPLICATIONS OF REGIONAL BUSINESS CYCLES
Martin Beraja
Erik Hurst
Juan Ospina
Working Paper 21956
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21956

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

We thank Bence Bardoczy for superb research assistance. We would also like to thank the editor Gianluca
Violante and four anonymous referees whose suggestions improved the paper substantially. We thank
Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, George-Marios Angeletos, David Argente, Mark Bils, Juliette Caminade,
Elisa Giannone, Adam Guren, Simon Gilchrist, Paul Gomme, Bob Hall, Marc Hofstetter, Loukas Karabarbounis,
Pat Kehoe, Virgiliu Midrigan, Elena Pastorino, Harald Uhlig, Joe Vavra, Ivan Werning for their very
helpful comments and discussions. Finally, we thank seminar participants at the Bank of England,
Berkeley, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Boston University, Brown, Central Bank
of Colombia, Chicago, Chicago Federal Reserve, Columbia, Duke, Harvard, IEF Workshop, Michigan,
Minneapolis Federal Reserve, Minnesota Workshop in Macroeconomic Theory, MIT, NBER's Summer
Institute EF&G, NBER's Summer Institute Prices Program, Northwestern, Princeton, Rochester, St.
Louis Federal Reserve, UCLA, Yale's Cowles Conference on Macroeconomics. Any remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Martin Beraja, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Aggregate Implications of Regional Business Cycles
Martin Beraja, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina
NBER Working Paper No. 21956
February 2016, Revised February 2019
JEL No. E24,E31,E32,R12,R23
ABSTRACT
Making inferences about aggregate business cycles from regional variation alone is diffcult because
of economic channels and shocks that differ between regional and aggregate economies. However,
we argue that regional business cycles contain valuable information that can help discipline models
of aggregate fluctuations. We begin by documenting a strong relationship across US states between
local employment and wage growth during the Great Recession. This relationship is much weaker
in US aggregates. Then, we present a methodology that combines such regional and aggregate data
in order to estimate a medium-scale New Keynesian DSGE model. We find that aggregate demand
shocks were important drivers of aggregate employment during the Great Recession, but the wage
stickiness necessary for them to account for the slow employment recovery and the modest fall in
aggregate wages is inconsistent with the flexibility of wages we observe across US states. Finally,
we show that our methodology yields different conclusions about the causes of aggregate employment
and wage dynamics between 2007 and 2014 than either estimating our model with aggregate data alone
or performing back-of-the-envelope calculations that directly extrapolate from well-identified regional
elasticities.

Martin Beraja
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
martinberaja@gmail.com
Erik Hurst
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Harper Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu

Juan Ospina
Banco de la Republica de Colombia
juan.jose.ospina@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Regional business cycles during the Great Recession in the US were strikingly different than
their aggregate counterpart. This is the cornerstone observation on which this paper is built.
Yet, the aggregate US economy is just a collection of these regions connected by the trade of
goods and services and the mobility of factors of production. We argue that their aggregation
cannot be arbitrary and that regional business cycles have interesting implications for our
understanding of aggregate fluctuations.
Primarily, there have been two broad types of literatures that have tried to understand
the drivers of aggregate business cycles. First, researchers have used aggregate time series
data to estimate aggregate business cycle models.1 Second, a recent literature has emerged
using plausibly exogenous regional variation to estimate local elasticities with respect to
regional shocks.2 Researchers then often extrapolate from such well-identified regional elasticities to aggregates by performing back-of-the-envelope calculations without the aid of a
formal model. The first approach ignores valuable information in regional data that can help
discipline key theoretical mechanisms. The second approach risks missing economic channels
and shocks that are important at the aggregate level but not the regional level.
In this paper, we present a methodology that combines the strengths of both approaches
by simultaneously using regional and aggregate data in order to estimate a medium-scale
New Keynesian DSGE model of a monetary union. While regional and aggregate reducedform responses to shocks might differ, we show that key structural equations are common
between the regional and aggregate economies under certain assumptions. Then, we show
how exploiting regional variation can help researchers estimate common structural parameters that may be difficult to pin down using aggregate data alone. Finally, when it comes to
understanding the Great Recession, we find that our methodology yields dramatically different results than if we either estimated our model solely with aggregate data or if we naively
extrapolated from well-identified regional elasticities by performing back-of-the-envelope calculations.
We begin the paper by using a variety of micro data sources to document that during
the Great Recession there was a sizable positive correlation between state-level wage growth
and employment growth. Specifically, using cross-state variation between 2007 and 2010,
we find that a 1 percent decline in employment was associated with a 0.72 percent and
0.64 percent decline in nominal wages and real wages, respectively. This contrasts with the
1

See, for example, Christiano et al. (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007), Justiniano et al. (2010), Christiano
et al. (2014), and Linde et al. (2016).
2
See, for example, Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014), Mian et al. (2013), Charles et al. (2016), Mehrotra and
Sergeyev (2017), and Yagan (2017).

1

muted response of aggregate wages during this period despite aggregate employment falling
sharply. From the aggregate time series, a 1 percent decline in employment between 2007
and 2010 was associated with a 0.5 decrease in nominal wages and a roughly 0.35 percent
decline in real wages. The fact that wages did not move much during the Great Recession
has led many academics and policy makers to conclude that nominal wages must be quite
rigid.3 However, if wages were quite rigid, why was there such a strong correlation between
wages and employment at the regional level? And, what does this regional evidence imply
about the drivers of the aggregate Great Recession and its aftermath?
To help answer these questions, we next develop a medium-scale New Keynesian DSGE
model of a monetary union where the regions aggregate to the economy as a whole. The
model includes both price and nominal wage rigidities. The regions are linked through trade
of intermediate inputs and can borrow and lend from each other. Interest rates are set at
the union level according to a monetary policy rule. We allow for nine potential shocks in
the model that may have both a regional and aggregate component.
We show that the joint behavior of wages and employment can differ between the regional and aggregate levels for two reasons. The first reason is that the relative wage and
employment responses across regions to a given type of shock (e.g., a household demand
shock) are theoretically different than the aggregate responses to the corresponding aggregate shock. In general, we show this implies that the “wage elasticity”—i.e., the response of
log-wages (either real or nominal) to a given change in log-employment—could be larger or
smaller at the aggregate versus the regional level.4 For example, in response to a household
demand shock, the regional wage elasticity can be smaller than the aggregate wage elasticity
because of trade in intermediate inputs across regions and because of cross-region borrowing
and lending. Also, in response to this shock, the aggregate wage elasticity may be smaller
than the regional wage elasticity because the interest rate endogenously responds to aggregate shocks in a monetary union, potentially mitigating aggregate employment fluctuations,
whereas it does not respond to regional shocks.
The second reason why observed aggregate and regional wage elasticities could differ
is because regional and aggregate economies were hit by different types of shocks. For
instance, regional shocks that shift local labor demand could be the primary driver explaining
cross-region differences in employment and wages during the Great Recession. However, a
3

For example, in her 2014 Jackson Hole Symposium, then-Chairwomen Janel Yellen stated that ”The
evidence suggests that many firms face significant constraints in lowering compensation during the [Great
Recession] and the earlier part of the recovery because of downward nominal wage rigidity.”
4
The concept of the “wage elasticity” matches the empirical work in the first part of the paper. Within
the model, this is the impulse response of log-wages to a given shock (or set of shocks) at a particular horizon
divided by the impulse response of log-employment to the same shock (or set of shocks) at the same horizon.

2

combination of shocks that drive both labor demand and labor supply could have been
important in the aggregate during this time period. In this scenario, the shocks driving
labor supply may only have an aggregate component and, hence, be differenced out when
considering variation across regions. If both types of shocks reduced employment but had
offsetting effects on wages, we would precisely observe that wages appeared less flexible at
the aggregate level relative to the regional level.
At the heart of our methodology is the fact that the Regional and Aggregate New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curves are identical under our model assumptions. Specifically, using
regional data alone, in a first step we estimate via GMM the parameter governing wage
stickiness in the New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve by exploiting shocks to regional labor
demand, given an initial guess for all other parameters. Using this point estimate and its
standard error, we construct a prior over the degree of wage stickiness. We then estimate
our aggregate model using aggregate time series data alone via full information Bayesian
methods. This gives us a posterior distribution for the degree of wage stickiness and all remaining parameters in the model.5 Furthermore, by changing how tight the prior is around
the point estimate coming from the first step, we can vary how much weight we put on the
regional versus aggregate data in informing the degree of wage stickiness in the economy.
For our main results, we consider two extreme cases: putting all the weight on the regional
data or all the weight on aggregate data (as is standard in the literature). In the last step,
we check whether our estimate of wage stickiness from the first step changes when we update
the initial guess using the posterior from all other parameters. It if does, we repeat the full
estimation algorithm.
We then show why using aggregate data alone could be problematic when trying to
distinguish between economies with high versus low wages stickiness, as well as why using
regional data may help. We begin by comparing how our estimates change when we put
more or less weight on the regional data. Because we document that wages and employment
were strongly positively correlated across regions but not in the aggregate during the Great
Recession, we estimate that the slope of the New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve and, relatedly, the frequency of wage changes, are much higher when combining regional and aggregate
data than when using aggregate data alone in estimation. In particular, we estimate that
around three-quarters of wages adjust every year when putting most of the weight on the
regional data, similar to micro estimates of annual wage adjustments using administrative
data sources (e.g., Grigsby et al. (2018)). Yet, when we estimate our model with only ag5
In this sense, our methodology shares features with both full- and limited- information methods used in
other papers to estimate New Keynesian DSGE models. For example, see Linde et al. (2016) for a recent
survey of the use of full information Bayesian methods for estimating DSGE models. See Galı́ et al. (2005)
for an example of using GMM techniques to estimate a “hybrid” New Keynesian Price Phillips Curve.

3

gregate data, we find that only half of wages adjust every year, similar to estimates from
Christiano et al. (2014) and Linde et al. (2016). This is one of the key findings of the paper:
we estimate wages to be more flexible when incorporating regional data into our estimation
than when we use aggregate data alone. Importantly though, the fit to the aggregate data
is identical under both approaches, as measured by the log-likelihood, which suggests that
there is little information regarding the degree of wage stickiness in our relatively short aggregate time-series sample. Then, through a series of thought experiments, we show that this
could be the case because it is hard to distinguish between economies with high versus low
wage stickiness whenever labor supply shocks are important relative to demand shocks and
whenever the time-series data sample is short. The regional data helps in both dimensions.
At least for the Great Recession, most of cross-region variation in economic conditions have
been found to be driven by cross-region variation in demand shocks. Furthermore, we have
significantly more observations in the regional panel data than we have in the aggregate
time-series data.
The last part of the paper uses our estimated model to explain: (1) why observed regional
wage elasticities were higher than observed aggregate wage elasticities during the Great Recession as well as (2) what caused the decline in employment during Great Recession and
the sluggish recovery afterwards. When using our methodology that combines regional and
aggregate data in estimation, we find that differences in aggregate versus regional elasticities
to household demand shocks cannot explain why aggregate wages seemed much more sticky
relative to their regional counterparts. Other demand shocks hitting the aggregate economy
cannot account for this fact either.6 Instead, we find that aggregate labor supply shocks
explain why aggregate wages did not fall.7 Because these aggregate labor supply shocks are
differenced out when comparing outcomes across regions and they push wages and employment in opposite directions, they made wages seem stickier in the aggregate than across
regions during the Great Recession.
Furthermore, we find that aggregate demand shocks were indeed important drivers of
aggregate employment during the Great Recession, but cannot account for the slow recovery
in the aftermath. Because we estimate that wages are rather flexible when using our regional
evidence, the model cannot generate enough endogenous persistence following demand shocks
in order to explain why employment remained depressed three to five years after the Great
Recession ended. In this sense, our results complement the results in Basu and House (2017)
6

We refer to shocks to the discount factor as household demand shocks. Furthermore, as in Smets
and Wouters (2007), we refer generically to discount factor and investment efficiency shocks as “aggregate
demand” because they make price inflation and employment move in the same direction
7
We model these as shocks to households preferences for leisure, but, as is well known, they are isomorphic
to a broader set of shocks to labor supply. The two cannot be distinguished given our data.

4

who show that in most medium-scale DSGE models wage stickiness is essential for obtaining
persistent real effects of nominal shocks. Instead, we find that negative labor supply shocks
explain much of the slow recovery in employment during the 2010-2014 period.
Lastly, we show how our conclusions differ from those of other leading approaches to
understand aggregate fluctuations. Had we performed back-of-the-envelope calculations extrapolating from well-identified regional employment elasticities following household demand
shocks, we would have overstated the role of such shocks in accounting for the sluggishness
in aggregate employment following the Great Recession. Likewise, had we estimated our
model with aggregate data alone, we would have concluded that aggregate demand shocks
were much more important in accounting for both the persistent employment decline and
the modest fall in aggregate wages during the Great Recession. However, we would have
estimated a degree of wage stickiness that is inconsistent with the flexibility of wages we
observed across US states.
Our paper contributes to various literatures. First, our work contributes to the recent
surge in papers that have exploited regional variation to highlight mechanisms of importance
to aggregate fluctuations. For example, Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014), Mian et al. (2013), and
Jones et al. (2018) have exploited regional variation within the US to explore the extent to
which household leverage has contributed to the Great Recession. Nakamura and Steinsson
(2014) and Chodorow-Reich (2018) use sub-national US variation to inform the size of local
government spending multipliers. Autor et al. (2013) and Charles et al. (2016) document
the importance of structural declines in local labor demand in explaining persistent declines
in both local employment and wages. We complement this literature by showing that local
wages also respond to local changes in economic conditions at business cycle frequencies.
Second, our work builds on the important work of Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) which
uses a structural model to show how local government multipliers can inform aggregate multipliers. In our paper, we present a methodology where regional variation can be combined
with aggregate data to learn about the nature and importance of certain mechanisms for
aggregate fluctuations. We show how regional data can help discipline the Calvo parameter
governing the frequency of nominal wage adjustments in a New Keynesian Wage Phillips
Curve. In this sense, we are part of a growing recent literature showing how regional variation can be used to discipline aggregate models. For example, Beraja et al. (2017) use
regional variation to explore the time varying aggregate effects of monetary policy, Adao
et al. (2018) use a structural model to map well identified estimates of the local employment
effects to trade shocks to aggregate employment trends, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) use
a combination of cross-region variation and a model of local economies that aggregate to
explore the effects of automation on aggregate employment, as well as Jones et al. (2018)
5

who were one of the firsts to use regional data in an equilibrium dynamic macro model to
study the Great Recession.
Third, our paper contributes to the recent literature trying to determine the drivers of
the Great Recession and its aftermath. Christiano et al. (2015) estimate a medium-scale
New Keynesian model using data from the recent recession. Although their model and
identification are different from ours, they also conclude that other shocks beyond demand
shocks are needed to explain the joint aggregate dynamics of prices and employment during
the Great Recession. Their paper abstracts from wage rigidities all together. However, they
find that productivity shocks are needed to match the missing aggregate deflation during the
Great Recession8 . Del Negro et al. (2015) estimate a medium-scale New Keynesian model
with financial frictions and show that it matches the joint patterns of declining output and
low but positive inflation during the Great Recession. Likewise, Gilchrist et al. (2017) also
uses micro data to discipline their model of price setting with firm financial constraints to
explore the link between financial shocks and missing disinflation during the Great Recession.
All of these papers focus on explaining the missing disinflation during the Great Recession.
Our paper complements this literature by focusing on why both nominal and real wages did
not fall more during the Great Recession.
Finally, our paper relates to the literature studying international business cycles. Since
the seminal paper by Backus et al. (1992) on the consumption correlation puzzle, a large part
of this literature has focused its attention on the ability of DSGE models to account for certain facts of international business cycles. For example, Frankel and Rose (1998) shows that
trade links are key to understand the correlations of business cycles across countries, while
others emphasize trade costs (Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000)) and financial frictions (Kehoe and
Perri (2002)) as important for understanding international business cycles. Furthermore, a
separate literature has developed New Keynesian models with multiple countries (e.g., Clarida et al. (2001), Galı́ and Monacelli (2008) and House et al. (2017)) and studied regional
stabilization in models of fiscal unions (e.g., Evers (2015), Farhi and Werning (2017) and
Beraja (2018)). We borrow much of the modeling insights from these literatures. However,
unlike them, we are not concerned with how shocks spillover and propagate across regions or
the conduct of optimal monetary or fiscal policy within a monetary or fiscal union. Instead,
we study how regional and aggregate responses to shocks differ in a monetary union, as well
as showing how regional data can be used in estimation.
8

Likewise, Vavra (2014) and Berger and Vavra (2018) document that prices were very flexible during
the Great Recession. They conclude that demand shocks alone cannot explain the aggregate employment
dynamics given the missing aggregate disinflation.

6

2

Creating State-Level Wage and Price Indices

2.1

State-Level Wage Index

To construct our primary nominal wage indices at the state level, we use data from the
2000 Census and the 2001-2014 American Community Surveys (ACS ). The 2000 Census
includes 5 percent of the US population while the 2001-2014 ACS ’s includes around 600,000
respondents per year between 2001 and 2004 and around 2 million respondents per year
between 2005 and 2014. The large coverage allows us to compute detailed labor market
statistics at the state level. For each year of the Census/ACS data, we calculate hourly
nominal wages for prime-age males. In particular, we restrict our sample to only males
between the ages of 25 and 54, who live outside of group-quarters, are not in the military,
and who have no self-employment income. Then, for each individual in the resulting sample,
we divide total labor income earned during the prior 12 months by a measure of annual
hours worked during the prior 12 months. Total hours worked during the previous 12 month
is the product of the respondent’s report of total weeks worked during the prior 12 months
and usual hours worked per week. Within each year, we exclude any individual with a zero
wage and we further truncate the measured wage distribution at the top and bottom one
percent.
Despite our restriction to prime-age males, the composition of workers on other dimensions may still differ across states and within a state over time. As a result, the changing
composition of workers could explain some of the variation in nominal wages across states
over time.9 For example, if lower wage workers are more likely to exit employment during
recessions, time series patterns in nominal wages will appear artificially more rigid than they
actually are. To partially cleanse our wage indices from these compositional issues, we follow
a procedure similar to Katz and Murphy (1992) by creating a composition-adjusted wage
measure for each U.S. state and for the aggregate economy based on observables. Specifically, within each state-year pair, we segment our sample into six age bins (25-29, 30-34,
etc.) and four education groupings (completed years of schooling < 12, = 12, between 13
and 15, and 16+). Our demographic adjusted nominal wage series is defined as follows:
W^
agekt =

24
X

Sharegkτ W agegkt

(1)

g=1

where W^
agekt is the demographic adjusted nominal wage series for prime age men in
9

See, Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994) and Basu and House (2017) for a discussion of the importance of
composition bias in the evolution of aggregate wages over the business cycle.

7

year t of state k, W agegkt is the average nominal wage for each of our 24 demographic groups
g in year t of state k and Sharegkτ is the share of each demographic group g in state k
during some fixed pre-period τ . By holding the demographic shares fixed over time, all of
the wage movements in our demographic adjusted nominal wage series result from changes
in nominal wages within each group and not because of a compositional shift across groups.
When making our aggregate composition adjusted nominal wage series, we follow a similar
procedure as in equation (1) but omit the k’s. For the Census/ACS data, we set τ = 2005
when examining cross-state patterns during the Great Recession and set τ = 2000 when
examining time series patterns of aggregate wages during the 2000s.
The benefit of the Census/ACS data is that it is large enough to compute detailed labor
market statistics at the state level. However, one drawback of the Census/ACS data is that
it is not available at an annual frequency prior to 2000. To complement our analysis, we use
data from the March Supplement of the Current Population Survey (CPS ) to examine longer
run aggregate trends in both aggregate nominal and real wages. These longer run trends
are an input into estimation methodology discussed in subsequent sections. We compute
the demographic adjusted nominal wage indices using the CPS data analogously to the
way we computed the demographic adjusted nominal wage indices within the Census/ACS
data.10 When comparing aggregate time series trends in demographically adjusted wages
between both the ACS and CPS during the 2000s, we set τ = 2000. When computing
aggregate time series trends in demographically adjusted nominal wages for our aggregate
time series analysis over longer periods, we set τ = 1975. Unless otherwise stated, all wage
measures in the paper are demographically adjusted. For the remainder of the paper, we
use the Census/ACS data to explore regional wage variation and the CPS data to examine
aggregate time series wage variation. However, for the 2000-2014 period, we can compare
the time-series variation in aggregate wages using the Census/ACS data with the time series
variation in aggregate wages using the CPS data. The two time series have a correlation of
0.98 during this period.
10

A full discussion of our methodology to compute composition adjusted wages in the Census/ACS and the
CPS can be found in the Online Appendix that accompanies the paper. However, we wish to highlight one
difference between the measurement of wages between the two surveys. Within the March CPS, respondents
are asked to report their earnings over the prior calendar year as opposed to over the prior 12 months. Given
this, March CPS respondents in year t report their earnings from year t − 1. Census/ACS respondents are
interviewed throughout the calendar year and are asked to report their earnings over the prior 12 months.
As a result, we designate the earnings of Census/ACS respondents in year t as being accrued in year t.

8

2.2
2.2.1

State-Level Price Index
Price Data

State-level price indices are necessary to measure state-level real wages. In order to construct state-level price indices we use the Retail Scanner Database collected by The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and made available at The University of Chicago Booth School of
Business.11 The Retail Scanner data consists of weekly pricing, volume, and store environment information generated by point-of-sale systems for about 90 participating retail chains
across all US markets between January 2006 and December 2013. As a result, the database
includes roughly 40,000 individual stores selling, for the most part, food, drugs and mass
merchandise.
For each store, the database records the weekly quantities and the average transaction
price for roughly 1.4 million distinct products. Each of these products is uniquely identified
by a 12-digit number called Universal Product Code (UPC). To summarize, one entry in the
database contains the number of units sold of a given UPC and the weighted average price
of the corresponding transactions, at a given store during a given week. The geographic
coverage of the database is outstanding and is one of its most attractive features. It includes
stores from all states except for Alaska and Hawaii. Likewise, it covers stores from 361
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA) and 2,500 counties. The data comes with both zip
code and FIPS codes for the store’s county, MSA, and state. Over the eight year period,
the data set includes total sales across all retail establishments worth over $1.5 trillion. The
Online Appendix shows summary statistics for the retail scanner data for years between 2006
and 2013 and for the sample as a whole.
In order to construct state-level price indices we follow the BLS construction of the CPI
as closely as possible. Specifically, our retail scanner price indices are built in two stages. In
the first stage, we aggregate the prices of goods within roughly 1,000 Nielsen defined narrow
product categories (e.g., granulated sugar, brown sugar, powdered sugar). Each good is
defined by their unique UPC. We next compute for each good the average price and total
quantity sold in a given month and state. We then construct the quantity weighted average
price for all goods in each detailed category in a given month and state. Finally, in the
second stage, we aggregate the category-level price indices into an aggregate index for each
state and month. A full discussion of our procedure can be found in the Online Appendix.
11

The Nielsen data is made available through the Kilts Center for Marketing Data at the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business. Information on availability and access to the data can be found at
http://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen/. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are ours and do
not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in
analyzing and preparing the results reported in the paper.

9

In the Online Appendix, we discuss further our Nielsen Retail Scanner Price Indices along
three additional dimensions. First, we show that aggregate version of our price index matches
nearly identically the aggregate BLS’s CPI for food and beverages giving us confidence that
our price index is broadly represented of aggregate food prices during the 2006-2013 period.
Second, we show that our local level price indices built from the Nielsen data matches well
BLS price indices for similar goods for larger MSAs where the BLS is able to produce reliable
price indices. Again this gives us confidence that our Nielsen price indices measures well food
prices at the local level. Finally, we discuss under what conditions regional variation in food
prices from our Nielsen price indices can be used to measure regional variation in the prices
of a broader consumption basket. We show that under a relatively weak set of assumptions,
the differential inflation rate across regions in a local composite consumption good is simply
the differential inflation rate across regions in our Nielsen regional price indices scaled by
the ratio of the non-tradable share of the composite good relative to the non-tradable share
of the scanner grocery goods. Given the empirical work that follows in the rest of the paper,
this scaling factor gets absorbed in the constant terms of our regressions.

3

Comparing Regional to Aggregate Patterns

The goal of this section is to contrast the strong co-movement of wages and economic activity
at the local level to the relatively weaker co-movement at the aggregate level, during the
Great Recession.

3.1

Regional Patterns

The left panel of Figure 1 shows the log-change in our demographic adjusted nominal wage
indices from the ACS between 2007 and 2010 across states against the log-change in the
employment rate. For state employment rates, we divide state total employment by total
state population. We get both state employment levels and state population levels from
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). As seen from the figure, state-level nominal wage
growth was strongly and positively correlated with state-level employment growth during the
2007-2010 period. A simple linear regression through the data (weighted by the state’s 2006
population) suggests that a 1 percent change in a state’s employment rate was associated
with a 0.72 percent change in nominal wages (standard error = 0.14). We refer to 0.72 as
the cross-state nominal wage elasticity with respect to employment growth.12
12

These findings are consistent with the extensive literature in labor economics and public finance showing
that local labor demand shocks cause both employment and wages to vary together in the short to medium
run. For example, Blanchard and Katz (1992), Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Charles, Hurst, and

10

Percent Change in Adjusted Real Wages 07−10
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5

Percent Change in Adjusted Nominal Wages 07−10
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15

Figure 1: State Employment Growth vs. State Wage Growth

−14

−12

−10
−8
−6
−4
Percent Change in Employment Rate 07−10

−2

0

Panel A: Nominal Wages

−14

−12

−10
−8
−6
−4
Percent Change in Employment Rate 07−10

−2

0

Panel B: Real Wages

Note: Figure plots demographically adjusted wage growth for prime-age men during 2007-2010
vs growth in the employment rate during 2007-2010 for the cross-section of US states. Nominal
wages are measured using the ACS dataset. Real wages are computed by deflating nominal wages
by our Retail Scanner Price Index. State employment rates come from dividing state employment
from the BLS by total state population from the BLS. Each observation is a U.S. state excluding
Alaska and Hawaii. The size of the circle measures state population in 2006. Each figure includes
a weighted regression line. The slopes of the regression lines are shown in Table 1.

The right panel of Figure 1 shows similar patterns for real wage variation. We compute
state level demographically adjusted real wages by deflating our state level nominal wages in
year t by the Retail Scanner Price Index in year t. We then compute the log change in real
wages between 2007 and 2010. Again, a simple linear regression through the data (weighted
by the state’s 2006 population) suggests an estimated cross-state real wage elasticity of
0.64 (standard error = 0.16). Accounting for differential inflation rates across states the
cross-state elasticity in nominal wages only slightly (from 0.72 to 0.64). We summarize our
estimated cross-state nominal and real wage elasticities in Table 1. While adjusting for
differences in local prices mitigates the nominal wage elasticities slightly, both the nominal
and real wage elasticities we estimate using cross-region variation are large relative to the
time series movements in real and nominal wages during the Great Recession. We illustrate
this fact next.
Notowidigdo (2018a) all highlight that local labor demand shocks due to shifting aggregate industry trends
have large effects on both local employment and local wages. Our results complement this literature by
showing similar patterns at business cycle frequencies.

11

Table 1: Cross-State Estimates of Wage Elasticities During the Great Recession
Wage Measure

Estimated Elasticity

Nominal Wages

0.72
(0.14)

Real Wages

0.64
(0.16)

Note: Table reports the simple bi-variate relationship between state employment growth between 2007 and
2010 and state demographically adjusted wage growth between 2007 and 2010. Wage data come from the
ACS and are demographically adjusted as described in the text. Real wages are deflated using our Retail
Scanner Price Index. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis.

3.2

Aggregate Patterns

Figure 2 shows the time series trends in both demographically adjusted nominal wages (left
panel) and real wages (right panel) for our samples of CPS and ACS respondents between
2000 and 2014. Real wages are reported in 2014 prices. To get aggregate real wages, we
deflate our aggregate nominal wage series by the aggregate CPI-U for all goods.13
A few things are of note from Figure 2. First, the CPS and ACS demographically adjusted
aggregate wage indices match each other nearly identically in both levels and trends. This
gives us confidence in using the ACS data for our cross-region estimates and the CPS data for
our time series analysis in subsequent sections. Second, demographically adjusted nominal
wages increased by about 1 percent during the 2007 and 2010 periods in both datasets.
Despite the employment to population ratio falling by about 8 percent nationally during
the Great Recession, aggregate demographically adjusted nominal wages were rising. This
pattern is at odds with the cross-region variation highlighted above. Finally, demographically
adjusted real wages show little break in trend during the 2007 to 2010. In both the CPS
and ACS, real wages were declining before the start of the Great Recession, declined further
through the recession, and continued declining after the recession.
Table 2 creates measures of aggregate time-series wage elasticities that can be compared
with the cross-region estimates in Table 1. Given the time series trends in both real and
nominal wages prior to the Great Recession as shown in Figure 2, we detrend both series
when examining patterns during the Great Recession.14 For real wages, we compute the
13

In the Online Appendix, we compare the time series trends in our unadjusted and our demographically
adjusted wage series. As predicted, adjusting for the changing composition of the workforce dampens nominal
wage growth during the Great Recession.
14
We thank Bob Hall for giving us the idea for this table. We base it on the analysis he did as part of his

12

27

Average Demographically Adjusted Real Wages ($/hour)

Average Demographically Adjusted Nominal Wage ($/hour)

Figure 2: Time Series Trends in Aggregate Wages ($/hour), CPS and ACS

26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19

28

27

26

25

24

23

18

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
CPS

CPS

ACS

Panel A: Nominal Wages

ACS

Panel B: Real Wages

Note: Figure shows average demographically adjusted nominal wages (left panel) and real wages
(right panel) for men aged 21-55 during the 2000-2014 period. Wages are reported as $/hour. The
solid line uses data from the CPS. The dashed line uses data from the ACS. Real wages are in
2014 prices and are deflated by the U.S. June CPI-U for all goods.

Table 2: Time Series Estimates of Wage Elasticities During the Great Recession
CPS Data

ACS Data

Panel A: Nominal Wages
De-Trended Nominal Wage Growth, 2007-2010
Nominal Wage Elasticity, 2007-2010

-3.9 percent

-4.1 percent

0.51

0.54

Panel B: De-Trended Real Wages
De-Trended Real Wage Growth, 2007-2010
Real Wage Elasticity, 2007-2010

-2.6 percent

-2.8 percent

0.34

0.37

Note: Table computes the aggregate wage elasticity to a one percent change in the employment rate. During
the 2007-2010 period, the aggregate employment rate fell by 7.7 percent. The first column shows demographically adjusted wage data from the CPS while the second column shows demographically adjusted wage data
from the ACS. Panels A and B show detrended nominal and real wage growth, respectively, during the
2007-2010 period.

discussion of our paper at the 2015 NBER summer EFG program meeting. In his discussion, he stressed the

13

annual real wage growth in our demographically adjusted CPS data between the years of
1990 and 2007. According to the CPS data, real wages have been declining by 0.4% per year,
on average, during the 1990 to 2007 period.15 When detrending nominal wage growth, we
assume an inflation rate of 2 percent per year. This implies that nominal wages would have
grown by 1.6% per year during 2007-2010 period absent the Great Recession (2% inflation
plus -0.4% real wage growth).
The top panel displays the aggregate nominal wage elasticity. To obtain this, we take the
de-trended demographically adjusted nominal wage growth using aggregate data from the
CPS (column 1) and ACS (column 2) between 2007 and 2010 and divides it by the aggregate
percentage change in the employment rate. According to BLS, the aggregate employment
to population ratio in the US fell by 7.7% between 2007 and 2010. In the aggregate time
series data, the nominal wage elasticity during the Great Recession was between 0.51 and
0.54 depending on whether we use the CPS or ACS data. As a reminder, the corresponding
wage elasticity from the cross region estimates in Table 1 is 0.72. The bottom panel provides
estimates of real wage elasticities over the same time period but at the aggregate level. Real
wages fell between 2007 and 2010 by 2.6% in the CPS and 2.8% in the ACS relative to
trend. Given that the aggregate employment to population rate fell by 7.7%, the aggregate
elasticity of real wages with respect to employment changes was 0.34 in the CPS and 0.37 in
the ACS. Note, these numbers are about half the magnitudes estimated from the cross-region
estimates.

3.3

Robustness

In this subsection, we explore two additional robustness specifications for our key result that
the relationship between wage growth and employment growth during the Great Recession
was much stronger using cross-state variation than using time series variation.
As discussed above, our demographic adjustments partially account for the changing selection of the workforce, based on observables, as economic conditions deteriorate. However,
selection based on unobservables can still bias our estimates. We now discuss two sets of
results that suggest changing selection on unobservables are not significantly affecting our
conclusions. First, we note that while controlling for observable dimensions of selection (age
and education) does affect the level of wage changes in both the times series and the cross
section, our demographic adjustments do not affect our estimates of the differential patterns
importance of controlling for past trends in real wages given that real wages have been steadily declining for
many years prior to the start of the Great Recession.
15
Our results are quite robust to the timing over which we compute the pre-Great Recession trend in
demographically adjusted real wages. For example, the annual change in real wages during the 2000-2007
period was -0.6% per year.

14

between the time series and the cross section. To the extent to which the changing selection
of workers biases our results, the bias is similar between both the cross-region and time series
estimates. Regardless of whether or not we adjust for changing composition based on observables, our estimates of cross-state wage elasticities during the Great Recession are always
higher than our time series estimates. While it is hard to say how our results would change
if we were able to control for unobservable selection, we find it reassuring that the main
takeaway from this section is not altered by controlling for selection based on observables.
To further explore the extent to which selection based on unobservables are biasing
our results, we exploit the panel nature of the CPS. Given the CPS structure, we have
multiple March Supplement earnings reports for a portion of our sample. Specifically, during
the 2007-2010 period, we examine the wages of workers in t − 1 who subsequently were
not working in period t. At what point in the period t − 1 wage distribution were these
non-working individuals in period t drawn? To answer this question, we condition on the
worker’s age and education given that we use these for our demographic corrections. If these
workers were drawn from around the median of the conditional distribution, then selection
issues on unobservables are likely not important with respect to biasing our wage change
measures during the Great Recession. If these individuals were drawn from the bottom part
of the distribution, then our estimated conditional wage change measures during the Great
Recession will be biased upwards. During the 2007-2010 period, we find that individuals
who are not working in t but did work in t − 1 were, on average, drawn from about the 40th
percentile of the t − 1 wage distribution (conditional on age and education). Given that this
is close to the median, it suggests that selection on unobservables is likely not substantively
biasing our estimates of wage changes. Moreover, to the extent that a bias exists, it suggests
that our estimates of wage flexibility from the cross-region regressions is actually a lower
bound on the true extent of wage flexibility during the Great Recession. If we were able to
control for selection perfectly, wages would look even more flexible based on our cross-region
variation.
As a separate robustness exercise, we explore the extent to which the patterns we document in Figure 1 also show up in other wage series. While there are no government data sets
that produce broad based composition adjusted wage series at the local level, the Bureau
of Labor Statistics’s (BLS’s) Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QEW) collects
firm level data on employment counts and total payroll at local levels. Likewise, the BLS’s
Occupational Employment Survey (OES) is a biannual survey of establishments designed to
produce estimates of employment and wages for specific occupations. The QEW produces
aggregate time series data on weekly earnings and employment while the OES produces time
series data on average hourly earnings and employment. Additionally, both surveys report
15

comparable statistics for each state. The QEW has the advantage of being from administrative data while the OES has the advantage of being a large survey of employers. However,
neither survey controls for changes in composition. Despite this major limitation, we feel it
is useful to explore patterns in these alternate data sources to examine the robustness of our
results using the CPS and ACS.
In terms of aggregate time series patterns, nominal weekly earnings in the QEW grew
by 8.7 percent between 2007 and 2010. Similarly, average nominal hourly wages for the
aggregate economy in the OES grew by 5.0 percent during the same period. These growth
rates in nominal earnings and nominal wages are much higher than the composition adjusted
nominal wage growth in both the CPS and ACS during the same time period documented
above. But, the qualitative patterns are similar in that nominal wages/earnings grew during
the Great Recession despite sharp declines in employment. While the aggregate time series
patterns suggest sizable negative relationships between wage growth in these other data
sources and aggregate employment trends, the cross-region patterns mimic the results from
the ACS. Figure 3 illustrates the cross-state relationship between nominal weekly earnings
growth and employment growth between 2007 and 2010 in the QEW (left panel) and nominal
average hourly wages between 2007 and 2010 from the OES (right panel). States that
experienced larger relative declines in employment rates also experienced larger relative
declines in nominal earnings or nominal wages as measured in other government data sources.
While we are more confident about constructing wage measures using the underlying micro
data from the CPS and ACS, we find it encouraging that the broad contrast between time
series wage patterns and cross-state wage patterns during the Great Recession show up in
other data sources as well.

3.4

Summary and Discussion

To summarize, our main empirical finding comes from comparing the cross-state wage elasticities with the aggregate wage elasticities. The response of wages to changes in employment
were much stronger at the state level during the Great Recession than at the aggregate level.
For example, the local real wage elasticity with respect to employment changes was nearly
twice as big in household data sets as the aggregate elasticity (0.64 vs. 0.34). It is this
difference in the relationship between wages and employment at the local level and at the
aggregate level that forms the basis of the remainder of this paper. Why did local wages
adjust so much when local employment conditions deteriorated during the Great Recession
while aggregate wages responded much less despite a sharp deterioration in aggregate employment conditions? What do these patterns imply for our understanding of the Great

16

Percent Change in Adjusted Nominal Wages 07−10
0
5
10
15

Percent Change in Nominal Weekly Earnings 07−10
−5
0
5
10
15

Figure 3: Cross Region Variation in Nominal Earnings/Wages During the Great Recession,
QEW and OES

−15

−10
−5
0
Percent Change in Employment Rate 07−10

5

−15

Panel A: QEW Data

−10
−5
0
Percent Change in Employment Rate 07−10

5

Panel B: OES Data

Note: Left panel shows the relationship between state nominal weekly earnings growth between 2007 and 2010
and state employment growth between 2007 and 2010 using data from the QEW. The right panel shows the
relationship between state average hourly wage growth between 2007 and 2010 and state employment growth
between 2007 and 2010 using data from the OES. Employment growth in both panels is measured within each
survey. Each panel includes a simple linear regression (unweighted) of the cross-state relationship between
nominal wage/earnings growth and employment growth. The coefficients for the regression lines in the top and
bottom panels, respectively, are 0.44 (s.e. = 0.07) and 0.30 (s.e. = 0.08).

Recession and its aftermath? We turn to answering these questions next.

4

A Monetary Union Model

In this section, we present a medium-scale, New Keynesian DSGE model of a monetary union.
The model is based on the influential papers by Justiniano et al. (2010), Christiano et al.
(2014), and Linde et al. (2016) but extended to include multiple regions. We have two goals
in mind: (1) to explain how and why aggregate and local wage and employment responses
might differ following a given shock, and (2) to identify shocks driving aggregate business
cycles. In Section 5, we develop a methodology that combines regional and aggregate data
in order to estimate the model, thereby allowing us to compute such responses and perform
shock decompositions.
Formally, our model economy is composed of many islands (indexed by k) inhabited by
infinitely lived households and firms in two distinct sectors that produce a final consumption
goods and intermediates that go into its production. There are two assets in the economy:
non-tradable physical capital and a tradable one-period nominal bond in zero net supply
where the nominal interest rate is set by a monetary authority at the union level. We
17

assume intermediate goods can be traded across islands but the final consumption good is
non-tradable. In particular, the final consumption good is an island-aggregate of several
retailers producing differentiated varieties. Finally, we assume labor is mobile across sectors
but not across islands.16 Throughout we assume that parameters governing preferences and
production are identical across islands and that islands only differ, potentially, in the shocks
that hit them.

4.1

Households and wage setting

Each island is populated by a continuum of households indexed by j ∈ [0, 1] who supply a
differentiated labor service Nkt (j) as in Erceg et al. (2000). Households maximize the utility
function:
E0

∞
X
t=0



Nkt (j)1+ν
β bkt+s φkt+s log(Ckt − hC̄kt−1 ) − ϕkt
1+ν
s

where Ckt is consumption of a final good, bkt is a stochastic process for the discount factor
and ϕkt is a stochastic process for leisure preference. Throughout, we will refer to shocks
to ϕkt as “labor supply” shocks. We denote by h the parameter governing external habits
in household consumption decisions, ν the inverse Frisch elasticity, and φkt the endogenous
discount factor (which is treated as exogenous by households). As in Schmitt-Grohé and
Uribe (2003), such model addition ensures the existence of a stationary distribution of bonds
across islands. Also, consumption Ckt is not indexed by 0 j 0 because, as in Justiniano et al.
(2010), we assume the existence of a full set of state-contingent securities that ensure that
equilibrium consumption and asset holdings are the same for all households in an island.17
Furthermore, we assume that households can save in a tradable one-period nominal bond
Bkt (which pays an aggregate interest rate Rt that is common across regions) or in nontradable physical capital K̄kt . The sequential budget constraint is then:
Pkt (Ckt + Ikt ) + Bkt = Rt−1 Bkt−1 + Wkt (j)Nkt (j) + Qkt (j)
 K

+ Rkt
ukt − Pkt a(ukt ) K̄kt−1 + Πkt + Tkt



Ikt
Ikt
K̄kt = (1 − δ)K̄kt−1 + µkt 1 − S
Ikt−1
where Ikt denotes investment in capital, ukt is the utilization rate, a(ukt ) is a capital uti16

We explore the issue of labor mobility during the Great Recession when we take the model to the data
(see Section 5.3).
17
Because later we will assume that households face uncertainty in whether they can re-optimize wages,
this assumption eliminates the associated idiosyncratic labor income risk.

18



Ikt
is a convex investment-adjustment-cost, Πkt are lump-sum transfers
lization cost, S Ikt−1
in the form of profit from local firms, Tkt are government transfers, Wkt (j)Nkt (j) is labor
income, Qkt (j) is the net cash flow from the portfolio of state-contingent securities, Pkt is
K
the price of the final good, Rkt
is the nominal capital rental rate, δ is the depreciation rate,
and µkt is a stochastic process for the marginal efficiency of investment.
Also, as in Erceg et al. (2000), we assume the existence of a large number of competitive
labor agencies that buy all forms of differentiated labor services and transform them into
homogeneous labor services, which they then sell for price Wkt . Their profit maximization
problem is:
Z
max Wkt Nkt −

{Nkt (j)}j

1

Z
Wkt (j)Nkt (j)dj

s.t.

1

Nkt (j)

Nkt =

1
λw

λw
dj

0

0

The demand for differentiated labor is then:

Nkt (j) = Nkt

Wkt (j)
Wkt

λw
 1−λ

w

,

(2)

where λw > 1. The wage index is:
1

Z

Wkt (j)

Wkt =

1
1−λw

1−λw
(3)

dj

0

Finally, we assume that only a fraction 1 − ξw of households can re-optimize their wages
every period and the remaining wages adjust according to a backward-looking indexation
rule. Re-optimizing households choose their wage Wkt (j) to maximize:

(

)
1+ν
N
(j)
max
Et
(βξw )s −bkt+s φkt+s ϕkt+s kt+s
+ Λkt+s Γw
kt,t+s Wkt (j)Nkt+s (j)
Wkt (j),{Nkt+s (j)}∞
1
+
ν
s=0
s=0
λw

 1−λ
w
Wkt (j)Γw
kt,t+s
s.t. Nkt+s (j) = Nkt+s
∀s
Wkt+s
∞
X



where Λkt+s is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the sequential budget constraint,
Γw
kt,t+s is the indexation term
Γw
kt,t+s

≡

s 
Y

ιw
πkt+l−1
π 1−ιw γ


,

l=1

and πkt is the inflation rate in island k at time t, π is the inflation target set by the mon19

etary authority, γ is the long-run growth rate of productivity, and ιw governs the degree of
indexation. Note that given our assumptions all households that re-optimize will actually
set the same wage.

4.2

Firms and price setting

Final consumption good producer A competitive firm in island k transforms a continuum of varieties i into a homogeneous final good via a CES aggregator. The profitmaximization problem is:
Z
max Pkt Ykt −

{Ykt (i)}i

1

Z
Pkt (i)Ykt (i)di

s.t.

Ykt =

0

1

Ykt (i)

1
p
λ
kt

λpkt
di

0

where Pkt and Ykt are the price and the quantity of the final good; Pkt (i) and Ykt (i) are the
price and quantity of variety i, and λpkt > 1 is the desired gross markup of the sellers of
the varieties, which follows an exogenous stochastic process. Profit maximization yields the
iso-elastic demand function:
p
 λktp

1−λ
Pkt (i)
kt
(4)
Ykt (i) = Ykt
Pkt
The zero profit condition implies that the price index satisfies:
Z

1

Pkt (i)

Pkt =

1
p
1−λ
kt

1−λpkt
di

(5)

0

Intermediate good producer The only commodity traded across islands is an intermediate good, x, produced by competitive firms. The representative producer of island
x
x
k operates a constant-return technology in local labor Nkt
and capital Kkt
and solves the
profit maximization problem:
x αx
x 1−αx
x
K x
max Ptx Axkt (Kkt
) (Nkt
)
− Wkt Nkt
− Rkt
Kkt

x ,K x
Nkt
kt

where Ptx is the price of the intermediate good (equalized across islands because of the lawK
of-one-price), Wkt is the local nominal wage, Rkt
is the nominal rental rate of capital, and
x
Akt is an exogenous stochastic process for productivity. The first order conditions are:
x αx
x −αx
Wkt = (1 − αx )Ptx Axkt (Kkt
) (Nkt
)

(6)

K
x αx −1
x 1−αx
)
Rkt
= αx Ptx Axkt (Kkt
)
(Nkt

(7)

20

Retailers A variety i is produced by a monopolistically competitive retailer in island k
y
, and intermediate goods Xkt . The production function
using effective capital Kkt , labor Nkt
is:
1−α1 −α2
y
(i)
− Ψt F
(8)
Ykt (i) = Kkt (i)α1 Xkt (i)α2 Ψt Aykt Nkt
where F is fixed cost of operating the technology that is common across islands, and Aykt
is the stationary component of local productivity, and Ψt is a non-stationary stochastic
process that affects both labor productivity and the fixed cost. Cost minimization implies
that—conditional on producing—the nominal marginal cost is:

M Ckt =

1
Ψt Aykt

1−α1 −α2 

K
Rkt
α1

α1 

Ptx
α2

 α2 

Wkt
1 − α1 − α2

1−α1 −α2
,

(9)

Finally, we assume that retailers are also subject to a Calvo-style friction and can only
change their prices infrequently. In each period, only a fraction ξp of retailers can re-optimize
their price, but the rest of the prices also change according to a backward-looking indexation
rule. The profit maximization problem is:
(
max

Pkt (i),{Ykt+s (i)}∞
s=0

Et

∞
X

)


(βξp )s Mkt+s Ykt+s (i) Pkt (i)Γpkt,t+s − M Ckt+s

s=0
p


s.t. Ykt+s (i) = Ykt+s

Pkt (i)Γpkt,t+s
Pkt+s

λt
 1−λ
p
t

∀s

where the pricing kernel coming from the households is:
Mkt+s = bkt+s ϕkt+s Λkt+s

(10)

and the indexation term is defined as:
Γpkt,t+s

≡

s
Y


ιp
πkt+l−1
π 1−ιp .

l=1

where ιp governs the indexation. Note that given our assumptions all retailers that reoptimize will actually set the same price.

21

4.3

Government policy

Fiscal policy Public spending is a time-varying, exogenous fraction of island-level output

Gkt =

1
1− g
kt


Ykt .

(11)

The role of exogenous process gkt is to not only capture true government spending shocks
but also to soak up variation in measured GDP due to changes in net exports when we fit
our closed-economy aggregate model to the data. Also, federal transfers Tkt are exogenous
and potentially different for each region in each period. For our purposes, there will be no
need to specify them.
Monetary policy A central authority sets the nominal interest rates which is common
for all islands. Specifically, it takes the form of a Taylor rule
Rt
=
R



Rt−1
R

ρR "

π t  φπ
π



GDPt
GDPt−1

φX #1−ρR
ηt ,

(12)

where GDPt is aggregate GDP defined as
GDPt =

X
Ckt + Ikt + Gkt ]

(13)

k

and ηt is an exogenous monetary policy stochastic process.

4.4

Shocks

The economy as a whole is perturbed by 9 exogenous shocks. Most exogenous processes are
assumed to be AR(1) with innovations having an aggregate as well as a local component. The
exceptions are monetary policy and the three technology shocks. First, monetary policy is
set at the level of the monetary union and thus exogenous disturbances are purely aggregate.
Second, fitting non-stationary aggregate data requires that it is the growth rate—and not
the level—of technology that follows an AR(1) process. Since transitory growth-rate shocks
induce permanent changes in levels, they have to be the same for all islands, otherwise
they diverge almost surely. Third, tradable and retail technologies have to stay in the same
order of magnitude to keep relative prices bounded. These considerations lead us to model
Ψt as purely aggregate with innovations to its growth rate, and to center the island-level
transitory productivity shocks around it. Finally, we assume that (i) local innovations sum
to zero in all periods and (ii) both aggregate and local innovations are normally distributed

22

with zero mean and constant variance. See Online Appendix B for a formal description of
the exogenous processes.

4.5

Equilibrium

x
K
x
An equilibrium is prices {Pkt (i), Pkt
, Wkt (j), Rkt
, Rt } and quantities {Ykt , Ckt , Ikt , Gkt , K̄kt , Kkt
,
y
x
Kkt (i), ukt , Nkt (j), Nkt
, Nkt (i), Xkt , Bkt , Dkt } such that, given the exogenous processes and
government policies, all agents are optimizing and all markets clear. Formally, the final
goods and labor markets clearing conditions and consolidated budget constraint in each
island are:

Ykt = Ckt + Ikt + Gkt + a(ukt )K̄kt ,

(14)

y
x
Nkt = Nkt
+ Nkt
,

(15)

x
Bkt = Rt−1 Bkt−1 + Ptx (Axkt Nkt
− Xkt ) + Tkt

(16)

Letting Dt denote federal debt, the budget constraint of the federal government is:
Dt = Rt−1 Dt−1 +

i
Xh
Pkt Gkt + Tkt

(17)

k

And, the tradable-good and bond markets clearing conditions in the aggregate are:
X

Xkt =

X

(18)

k

k

X

x
Axkt Nkt

Bkt = Dt

(19)

k

4.6

Aggregation

This subsection derives aggregation results and expressions for the Aggregate and Regional
New Keynesian Wage Phillips curve in a log-linearized economy. We will use these results
heavily both in the next section, to show how aggregate and regional elasticities might differ,
as well as later on when developing our methodology that combines aggregate and regional
data in estimation.
First, we log-linearize the model around the unique balanced-growth path. Lemma 1
shows that the log-linearized economy aggregates up to a representative economy where, to
a first order approximation, all aggregate variables are independent of any cross-regional considerations. This implies that, as far as aggregates are concerned, our model’s implications
are identical to canonical DSGE models that do not model regions directly and, instead,
23

simply pose the existence of a representative aggregate economy that is driven by aggregate
shocks alone.18
Second, Lemma 2 shows that island economies in log-deviations from the aggregate economy behave to a first order approximation as if they were a collection of independent smallopen-economies driven by purely idiosyncratic shocks. Again, this implies that we can study
variation in regional outcomes without considering aggregates.
There are two key assumption behind these results. The first is that all islands are identical with respect to their underlying parameters. The second is that the joint distribution of
island-specific shocks is such that their cross-sectional sum is zero. If the number of islands
is large, this holds in the limit because of the law of large numbers.
Lemma 1. Aggregate variables in the log-linearized economy behave as if the economy
had a single island, with only a non-tradable sector where firms produced with technology
(Kt )α1 +α2 αx (Ψt Nt )1−α1 +α2 αx − Ψt F , which was hit by aggregate shocks driving AR(1) processes {λpt , zt , bt , µt , ϕt , gt , ηt }.
Lemma 2. Island variables in log-deviations from aggregates behave as if each island was an
independent small-open-economy, facing exogenous nominal interest rate and price of tradable goods, which was hit by island shocks driving AR(1) processes {λpkt , Axkt , Aykt , bkt , µkt , ϕkt , gkt }.
Proof. See Appendix B for a proof of Lemma 1 and 2.
Following these lemmas, we can write the Regional New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve
as:
 w 
κw
w
(c̃kt − hc̃kt−1 ) + ϕ̃kt
π̃kt
= βEt π̃kt+1
+ κw ν ñkt − κw w̃kt + ιw (π̃kt−1 − β π̃kt ) +
1−h

(20)

where lowercase variables with “ ˜ ” represent island variables in log-deviations from aggregates with n, c, π w , w and π representing employment, consumption, nominal wage growth,
real wages in terms of the non-tradable good and the inflation rate, respectively. As a
reminder, ϕ̃kt is the labor supply shock, ν1 is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, ιw parameterizes the degree of wage indexation, and h parameterizes the degree of habit formation.
18

The model we presented has many islands subject to idiosyncratic shocks that cannot be fully hedged
because asset markets are incomplete. By log-linearizing the equilibrium, we gain in tractability but ignore
these considerations and the aggregate consequences of heterogeneity. The approximation will be good as
long as the underlying volatility of the idiosyncratic shocks is not too large. If our unit of study was an
individual, as for example in the precautionary savings literature with incomplete markets, the use of linear
approximations would likely not be appropriate. However, since our unit of study is an island the size of a
U.S. state, we believe this is not too egregious of an assumption. The volatilities of key economic variables
of interest at the state or country level are orders of magnitude smaller than the corresponding variables at
the individual level.

24

Furthermore, the slope of Regional New Keynesian Wage Phillips curve is:

κw ≡

λw − 1
(1 − βξw )(1 − ξw )
ξw
λw (1 + ν) − 1

(21)

where 1 − ξw is the fraction of wages that re-set every period and λw is the desired gross
wage-markup of the sellers of the specialized labor services. Thus, fixing other parameters,
a lower value of κw implies a larger degree of wage stickiness.
Analogously, the Aggregate New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve is:
 w 
κw
(ĉt − hĉt−1 ) + ϕ̂t
π̂tw = βEt π̂t+1
+ κw ν n̂t − κw ŵt + ιw (π̂t−1 − β π̂t ) +
1−h

(22)

where lowercase variables with “ ˆ ” represent aggregate variables in log-deviations from the
balanced growth path.
Of particular note is the fact that the Regional New Keynesian Phillips Curve shares
identical parameters with the Aggregate New Keynesian Phillips Curve. Furthermore, the
variables associated with such parameters are the regional counterparts to the aggregate
ones. Section 5 shows how to leverage this property of the equilibrium for estimating the
model using a combination of regional and aggregate data.

4.7

Aggregate vs. Regional Responses to Shocks

Having described the full model, we now explore the main economic channels that may cause
aggregate and regional responses to shocks to differ. While Section 7 presents quantitative
results along these lines, in this section we provide a more qualitative analysis. We highlight
three such channels in this paper: (1) monetary policy only affects aggregates in a monetary
union, (2) regional labor demand in the non-tradable sector is more elastic than aggregate labor demand because local purchases of imported intermediates can be adjusted, and (3) local
economies can save and borrow, running current account deficits, but the aggregate economy
cannot because it is closed and bonds are in zero net supply. Beraja (2018) highlights yet
another important difference: in a fiscal union like the US, the federal tax-and-transfer system redistributes resources across regions in order to stabilize regional business cycles. This
channel turns out to be quantitatively important, in particular during the Great Recession,
but is entirely absent in the aggregate closed economy.
To make the analysis as transparent as possible, we consider a simplified version of our
model where we can obtain intuitive, closed-form expressions at both the aggregate and
0
regional level for: the employment response to a discount factor shock on impact dn
and
db0
25

0
the reduced-form, real wage elasticity following a discount factor shock on impact dw
. It is
dn0
worth noting that this theoretical wage elasticity is closely related to the empirical elasticities
we estimated in Tables 1 and 2.
Specifically, we consider a version of our model without capital, habit formation, indexation, or fixed costs; where we set steady state inflation to zero; where islands are endowed
with a constant amount of the tradable good every period instead of producing it; where the
nominal interest rate rule depends on current output alone; and where government spending
is constant at its steady-state level. Furthermore, we assume that prices are perfectly rigid.
Appendix B.7 derives the aggregate and regional employment responses and wage elasticities below:

1 − ρb
1
1 − α 1 − ρ b + ϕy
db̂0
1 − ρb
dñk0
=
1 − ρb + β1 − aB̃B̃
db̃k0
dn̂0

=

dŵ0
κw (1 − α + ν)
=
dn̂0
1 − β(aww + ρb − 1) + κw
κw (1 + ν)
dw̃k0
1 − βaww + κw
=
dñk0
1 − β(aww + ρb − 1) + κw 1 − βaww + κw + β(1 − aB̃B̃ )

where aww and aB̃B̃ are the corresponding eigenvalues associated with the effects of past
wages on current wages and past accumulated bonds on current bonds.19
As seen from above, the employment response to a discount factor shock on impact
and the corresponding wage elasticities differ markedly between the aggregate and regional
economies. For example, the endogenous response of the nominal interest rate rule ϕy
reduces the aggregate employment impact response because the monetary authority can
lower interest rates to partially offset the discount factor shock. The parameters of the
interest rate rule are entirely absent in the expression for the regional employment response
because, in a monetary union, there is a common nominal interest rate across regions. This
suggests that in periods where the economy is at the zero lower bound, aggregate and
regional employment responses to a discount factor shock are more similar, a point also
made in Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) with respect to government spending multipliers.
However, in this simplified model with fixed prices, monetary policy does not affect either
aggregate or regional wage elasticities.
Furthermore, since island level economies in deviations from the aggregate are small open
economies, there are two related extra margins of adjustment that are absent in the aggregate closed economy. First, the possibility to substitute labor for intermediate goods in the
production of final consumption goods at the regional level (α > 0) provides regions another
margin of substitution relative to the aggregate economy. This increases the aggregate em19

They are the solutions that are inside the unit circle to 0 = β(aww )2 − (1 + β + κw )aww + 1 and
x
0 = (1 − βaB̃B̃ )(1 − aB̃B̃ ) − βpB x φ0

26

ployment response relative to the regional response with respect to discount factor shocks
because, for an equivalent increase in current consumption demand induced by the shock,
local employment needs to increase one-for-one in equilibrium while aggregate employment
1
times the consumption increase. Conversely, it decreases the agneeds to increase by 1−α
gregate wage elasticity relative to the regional one. Second, and relatedly, the possibility to
transfer resources intertemporally through savings at the gross real interest rate β1 decreases
both the regional employment response and the wage elasticity relative to their aggregate
counterparts, since β1 > 1 > aB̃B̃ .
We conclude that, even in this simple model where all regions are identical along the
balanced-growth path, differences in economic channels that operate at the regional but
not aggregate level can make both the aggregate employment response and reduced-from
wage elasticity to an aggregate discount factor shock be either greater or smaller than their
regional counterparts. Similar findings hold for other shocks as well. Also, adding further
heterogeneity across regions (e.g., size, industrial composition, etc.) would likely exacerbate
the differences between regional and aggregate employment responses and wage elasticities
even more. These results point to one potential reason to explain the results in Section 3.2:
economic forces can cause a wedge between regional and aggregate wage elasticities even if
both regional and aggregate economies experience the same types of shocks.

5

Estimation: regional and aggregate data combined

In this section, we develop a methodology to estimate our model combining regional and
aggregate data. Because this allows us to identify aggregate shocks driving business cycles, it
links particular regional patterns to particular aggregate shock decompositions. Specifically,
we use the regional evidence from the previous sections in order to inform key parameters
governing the degree of wage stickiness in the aggregate. When combined with aggregate
time-series data, this allows us to estimate the full model, identify the aggregate shocks of
interest, and quantitatively evaluate their relative importance as drivers of aggregate business
cycles. Furthermore, it allows us to assess why the aggregate relationship between wages
and employment during the Great Recession was weak while it was strong at the regional
level, as seen from cross region variation.

5.1

Methodology

The starting point of the methodology are the Regional and Aggregate New Keynesian Wage
Phillips Curves, i.e., equations (20) and (22). As we showed in Section 4.6, the first crucial

27

implication of our modeling assumptions is that the parameters in both the Regional and
Aggregate New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curves are identical. We let Θ ≡ {β, ν, ιw , h, λw }
be a vector of all such parameters other than the Calvo wage adjustment parameter ξw .
Furthermore, Lemma 1 showed that the aggregate log-linearized equilibrium behaved as if
there was a representative closed economy. Since ξw does not directly enter in any of the
rest of the equations describing the aggregate log-linearized equilibrium, we can write such
system (compactly) as:
A(Θ, Σ)Et [Xt+1 ] + B(Θ, Σ)Xt + C(Θ, Σ)Xt−1 = 0

(23)

where Xt is a vector of both endogenous and exogenous variables and A(Θ, Σ), B(Θ, Σ), C(Θ, Σ)
are matrices that depend on Θ as well as a vector of all other parameters in the model (e.g.,
labor shares, capital adjustment costs, etc.) that we denote by Σ.
Then, we present a methodology in order to estimate the model combining a panel of
regional data {Ỹkt } and time-series aggregate data {Ŷt }. The algorithm below describes it:
1. Fix Θ to an initial guess. Using only regional data {Ỹkt }, estimate equation (20) via
GMM. Obtain point estimate ξˆw and standard error σ̂ξw .
2. Choose a constant ϑ ≥ 0 and a prior pϑ (ξw , Θ, Σ) such that ξˆw and ϑσ̂ξw are respectively
the prior mean and standard deviation of ξw .
3. Using only aggregate data {Ŷt }, estimate the aggregate model (equations (22) and
(23)) via full-information Bayesian techniques with prior pϑ (ξw , Θ, Σ). Obtain posterior
p̂ϑ (ξw , Θ, Σ|{Ŷt }).
4. Go back to 1. and use the mean of Θ in posterior p̂ϑ (ξw , Θ, Σ|{Ŷt }) as the new initial
guess. Iterate until convergence in ξˆw .
A number of comments are in order. Regarding steps 2. and 3., we use full-information
Bayesian estimation techniques in the tradition of Linde et al. (2016), Christiano et al. (2014)
and Justiniano et al. (2010). We follow their choices as closely as possible while ensuring
consistency with our state-level data and regressions. The details of these steps as well as
the time series data used for the estimation are described in the Online Appendix. However,
we choose the prior mean and standard deviation of the degree of wage stickiness ξw based
on our regional estimates. Crucially, by changing the constant ϑ, we can put more or less
weight on the regional versus aggregate data in informing this parameter. For example,
when ϑ = 0, we fix ξw to its point estimate ξˆw from our regional regression in step 1., thus
putting all the weight on the regional data and none on the aggregate data. For our main
28

results we will consider ϑ = 0 and ϑ = 2. We pick ϑ = 2 because this turns out to be
equivalent to estimating the model with aggregate data alone and completely ignoring the
regional evidence. It effectively imposes a flat prior over ξw . In Section 6, we discuss how the
results change for intermediate values of ϑ as well as why ϑ = 0 is our preferred benchmark.
Regarding step 1., beyond the Regional New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve, our methodology does not use any other equations describing the regional equilibrium for estimation.
Furthermore, it only uses the regional data to estimate ξw , given all other parameters. Section
5.3 describes this estimation step in detail. It is in the same spirit of the limited-information
methods used in, for instance, Galı́ et al. (2005) when estimating a “hybrid” New Keynesian
Price Phillips Curve.
5.1.1

Why use only the Regional New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve?

One standard alternative to our methodology would have been to use all regional and aggregate equations describing the equilibrium and simply estimate all model parameters via
full-information methods. Why do we present a methodology that only uses the Regional
New Keynesian Phillips Curve and the aggregate equilibrium equations instead?
The first reason is data availability. There is no good available data for several variables
at the state-level in the US that are needed for estimation (e.g., physical capital and current
accounts). These variables do not show up in the Regional New Keynesian Wage Phillips
Curve but do so in other structural equations describing the regional equilibrium.
The second reason is clarity. Our focus is on the implications of regional business cycles
for wage stickiness and, as a result, on our understanding of the drivers of aggregate business
cycles. As such, the regional evidence we presented in Section 3 is arguably informative
about the degree of wage stickiness in the economy but less so about other parameters.
Simultaneously estimating these parameters from regional data would make the aggregate
implications of regional business cycles less transparent and the main results in the next
sections less credible and harder to interpret.
The third reason is bridging the gap between those researchers estimating structural models and those estimating reduced-form responses to regional shocks. As the later literature
does, our methodology also uses instruments at the regional level as a source of exogenous
variation. This arguably allows for more credible identification, a point we further explore in
Section 6. However, we exploit such regional variation to estimate key structural parameters
that under certain assumptions are common between regional and aggregate economies, as
opposed to estimating reduced-form responses to shocks which as we argued in Section 4.7
typically differ.
The last reason, and perhaps the most fundamental, is robustness to model misspecifica29

tion. Suppose the researcher is unsure about other specific features of the economy that do
not change the Regional and Aggregate New Keyenesian Phillips Curves or the aggregation
properties of the model in Lemma 1. Yet, assume that these other features matter for other
regional equilibrium equations and thus change the regional responses to shocks.20 To make
this discussion concrete, one such feature is the form of the endogenous discount factor φkt .21
Parameters governing it do not show up in any of the aggregate equations nor in the New
Keynesian Wage Phillips Curves but matter greatly for the regional responses, as shown in
our closed-form example in Section 4.7. If the estimated degree of wage stickiness is affected
by using the Regional New Keynesian Phillips Curve in estimation jointly with misspecified regional equilibrium equations (e.g., an Euler equation with the “wrong” endogenous
discount factor), then this would also affect the aggregate responses to shocks and result in
drawing incorrect conclusions from our model. However, our methodology is robust to this
type of misspecification precisely because it only uses the Regional New Keynesian Phillips
Curve and no other regional equilibrium equations.

5.2

Benchmark Parameterization

There are five parameters embedded in Θ that show up in the estimation of (20) and (22):
β, ν, ιw , h and λw . As discussed above, we are interested in recovering ξw using regional
data. Note, as seen by equation (21), the Calvo parameter of wage adjustment (ξw ) is a key
component determining κw . Estimating κw provides us with a way to recover ξw , given other
parameters. In terms of parameterizing Θ, we externally calibrate β, ν, ιw and λw . We then
use our algorithm to estimate h and ξw .
We set β equal to 0.9948. There is a large empirical literature estimating ν1 which is the
Frisch elasticity of labor supply. Estimates from the micro literature find that the combined
extensive-margin and intensive-margin uncompensated labor supply elasticities in the range
of 1 (ν = 1).22 Macro estimates identified off of business cycle variation estimate uncom20

Beraja (2018) shows how thinking about misspecification in terms of equilibrium equations is also useful
when considering whether counterfactuals with respect to policy rule changes are robust or not, as well as
how to construct counterfactuals without having to fully specify a structural model when researchers are
uncertain about features of the economy that may be difficult to distinguish in the data.
21
Another example is the form of the federal fiscal transfers rule to the islands Tkt in a fiscal union. See
Beraja (2018) for a detailed discussion of the role of these transfers in stabilizing US regional business cycles.
22
Prominent estimates of the intensive margin Frisch include 0.71 from Pistaferri (2003) and 0.54 from
(Chetty et al., 2011). (Chetty et al., 2011) also surveyed several quasi-experimental estimates of the extensivemargin Frisch and find an estimate of 0.32. Several authors have produced structural estimates of the
extensive margin Frisch in the range of 0.4 to 0.7 (Gourio and Noua (2009), Mustre-del Ro (2015), and Park
(2017)). Based on this literature we treat the combined Frisch, reflecting both the intensive and extensive
responses, to be in the neighborhood of 1. This is consistent with the recent work of Christiano et al. (2014)
who also exogenously set the Frisch to 1 when estimating their medium-scale DSGE model.

30

pensated elasticities above 2 (ν below 0.5).23 Additionally, the Frisch is often imprecisely
estimated in New Keynesian DSGE models. Given this, we do not estimate ν and instead
set it in both our aggregate and cross-region estimation to estimates from the literature. For
our benchmark estimation, we set ν = 1. However, in our robustness analysis, we explore
the sensitivity of our results to alternate estimates for ν such as ν = 0.5 or ν = 2. ιw
governs the extent of wage indexation embedded in wage contracts. If ιw = 0, there is no
wage indexation. As we show later, the exact value of ιw does not affect our estimates of
ξw . Given this, we assume ιw = 0 in our benchmark estimation. However, we also perform
a robustness specification where we estimate ιw directly from the regional data. Finally, we
follow Linde et al. (2016) and set λw = 1.2. Table 3 summarizes the parameters that we
keep fixed throughout. These include the aforementioned parameters in the New Keynesian
Wage Phillips Curve as well as the depreciation rate, the long-run inflation rate, the steady
state government spending share, and the output growth rate.
Table 3: Fixed parameters, annual frequency
Wage Phillips Curve Fixed Parameters
β
ν
λw
ιw

discount factor
0.9948
inverse Frisch elasticity 1
wage markup
1.2
wage indexation
0

Other Fixed Parameters
δ
Π
g
γ

depreciation rate
ss gross inflation
ss gov’t spending share
growth rate

0.1
1.028
0.2
2

While β, ν, λw and ιw will be held fixed in the two steps in the estimation algorithm
corresponding to the aggregate and cross-region estimation, that is not the case with h and
ξw . We estimate the degree of habit formation in the aggregate estimation step jointly with
all other parameters. But, our aggregate estimate of h is also affected by the amount of
wage stickiness ξw in the economy. Additionally, as seen in (20), our cross-region estimate
of ξw is determined, in part, by h. As it turns out though, the cross-region estimate of ξw is
not sensitive to changes in the initial guess for h around those in the literature (i.e., values
between 0.3 and 0.6). We show this in Table 6. Hence, in practice, we only have to run the
algorithm once whenever we set the initial guess for h to be anywhere in that range.
Table 4 shows all estimated parameters. Our choices for the priors follow Christiano et al.
23

See, for example, King and Rebelo (2000)

31

(2014) as closely as possible, subject to the necessary frequency conversions from quarterly
to annual. The column “Posterior Benchmark” refers to our benchmark estimation results
where we set ϑ = 0, thus effectively fixing ξw to correspond to the point estimate from step
(1) that only uses regional data. This means that, conditional on other parameters, we do
not use any information on the aggregate data to discipline the degree of wage stickiness.
Instead, the aggregate data informs the remaining parameters of the model, conditional on
the ξw estimated from regional data. The column “Posterior Aggregate Data” corresponds
to setting ϑ = 2 in the estimation. The key difference between this case and our benchmark
is that we now let the aggregate data inform the degree of wage stickiness as well in step
2. of the algorithm. As it turns out, when ϑ = 2, the prior standard deviation of ξw is so
high that the estimated parameters are identical to those that would come from only using
aggregate data in estimation. Thus, we refer to the case with ϑ = 2 as the one that uses
aggregate data only in estimation and the case with ϑ = 0 as our benchmark procedure that
combines regional and aggregate data in estimation. In robustness exercises, we will explore
intermediate values of ϑ.
Our benchmark estimate of ξw using the regional data is equal to 0.24 . This implies
that 76 percent of wages adjust during a given year. This number is very similar to recent
micro estimates of annual base wage adjustments using administrative data sources.24 Had
we estimated the model with aggregate data alone, we would have found that ξw equals 0.50.
This is consistent with other recent estimates that use aggregate data alone to estimate their
medium-scale New Keynesian models. See, for example, Christiano et al. (2014) and Linde
et al. (2016). Section 6 further comments on the differences between the two estimation
strategies. The next sub-section discusses in detail the step in the algorithm that uses
regional data to estimate ξw given other parametes.

5.3

Estimating the Wage Phillips Curve using Regional Data

In this sub-section, we discuss how we estimate the degree of wage stickiness using cross
region variation during the Great Recession. This is step (1) in our fixed-point algorithm.
In particular, we estimate equation (20) using state level data to uncover ξw . Our estimates
of κw can be mapped to estimates of ξw given assumptions on λw , ν and β.
Because the nominal wage, W̃kt , and the local price level, p̃kt are stationary in logdeviations from the aggregate, we re-write equation (20) in levels as opposed to growth rates
24

See, for example, Grigsby et al. (2018).

32

Table 4: Model priors and posteriors
Prior
Dist Mean SD

Posterior
Benchmark
Aggregate data
Mean SD
Mean SD

Wage Phillips Curve
ξw
h

Calvo wages
habit parameter

B
B

0.24 0.32
0.50 0.10

0.24 N/A
0.48 0.07

0.50
0.62

0.09
0.08

N
B
N
B
N
N
N
N
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
IG
IG
IG
IG
IG
IG
IG

0.40
0.50
1.20
0.32
1.00
5.00
1.50
0.25
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
2.33
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80

0.12
0.28
1.04
0.61
1.55
2.99
1.62
0.46
0.37
0.43
0.16
0.61
0.68
0.67
0.71
0.70
1.22
2.17
0.50
14.77
0.94
1.95
0.67

0.12
0.30
1.05
0.67
1.36
3.20
1.51
0.46
0.40
0.41
0.17
0.60
0.70
0.56
0.59
0.71
1.16
2.17
0.49
14.45
0.90
1.15
0.52

0.01
0.11
0.07
0.05
0.72
1.22
0.14
0.09
0.08
0.13
0.08
0.13
0.10
0.14
0.11
0.08
0.16
0.26
0.07
4.90
0.20
0.29
0.12

Others
α
ιp
λp
ξp
χ
S 00
φπ
φX
ρR
ρη
ρz
ρg
ρµ
ρ λp
ρϕ
ρb
100ση
100σz
100σg
100σµ
100σλp
100σϕ
100σb

capital share
price indexation
SS price markup
Calvo prices
capital util. cost
capital adjust. cost
reaction infation
reaction GDP growth
int. rate smoothing
monetary policy
TFP growth
gov’t spending
investment
price markup
labor supply
discount factor
monetary policy
TFP growth
gov’t spending
investment
price markup
labor supply
discount factor

0.05
0.15
0.10
0.20
1.00
3.00
0.25
0.10
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
3.31
1.32
1.32
1.32
1.32
1.32
1.32

Log marginal likelihood

0.01
0.11
0.07
0.06
0.72
1.23
0.15
0.08
0.09
0.14
0.08
0.13
0.10
0.12
0.10
0.07
0.18
0.25
0.07
5.29
0.26
0.31
0.14

-592

-590

Notes: N stands for Normal; B for Beta; IG for Inverse-Gamma distribution. Metropolis-Hastings:
2 chains with 120,000 draws, first 24,000 were discarded. Log marginal likelihood calculated as
Modified Harmonic Mean. “Benchmark” corresponds to the fixed-point estimation with ϑ = 0
which estimates ξw using only the regional data. “Aggregate data” corresponds to the estimation
with ϑ = 2 which effectively ignores regional data and is equivalent to estimating ξw solely from
the aggregate data.

as:
W̃kt = α0 + α1 W̃kt+1 + α2 M ˜RS kt + α3 W̃kt−1 + ϕ̃kt + ε̃kt+1
33

(24)

 w  w
where ε̃kt+1 is the expectational error of E π̃kt+1
−π̃kt+1 and ϕ̃kt is the local level labor supply
1
(c̃kt − hc̃kt−1 ),
shock, M ˜RS kt is the marginal rate of substitution defined as p̃kt + ν ñkt + 1−h
β
κw
1
α1 = 1+β+κw , α2 = 1+β+κw , and α3 = 1+β+κw .
In practice, when estimating (24), we compute all state level variables in log deviations
from their value in 2005. This removes any persistent differences in their initial levels across
states. Furthermore, instead of expressing the regional variables as log deviations from the
aggregate directly, we include a vector of time fixed effects in the regression. For W̃kt , we
use our demographically adjusted state level nominal wage measures introduced in Section
2. When computing M ˜RS kt , we use our state level scanner prices calculated from the
Nielsen Retail Scanner Database for p̃kt . Our measure of ñkt is the log employment rate
in state k during year t. To compute the state employment rate, we download both state
level employment and state level population directly from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
website. Our measure of consumption c̃kt comes from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
We convert the nominal series to a real series by deflating by our state level price indices. A
full discussion of the data sources for all state level variables used in this regression can be
found in the Online Appendix that accompanies the paper. We estimate (24) using t = 2007,
2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011. We start in 2007 because our price data begins in 2006 and
we need lagged prices to deflate c̃kt−1 . Our regressions exclude Alaska and Hawaii because
we have no price information for these states. As a result, our base regression includes 240
state-year pairs. Moreover, theory implies that α1 + α2 + α3 = 1 and α1 = βα3 . We impose
these constraints when estimating (24). Our estimate of κw comes from taking the ratio of
α2 to α3 .
There are a few challenges to estimating (24) via OLS. First, W̃kt+1 , by definition, is
correlated with the expectation error, ε̃kt+1 , and the local labor supply shock, ϕ̃kt . To solve
this potential issue, we instrument for future wages using lagged employment (ñk,t−1 ) as well
as lagged (log) real per capita GDP. We download the per capita real GDP measures directly
from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis website.25 These t − 1 variables are uncorrelated
with both the expectation error in t as well as period t innovations to local labor supply
shocks. Conditional on M ˜RS kt and W̃kt−1 , lagged employment and lagged real GDP are
predictive of W̃kt+1 with an F-test of joint significance of the instruments equal to 9.9. In
all specifications, we use our predicted measure of future wages as a regressor and bootstrap
the standard errors to account for the first stage prediction.
A second potential concern of our estimation of (24) is that M ˜RS kt is potentially correlated with ϕ̃kt given it is a function of ñkt . In a world where local labor supply shocks
25

As with all of our other state level economic variables, we create an state specific index for real log
per-capita GDP with a value of 1 in 2005. All subsequent years are log deviations from 2005.

34

exist, changes in employment can occur holding wages fixed. Note, estimating (24) via OLS
will bias our estimate of κw downward which will bias our estimate of ξw upward implying
greater wage stickiness. Therefore, estimating (24) via OLS will give us a lower bound on
the estimated amount of wage flexibility implied by cross-region variation. As discussed
above, we find much lower wage stickiness in our cross-region regressions relative to what is
implied from aggregate data even in our OLS regression. However, to better identify κw we
instrument for the M ˜RS kt using measures of local house price growth. Following the work
of many recent papers, including Mian and Sufi (2014), we use log local house prices as an
instrument for M ˜RS kt that is related to changes in household demand.26 In Section 6 we
discuss in detail why using household demand shocks can help identify the degree of wage
stickiness in a world where labor supply shocks are important.
Formally, the identifying assumption is that local house price variation during this period
is orthogonal to movements in local labor supply shocks. This is a likely valid assumption
for preference based labor supply shifters.27 Furthermore, it is worth highlighting that our
measure of the M̃ RSkt includes local consumption. Thus, the identification assumption is
not violated by changes in current or expected housing wealth that could shift labor supply
through changes in consumption.
When we instrument for both W̃kt+1 and M ˜RS kt using lagged log employment rates,
lagged log GDP and contemporaneous log house prices, the F-stat on the lagged log employment rate and lagged log GDP in predicting w̃kt+1 was 18.9 and the F-stat of contemporaneous log house price changes in predicting M ˜RS kt was 41.9. Table 5 shows our base
specification estimates of (24) using cross-state variation. Column 1 shows our results when
we instrument for only Wkt+1 while column 2 shows our results when we instrument for both
W̃kt+1 and M ˜RS kt . The table shows our estimates of α2 and α3 . We do not report α1 since
it is constrained to be equal to βα3 . Our coefficient of interest is κw which is the ratio of α2
to α3 . Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parenthesis.
When ignoring the fact that M ˜RS kt and ϕ̃kt are potentially correlated (column 1), our
estimate of κw is 0.18 (standard error = 0.08). As noted above, we expect this specification to
26

Our housing data comes from the Federal Housing Finance Authority (FHFA). The FHFA produces
nominal state level price indices for all states.
27
ϕ̃kt could also proxy for differences in government policy across locations that could discourage labor
supply. One potential policy would be extended unemployment insurance. Essentially all states increased
the duration of their unemployment benefits substantively during the recession with most states increasing
to 99 weeks. Other programs like SNAP, HAMP and HARP were expanded nationally but interacted with
local economic conditions. Given that many of these policies (extended unemployment insurance, SNAP,
HAMP and HARP) were implemented after 2009, we performed a robustness exercise of only restricting our
sample to only include 2007-2009 data when instrumenting M̃ RSkt with house price changes. Our point
estimate for κw was nearly identical in this robustness specification. This is consistent with these policies
having only a modest effect on individual labor supply behavior within a region.

35

Table 5: Estimates of κw from Cross State Variation 2007-2011, Base Specification
(1)

(2)

α̂2

0.08
(0.03)

0.15
(0.05)

α̂3

0.46
(0.02)

0.43
(0.03)

κ̂w

0.18
(0.08)

0.35
(0.15)

ξˆw

0.35

0.24

Instrument for w̃kt+1
Instrument for M ˜RS kt

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Sample Size

240

240

Note: Table shows the coefficients from estimating (24). Equation estimated imposing α1 = βα3
and α1 + α2 + α3 = 1. Each observation is a state-year pair. κw = α2 /α3 . In both columns, we
instrument for W̃kt+1 using ñkt−1 and lagged log of state real GDP per capita. In column 2, we also
instrument for M ˜RS kt using contemporaneous log house prices as an additional instrument. All
standard errors (in parenthesis) are bootstrapped to account for the two stage procedure. Standard
errors are also clustered at the state level. See text for additional details. When computing ξˆw ,
we set λw to a value of 1.2. When computing M ˜RS kt we set h = 0.48 as determined by our fixed
point procedure.

be a lower bound on the estimate of κw (and an upper bound on wage stickiness) given that
local labor supply shifts could cause movements in employment with no corresponding fall
in wages. In column 2, we instrument for M ˜RS kt with local house price variation. As seen
from column 2, instrumenting for M ˜RS kt causes our estimates of α2 and consequently κw
to increase to 0.35 (standard error = 0.15). Our results in column 2 will be our benchmark
estimate throughout the paper. Using equation (21) we can infer ξw from κw given our
parameterization of β and ν and λw . Our preferred estimate of ξw estimated from the cross
state variation is 0.24 suggesting that 76 percent of wages adjust during a given year.
When estimating (24), we impose that α1 = βα3 , with β = 0.9948, and that α1 +α2 +α3 =
1. If we ran the regression without imposing the first constraint, we cannot reject that
β = 0.9948 (i.e, α1 = 0.9948α3 ). Likewise, we cannot reject that the three coefficients sum
to 1. For example, if we estimated the results in column 2 of Table 5 without imposing the

36

constraints, α1 = 0.65 (standard error = 0.36), α2 = 0.05 (standard error 0.18), and α3 =
0.30 (standard error = 0.19). The three coefficients sum to about 1 (as predicted by theory)
and α1 is not statistically different from α3 . We wish to note that imposing the constraint
that α1 = 0.9948α3 does increase the precision of our base estimates as seen in Table 5.

5.4

Robustness of Regional Estimates

Table 6: Estimates of κw and ξw from Cross State Variation 2007-2011, Robustness Specifications
Estimate of κw

Estimate of ξw

Base Estimates

0.35
(0.15)

0.24

Robustness 1: h = 0.3

0.35
(0.16)

0.24

Robustness 2: h = 0.6

0.33
(0.15)

0.24

Robustness 3: ν = 1.5

0.19
(0.08)

0.27

Robustness 4: ν = 0.5

0.41
(0.25)

0.30

Robustness 5: Estimate ιw

0.34
(0.16)

0.24

Note: Table shows the coefficients from estimating (24) under alternate parameter assumptions.
Equation estimated imposing α1 = 0.99 α3 and α1 + α2 + α3 = 1. Each observation is a state-year
pair. κw = α2 /α3 . The specification is analogous to column (2) in Table 5. All standard errors
(in parenthesis) are bootstrapped to account for the two stage procedure. Standard errors are also
clustered at the state level. Row 1 redisplays our estimates under our base parameterization shown
in column 2 of Table 5. Rows 2 and 3 holds our base parameterization of β, ν and ι fixed but
varies h. Rows 4 and 5 holds our base parameterization of β, h and ι fixed but varies ν. In the last
row, we hold our base parameterization of β, h and ν fixed but allows ιw to be estimated from the
data. See text for additional details. To compute our estimate of ξw , we set λw to a value of 1.2.

Table 6 shows additional robustness specifications for our estimates of κw and ξw to
alternate parameterizations. Row 1 of the table reproduces our results in column 2 of Table
5. All other rows show estimates for alternative values of ν, h, and ιw . For the alternative
estimates, we use the same specification as in column 2 of Table 5. Specifically, rows 2
37

and 3 show our estimates for alternate values of h while rows 4 and 5 show our estimates
for alternate values of ν. Changing the habit parameter across the range of estimates in
the literature have no effect on our estimates of wage stickiness. While our estimates of
κw change with different values of ν, our estimates of ξw are relatively stable. The reason
for this is that ν also effects the mapping of κw to ξw . Across the various values of ν, our
estimates of ξw only varies slightly from 0.24 to 0.3.
In the last row of the table, we explore the robustness of our results to relaxing our
assumption that ιw = 0. To do this, we estimate a equation (24) but still imposing that
β = 0.9948, ν = 1 and h = 0.48. Under these assumptions, the last term in the equation
is −(Pkt−2 + Pkt ). The coefficient on this term is informative about ιw . When we do this
robustness specification, our estimates of α2 and α3 are essentially unchanged leaving our
estimate of κw unchanged. Our estimate of ιw is close to zero, but with a large standard
error. This could be a result of potential measurement error in our state level price indices
or it could be because ιw is in fact zero.
In the Online Appendix accompanying the paper, we perform a further set of robustness
exercises with respect to our estimates of κw and ξw using regional data. In particular,
we explore whether differences in the industrial composition across states could be biasing
our estimates. For example, industries that are unionized may have different wage setting
patterns than non-unionized states. To assess the extent that such concerns could be biasing
our state level estimates, we performed two additional analyses. First, we explicitly controlled
for the states 2006 manufacturing share when estimating (24). Second, we excluded the
top one-quarter of states with the highest 2006 manufacturing share from our estimating
sample. In both robustness exercises, our estimates of κw and ξw were nearly identical to
those reported in Table 5.
Finally, before concluding this section, it is worth discussing the “no cross-state migration” assumption that we have imposed throughout. Migration is only a potential problem
for our estimates of κw and ξw if migration is selected. If in states where economic conditions deteriorate, high wage workers move out, this will put downward pressure on observed
state level wages even if everyone’s individual wage is sticky. Two things make us confident
that this is not substantively biasing our results. First, as discussed in Section 2, our wage
measures are demographically adjusted. To the extent that migration is correlated with
observables like age and education, such selection issues are already purged from our wage
measures. Second, using data from the 2010 American Community Survey, we compute
migration flows to and from each state and, then, construct a net-migration rate for each
state. As documented by others, we find that the net migration rate was very low during
the Great Recession (see, for example, Yagan (2017)). The fact that the net migration rate
38

across states was low during the Great Recession suggests that if selected migration takes
place, it is likely not biasing our estimates in a meaningful way.

6

The value of combining regional and aggregate data

In Section 4.7, we used a simplified version of our model to argue that using regional
data alone to make inferences about the aggregate responses to shocks could be problematic—point that we will come back to in Section 7 using our full model.
In this section, we instead ask: what is the “problem” with using aggregate data alone
when trying to distinguish between models with high versus low wage stickiness? Why does
combining regional and aggregate data help? We begin by comparing our estimation results
under both approaches and then turn to these questions.

6.1

Comparing estimation results

In Table 4 above we show the parameter estimates under both approaches. First, the degree
of wage stickiness is much larger when estimating the model with aggregate data alone: the
posterior mean of ξw increases from 0.24 to 0.50. This implies that, when using aggregate
data alone, we estimate that 50 percent of wages do not change every year, as opposed
to 24 percent when estimating the model with regional and aggregate data combined. As a
comparison, Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014) estimates a medium scale DSGE model
using only aggregate time series data over the 1985 to 2010 period and also finds relatively
large amounts of wage stickiness with their estimates of ξw equaling 0.43.28 Second, the
standard deviation of the labor supply shock σϕ increases from 1.15 to 1.95 as the regional
data is used and the persistence ρϕ of the labor supply shock increases from 0.59 to 0.71.
Because wage stickiness is one of the main model features generating endogenous persistence
and amplification in response to shocks, when wages are estimated to be more flexible, our
model requires more volatile and persistent labor supply shocks in order to match the same
aggregate time-series wage data.
Regarding the fit of the aggregate model with respect to time-series aggregate data,
the last line of Table 4 above shows that the log-likelihood is almost identical under both
approaches. This means that there is no discernible loss in model fit when effectively fixing
ξw to the point estimate of 0.24 from regional data (i.e, the ϑ = 0 case) or estimating it
jointly with the rest of the parameters from aggregate data alone (i.e., the ϑ = 2 case).
28

Because they use quarterly data, Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014) reports quarterly estimates of
ξw equal to 0.81. The implied annual ξw is (0.81)4 = 0.43.

39

The same is true for intermediate values of ϑ. The fact that the log-likelihood is relatively
insensitive to alternate estimates of ξw suggests that this parameter is not well disciplined
by the US aggregate time series data. This is consistent with the fact that the model
implied estimates of wage stickiness using aggregate time series data varies substantively
across papers within the literature.29 Conversely, there is a substantial loss in the fit of the
regional New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve (equation (24)) when we set ξw = 0.50, i.e.,
the the estimated ξw resulting from the estimation using aggregate data alone. Specifically,
the mean squared error of the regional regression increases from 0.0002 to 0.0146 when we
set ξw = 0.50. Furthermore, the mean squared error increases sharply when going from
ϑ = 0 to more intermediate values of ϑ and their associated ξw estimates. For instance,
for ϑ = 0.5 and ϑ = 1 the mean squared errors from the regional regression are 0.0013 and
0.0069, respectively.
The above discussion implies that in our relatively short sample of 40 years of aggregate
time-series data there seems to be little information regarding the degree of wage stickiness.
For this reason, our preferred estimates are either the benchmark parameterization that only
uses regional data in estimating ξw (ϑ = 0) or the one associated with ϑ = 0.5 because the
mean squared error is still relatively small. Larger values of ϑ that put further weight on the
aggregate data in estimating ξw bring essentially no gains in terms of fitting the aggregate
time-series but result in substantial losses in terms of fitting the regional patterns.

6.2

Distinguishing between high and low wage stickiness models:
the role of demand and labor supply shocks

Through a series of thought experiments, this section explores why using aggregate data
alone could be problematic when trying to distinguish models with high versus low wage
stickiness, as well as why the regional data may help with identification. The bottom line
of the analysis is that it becomes hard to distinguish across these models in aggregate data
whenever labor supply shocks are important relative to demand shocks (e.g., discount rate
shocks) and whenever the time series data has a relatively short sample.
Consider first a thought experiment along the following lines: assume that the data
generating process is the “true” model of the economy in Section 4, parameterized with a
low wage stickiness and a given relative volatility of discount rate shocks versus labor supply
shocks. Specifically, for the thought experiment, assume the parameterization is exactly
our benchmark specification from Table 4. Then, consider an “alternative” model that a
29

As noted above, Christiano et al. (2014) estimates an annual amount of wage stickiness of 43%. Alternatively, Christiano et al. (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007), and Linde et al. (2016) provide annual estimates
of ξw equal to 17%, 28% and 39%, respectively.

40

researcher is estimating on a short-sample of only 40 observations coming from the true data
generating process. In this alternative model, the researcher only estimates the degree of
wage stickiness (ξw ) and the discount rate and labor supply shock volatilities (σb and σϕ ).
All other parameters are known to be those from the true model and are thus not estimated.
Importantly, suppose the researcher is rather dogmatic and believes with high confidence
that there is a high degree of wage stickiness in the economy. Specifically, suppose the
researcher imposes a tight prior around the mean of ξw = 0.5 when estimating the model,
i.e., the higher degree of wage stickiness we estimated from aggregate data alone in Table 4.
Panel (A) of Figure 4 shows the distribution of ξw posterior mode estimates that dogmatic
researchers would obtain when estimating their alternative model from random short samples
of 40 observations of data generated by the true model. Panel A of the figure also compares
how the posterior mode distribution moves away from the dogmatic researcher’s prior when
the true model has either higher or lower relative volatility of discount rate versus labor
supply shocks than in our benchmark parameterization. Specifically, the distribution denoted
by “Medium σb /σϕ ” corresponds to the benchmark parameterization, the “High σb /σϕ ”
corresponds to increasing (decreasing) the true discount rate shock (labor supply shock)
standard deviation by a factor of 2, and “Low σb /σϕ ” to increasing (decreasing) the true
labor supply shock (discount rate shock) standard deviation by a factor of 2.
Panel (B) of Figure 4 considers the reverse thought experiment. The true model is one
with high wage stickiness and a given relative volatility of discount rate versus labor supply
shocks —the parameterization associated with the “aggregate data only” columns in Table
4. A dogmatic researcher in this economy is one who is then estimating the alternative
model with a tight prior around the mean of ξw = 0.24, i.e., the low posterior mean of
wage stickiness estimated using only the regional data. In Panels (C) and (D) we repeat
both experiments but instead estimate the wage stickiness parameter using longer random
samples of 400 observations instead of 40 observations.
Both short sample experiments result in the same conclusions. Short samples from a
true data generating process where demand shocks are more important than labor supply
shocks command more information about the true degree of wage stickiness in the economy.
For example, consider the results in Panel (A). The true data generating process has a wage
stickiness parameter of 0.24 (the dotted vertical line). In a world where demand shocks are
relatively more important than labor supply shocks (high σb /σϕ ), the estimated amount of
wage stickiness (even given a high prior) is close to the truth: ξw = 0.27 versus ξw = 0.24.
However, in a world where labor supply shocks are relatively more important than demand
shocks (green line in Figure 4), a researcher with a high prior for wage stickiness would
fail to recover the economy’s actual amount of wage stickiness (0.37 versus 0.24). Hence,
41

Figure 4: Posterior mode distribution of ξw under different thought experiments

it becomes easier to shift a “wrong” prior towards the true degree of wage stickiness and
distinguish between models with high versus low stickiness when the economy is being driven
by demand shocks versus labor supply shocks.
The results in Panels (A) and (B) stem from standard economic intuition. For simplicity,
assume that prices are perfectly flexible and firms are on their labor demand schedule.
Whenever demand shocks are the main drivers of economic fluctuations, observed movements
in wages and employment are shifts in the labor demand schedule along the wage setting
schedule. Thus, given a Frisch elasticity of around 1 (ν = 1), the model will correctly infer
the true degree of wages stickiness from such time series movements even when the underlying
time series sample is short. However, if both demand and labor supply shocks are important,
both the labor demand and wage setting schedules are shifting. Then, it becomes hard in
a short sample to distinguish between, for example, a high degree of wage stickiness and
offsetting labor demand and labor supply movements which move employment in the same
direction but leave wages unchanged.
How does regional data help to overcome the problem of estimating the extent of wage
stickiness when the aggregate time series data has a short sample? First, by exploiting cross42

region panel data, sample sizes are larger. For example, in our analysis, we have roughly
250 state*time observations used in identifying the amount of wage stickiness. Second, and
potentially more important, most of cross-region variation in economic conditions during the
Great Recession have been found to be driven by cross-region variation in demand shocks.
As seen above, it is easier to identify the extent of wage stickiness in short panels when the
underlying variation is being driven by demand shocks. Furthermore, as discussed above, we
use an instrumental variable procedure to isolate only labor demand shocks when estimating
the extent of wage stickiness from the regional data. It is worth stressing, however, that
our cross-region estimation strategy relies on a few key strong assumptions. In particular,
as noted above, our procedure relies on the assumption that the economy satisfies certain
symmetry properties such that Lemmas 1 and 2 hold and the parameters in the Regional
and Aggregate NKWPC coincide. This is because we cannot directly use the reducedform regional wage elasticities as a target moment in estimating the aggregate model of the
economy, since as we have shown in Section 4.7 the regional and aggregate reduced-form
responses to shocks typically differ.

7

Aggregate Implications of Regional Business Cycles

The facts we presented in the first part of the paper are puzzling. Aggregate wages did not
fall much during the Great Recession. However, local wages declined more in states where
employment decreased more. Why did aggregate wages respond so little to the decline in
economic activity during the Great Recession while the correlation was much larger across
states? What can we learn from such regional patterns about the causes of the Great
Recession and its aftermath?
When tackling these questions, we compare the results following our benchmark parameterization in Section 5—which follows from estimating the model with regional and
aggregate data combined—with two alternative leading approaches in the literature. In the
first alternative approach, we instead use our model estimated with aggregate time-series
data alone, which as we have argued before is equivalent to setting ϑ = 2 in our methodology. This approach is consistent with the standard approach used to estimate medium-scale
New Keynesian DSGE models. In the second alternative approach, we abstract from our
model entirely. Instead, we perform back-of-the-envelope calculations that extrapolate from
well-identified regional responses to household demand shocks to the aggregate responses of
interest. This approach is very much in the spirit of empirical papers using variation across
regions in order to make inferences about aggregates directly. For example, many papers
have used cross-region variation in the exposure to housing or banking shocks during the
43

Great Recession to assess the effects on local employment (Mian et al. (2013) and Giroud
and Mueller (2015)). These estimates have then been used by some to make predictions
about the causes of aggregate employment declines during this period.
The goal of these comparisons is to highlight that: (1) by focusing on aggregate data
alone, existing models have ignored information in regional data that can help discipline
their main mechanisms, and (2) by focusing on regional data alone, back-of-the-envelope
calculations that make inferences about aggregates without the aid of a formal model may
miss economic channels and shocks that are important at the aggregate but not regional
level.

7.1

Why do aggregate wages look sticky?

Many authors have emphasized how changes in household demand following declines in
housing wealth or a tightening of borrowing constraints were important drivers of regional
business cycles during the Great Recession.30 Within our model, discount factor shocks can
be interpreted as a proxy for such household demand shocks.31 Thus, as we discussed in
Section 4.7, one potential explanation for the difference between aggregate time series and
cross-state patterns is that household demand shocks (i.e., discount factor shocks) were the
main drivers of both regional and aggregate employment and wages during the Great Recession, but the wage elasticity to this shock is smaller in the aggregate because of economic
mechanisms that operate at either the aggregate or the regional level but not both. Alternatively, the differences could be explained by other shocks also being important drivers
of aggregate, but not regional, employment and wage growth. For instance, if household
demand shocks decreased both regional and aggregate labor demand during the Great Recession but labor supply shocks were only important in the aggregate, then because such
shocks reduce employment but put upward pressure on wages, we would precisely observe
that wages seemed less flexible at the aggregate than the regional level during the late 2000s.
Because of our empirical findings and these theoretical differences, we use the reduced-form
, as a useful statistic for diselasticity of real wages with respect to employment, dlog(w)
dlog(n)
criminating across potential causes of the Great Recession as well as a diagnostic tool for
distinguishing between models of business cycles.32
Similar in spirit to Mian and Sufi (2014), we begin by using plausibly exogenous house
reg )
price changes across regions in order to estimate the regional wage elasticity dlog(w
to a
dlog(nreg )
30

See Mian and Sufi (2014) for an important contribution along these lines.
See Werning (2015) for a formalization of this point.
32
See Nakamura and Steinsson (2017) for a related discussion on how both well-identified moments and
portable statistics are helpful to discriminate across models.
31

44

regional household demand shock. This is the empirical analog to the theoretical wage elasticity ddñw̃ we derived in Section 4.7. In particular, using the same state-level data underlying
Table 5, we regress the log-change in real wages between 2007 and 2010 on the log-change
in employment during this time period, where we instrument the latter with the log-change
in house prices between 2007 and 2010. We obtain a 3-year elasticity of 0.78 (0.30). This is
very close to the unconditional elasticity of 0.64 we reported in Table 1, which is consistent
with the observation that regional differences in employment and wages were by and large
driven by household demand shocks (which are proxied by discount factor shocks in our
framework).
agg )
to an aggregate
Next, in our model, we compute the aggregate wage elasticity dlog(w
dlog(nagg )
discount factor shock during the 2007-2010 period. This is analogous to the theoretical wage
elasticity ddn̂ŵ in the simplified model from Section 4.7. Because we do not have plausibly
exogenous time-series variation in aggregate household demand during the Great Recession,
agg )
directly from the data as we did for the regional elasticity.
we cannot estimate dlog(w
dlog(nagg )
Instead, we use our estimated model to compute the impulse responses of real wages and
employment to a discount factor shock in 2007 that induces changes in aggregate household
demand. As we have mentioned, such discount factor shock is the closest theoretical analog
reg )
. Computing the
to the changes in regional household demand we used to estimate dlog(w
dlog(nreg )
dlog(wagg )
impulse responses at a 3 year horizon, we find an aggregate elasticity dlog(nagg ) of 1.16 for
our benchmark parameterization that combines regional and aggregate data in estimation.
Because the aggregate real wage elasticity in response to a household demand shock is
actually larger than the regional one (1.16 v 0.78), economic mechanisms that differentially
operate between the aggregate and regional levels cannot alone explain the relative stickiness
of aggregate wages that we observed during the Great Recession. As we showed in Section 4.7,
such economic mechanisms could have decreased this elasticity in theory—thus explaining
the lack of flexibility of aggregate wages. However, we find that the opposite is true given our
benchmark parameter estimates.33 Had we used the alternative parameterization that uses
aggregate data alone in our model estimation, we would have found that the aggregate real
wage elasticity in response to a household demand shock was 0.39. This is very close to the
observed aggregate real wage elasticity of around 0.37 for the Great Recession shown in Table
2. Thus, we would have erroneously concluded that differences between the regional and
aggregate real wage elasticities in response to a household demand shock could potentially
resolve why aggregate wages look relatively sticky. However, the aggregate wage stickiness
33

For example, one such mechanism is monetary policy. Intuitively, because monetary policy endogenously
responds to changes in demand, it stabilizes employment. As a result, the elasticity of wages to employment
in the aggregate is larger than at the regional level. The large monetary policy actions taken by the U.S.
Federal Reserve during the Great Recession likely helped to stabilize aggregate employment.

45

estimated using only aggregate data is inconsistent with the cross-region relationship between
real wage growth and employment growth observed during the Great Recession.
Given that differences in wage elasticities in response to regional versus aggregate household demand shocks cannot explain the differential aggregate and regional wage patterns
during the Great Recession, it must be that the set of shocks experienced by the aggregate
economy during the Great Recession differed from their regional counterparts. However,
these set of aggregate shocks get differenced out when exploiting cross-region variation. In
order to see which other shocks can account for the observed aggregate wage stickiness, we
feed the aggregate model with the estimated shocks during the 2007 to 2010 time period
assuming the economy was on a balanced-growth path prior to 2007. We then compute the
predicted log-change in real wages divided by the log-change in employment between 2007
and 2010 for each of the shocks or set of shocks we examine. Table 7 shows the results for
our benchmark model as well as for the alternative parameterization that uses aggregate
data alone in estimation.
Table 7: Predicted

dlog(wagg )
dlog(nagg )

during the Great Recession in Response to Various Shocks

b

Shocks
b and µ

b, µ, and ϕ

Benchmark

0.97

0.83

0.31

Aggregate data alone

0.39

0.40

0.25

Note: The column first column corresponds to feeding the model with only the 2008, 2009, and
2010 realizations of the discount factor shock (b). The second column feeds the realizations of both
the discount factor and investment efficiency shocks (b, µ). The final column feeds the realizations
of the discount factor shock, the investment efficiency shock and the labor supply shock (b, µ,
ϕ). The first row labeled “Benchmark” uses the parameterization and shocks when estimating the
model with both regional and aggregate data. The second row labeled “Aggregate data only” uses
the parameterization and shocks when only using aggregate data for estimation.

The results suggest that labor supply shocks were an important factor explaining why
aggregate real wages did not fall during the Great Recession. Specifically, Table 7 shows
that, when we feed the model with only the discount factor shock (b) realizations, the
cumulative aggregate real wage elasticity between 2007 and 2010 is 0.97 under our benchmark
parameterization. This is somewhat smaller than 1.16—i.e., the theoretical elasticity we
computed above after a one-time discount factor shock—and closer to the regional elasticity
of 0.78. But it is still much larger than 0.37—i.e., the aggregate elasticity we empirically
estimated for the Great Recession shown in Table 2. When we feed the realizations of the
discount factor and investment efficiency shocks combined (b and µ), the elasticity decreases
46

slightly to 0.83. Yet, these combined “demand shocks” still cannot account for the observed
stickiness of aggregate wages.34 However, when we feed the benchmark model a combination
of the discount factor shock, the investment efficiency shock and the labor supply shock (ϕ),
the elasticity decreases considerably to 0.31. The combination of these three shocks using
our benchmark model is very close to the observed elasticity for the Great Recession (as
shown in Table 2).
Furthermore, Table 7 shows that, had we estimated the model with aggregate data alone,
we would have found that household demand shocks alone would have nearly matched our
empirical estimates of the aggregate wage elasticity during the Great Recession. In other
words, the model estimated with only aggregate data implies that labor supply shocks are
not necessary to explain the aggregate relationship between wages and employment during
the Great Recession. The reason for this is that under our parameterization with aggregate
data alone the degree of wage stickiness is estimated to be much higher than under our base
parameterization.
We conclude that aggregate wages looked much more sticky relative to their regional
counterparts during the Great Recession because of labor supply shocks that hit the aggregate economy. Since these labor supply shocks push wages and employment in opposite
directions and are differenced out when comparing outcomes across regions in our regional
regressions, they reduced the observed aggregate wage elasticities relative to the observed
regional wage elasticities during the Great Recession.

7.2

What explains the employment decline and slow recovery?

In this section, we begin by focusing on how household demand shocks contributed to the
employment decline between 2007 and 2010 as well as the slow recovery afterwards. Then,
motivated by the results from the previous section, we perform a model-based shock decomposition in order to understand which other shocks were also important drivers of employment
during the Great Recession and its aftermath.
Following our three alternative approaches, Figure 5 compares the employment response
at several horizons to household demand shocks that occurred between 2007 and 2010. As
explained before, we interpret discount factor shocks as the closest model analog to changes
in household demand. Then, the solid and dashed lines show, respectively, the model implied responses to discount factor shocks when using either our benchmark parameterization
(i.e., combining regional and aggregate data in estimation) or the alternative parameterization that uses aggregate data alone in estimation. Specifically, we compute the predicted
34
As in Smets and Wouters (2007), we refer to these shocks as “demand” because they cause both employment and price inflation to move in the same direction.

47

log-change in employment at several horizons when we feed the model with the estimated discount factor shocks between 2007 and 2010 alone, assuming the economy was in a balancedgrowth path in 2007. The dotted line shows the back-of-the-envelope calculation when
extrapolating from estimated regional responses. Using the same state-level data underlying
Table 5, we first regress the log-change in employment from 2007 at different yearly horizons
on the log-change in house prices between 2007 and 2010. Under the assumption that such
house price changes are exogenous and correlated with changes in household demand, this
gives estimates of the reduced-form regional employment response at different horizons to
the combined household demand shocks that occurred between 2007 and 2010.35 This rein Section 4.7. Then,
gional response is the empirical analog to the theoretical response dñ
db̃
in order to compute the aggregate employment response to household demand shocks, we
simply multiply the reduced-form regional response by the aggregate decline in house prices36
between 2007 and 2010 of 30 percent.37
Between 2007 and 2010, we find a similar employment response to household demand
shocks when we use our model under the benchmark parameterization or the back-of-theenvelope calculation. Employment falls between 2.5 and 3.5 percent under both approaches
between 2007 and 2010. This is also very similar in magnitude to the employment response
implied by the regional elasticities to a housing net worth shock in Mian and Sufi (2014).38
However, had we used aggregate data alone in estimation, we would have predicted an
employment decline of approximately 6 percent between 2007 and 2010, assigning a much
bigger role to household demand shocks in explaining the employment decline during the
Great Recession.
Furthermore, under our benchmark parameterization, we find that employment should
have essentially recovered by 2012 had the economy been hit by discount factor shocks alone.
35

House prices are not exogenously determined. However, there is growing evidence that house price
movements during the 2000s were driven by either shifts in mortgage lender technology (Favilukis et al.
(2017)) or shifts in beliefs (Kaplan et al. (2017)). As house prices change, it can generate both wealth effects
and liquidity effects that can drive household demand (Berger et al. (2018) and Mian and Sufi (2014)).
The housing price movements therefore can serve as a proxy for shifts in expectations that can drive local
consumption and employment through local household demand channels.
36
To compute the change in house prices, we use the S&P/Case-Shiller 20-City Composite Home Price
Index, Seasonally adjusted (SPCS20RSA) from https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/SPCS20RSA.
37
It is worth mentioning that an alternative way of performing the back-of-the-envelope calculation is to
first multiply the reduced-form regional response by the observed regional changes in house prices and then
sum over all regions to obtain the aggregate response. The two approaches are equivalent to a first order
approximation and, in this context, they give similar answers. Yet, to the extent that they do differ is a
consequence of Jensen’s inequality.
38
Mian and Sufi (2014) report a non-tradable employment elasticity to housing net worth between 0.2 and
0.4 between 2007 and 2009 (depending on their specification). In order to perform a back-of-the-envelope
calculation, we can simply multiply these elasticities by their reported average housing net worth decline of
9.5 percent. This results in a predicted employment decline between 2 and 3.5 percent.

48

Figure 5: Employment Response to 2007-2010 Household Demand shocks

Note: “Model, benchmark” shows the employment response when feeding the model with the
2007-2010 discount factor shocks, under the benchmark parameterization that combines regional
and aggregate data in estimation. “Model, aggregate data alone” uses the alternative parameterization when we estimate the model with aggregate data only. For “Back-of-the-envelope”, we first
compute the regional employment elasticity at different horizons to regional house price changes
that occurred between 2007-2010. Then, we multiply these elasticities with the aggregate house
price changes between 2007-2010.

49

This is far from the case when either performing our back-of-the-envelope calculation or when
using our model estimated with aggregate data alone. For example, the back-of-the-envelope
calculation implies that by 2013 aggregate employment should have still been depressed by
about 2 percent compared to its long-run level as a result of household demand shocks.
Taken together, we conclude that the combination of economic mechanisms that operate
at the aggregate but not regional level does not generate quantitatively large differences in
the employment response to household demand shocks at short horizons when our model
is estimated using regional and aggregate data combined. However, at longer horizons,
such mechanisms make extrapolating directly from regional employment elasticities more
problematic.
Next, we ask which shocks can account for the employment decline between 2007 and
2010 as well as the slow recovery afterwards. In order to do so, we perform a historical
shock decomposition and report the contributions of each group of shocks to the observed
employment changes. Figure 6 shows the results. The solid line is the actual data. The black
bars are computed by feeding the model with a combination of demand shocks (i.e., discount
factor and investment efficiency shocks) and the policy shocks (i.e., monetary and government
spending shocks). As mentioned, we call the combination of discount factor and investment
efficiency shocks “aggregate demand” because they cause inflation and employment to move
in the same direction. The dark grey bars are computed by feeding the model with the
“aggregate supply” shocks (i.e., productivity and price markups). Finally, the light grey
bars are computed by feeding the labor supply shock alone.
We find that, under our benchmark parameterization (left panel), the combination of
aggregate demand and policy shocks can account for much of the employment decline between 2007 and 2009. The same is true had we estimated the model with aggregate data
alone (right panel). Thus, under both parameterizations, these shocks explain a significant
portion of the employment decline during the early portions of the Great Recession. However, the differences between the two parameterizations are much starker regarding the slow
recovery of employment after 2010. Under our benchmark parameterization, we find that
had the economy only been hit by aggregate demand and policy shocks, employment would
have recovered much faster in the aftermath of the Great Recession.39 Instead, it is the
combination of aggregate supply and labor supply shocks that account for the slow recovery.
By 2012, it is primarily the labor supply shocks that are explaining the sluggish employment
recovery in the U.S. under our base parameterization. However, had we estimated the model
39

When we split the contribution further between demand and policy shocks, we find that policy shocks
do not explain any of the decline in employment during the Great Recession and, if anything, employment
would have recovered even slower without them.

50

Figure 6: Employment shock decomposition

Note: Bars are computed by feeding the model with groups of shocks, one at a time. Combined,
they add up to the data (i.e., the solid line). “Aggregate Demand + Policy” feeds the discount
factor, the investment efficiency, monetary policy, and government spending shocks. “Aggregate
Supply” feeds the price markup and productivity shocks. “Labor Supply” feeds the labor supply
shocks alone. Panel (a) corresponds to our benchmark estimation that combines regional and
aggregate data. Panel (b) uses aggregate data alone in estimation instead.

with aggregate data alone, we would have found that aggregate demand and policy shocks
significantly contributed to the observed persistence in employment decline.40

7.3

Robustness

We performed a number of robustness exercises to explore the sensitivity of our main quantitative results. First, we re-estimated our model using each alternative parameterization of
habits h, Frisch elasticity ν, and indexation ιw from Table 6. Also, we considered setting
λw = 1.5, another common estimate in the literature. All of our main findings described in
the previous sections remain essentially unchanged.
Additionally, in Online Appendix B.9, we show how Figures 5 and 6 change when we
40

These differences echo the point made by Basu and House (2017) that, in most medium-scale DSGE
models, wage stickiness is essential for obtaining persistent real effects of nominal shocks.

51

re-estimate our model using intermediate values of ϑ in our methodology from Section 5.
As a reminder, ϑ = 0 corresponds to our benchmark estimates that only use regional data
in estimating the degree of wage stickiness and ϑ = 2 is equivalent to using aggregate data
alone. We find that our results are essentially unchanged when we set ϑ = 0.5—which puts
more weight in the aggregate data in disciplining the degree of wage stickiness by relaxing
the prior standard deviation on ξw to be 0.5 standard errors of the regional estimates. For
a larger ϑ = 1, the results begin to change qualitatively and are somewhere in between the
case with ϑ = 0 and ϑ = 2, assigning a larger role to demand shocks in explaining the
sluggish employment recovery. Yet, as we discussed in Section 6, the cases of ϑ = 1 and
ϑ = 2 entail a big loss in the fit of the regional New Keynesian Phillips Curve to our regional
data without any significant gain in the fit of the aggregate model to the aggregate data.
Hence, our preferred estimates are those associated with ϑ = 0 or ϑ = 0.5.

7.4

Discussion

To summarize, we find that aggregate demand shocks were the main drivers of aggregate employment during the early parts of the Great Recession, but the wage stickiness necessary for
them to account for the slow employment recovery through 2014 in our model is inconsistent
with the flexibility of wages we observe across US states. Relatedly, directly extrapolating
from regional employment fluctuations to aggregate employment fluctuations in response to
household demand shocks overstates their contribution to the persistent employment decline
following the Great Recession. Moreover, the full set of results highlighted above suggests
that labor supply shocks are needed to explain the observed differences between aggregate
and regional wage elasticities, as well as much of the slow employment recovery after the
Great Recession. We offer a few possible interpretations in light of other existing research.
First, because our model generates wage elasticities that are counterfactually high in
response to aggregate demand shocks alone, if demand forces where indeed key drivers of
both employment and wages between 2007 and 2014, they ought to generate variation in
the measured “labor wedge” through channels other than wage or price stickiness. For
example, Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2017) shows how “confidence” shocks can manifest
themselves as “labor wedge” shocks in a DSGE model.
Second, there is a growing literature among both labor and macro economists suggesting
that structural forces contributed to aggregate employment declines observed during the
Great Recession.41 The secular decline of low skilled primarily manufacturing jobs that
occurred during the 2000s may have resulted in skill mismatch in the aggregate economy
41

See, for example, Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2016), and Charles, Hurst, and Schwartz (2018b)).

52

that manifested itself as an increasing labor wedge. As low skilled jobs are eliminated,
employment falls for low skilled workers. If these workers do not have the skills necessary
to fill the jobs created in the economy, wage pressure on existing jobs will be muted. The
large employment declines with mitigated downward wage pressure can look like a negative
labor supply shock in aggregate data. Both Charles et al. (2018a) and Charles, Hurst, and
Schwartz (2018b) use reduced form estimates to conclude that between 30 and 40 percent
of the employment decline in the U.S. from prior to the Great Recession through 2014 can
be attributed to secular declines in the manufacturing sector. Şahin et al. (2014) develop a
quantitative framework to assess the extent to which a mismatch in skills between job-seekers
and firms that are hiring can lead to increasing unemployment. They also find that upwards
of one-third of the increase in unemployment during the Great Recession can be attributed
to such sectoral mismatch. Additionally, Charles et al. (2016) use detailed household data to
conclude that the housing boom masked some of secular decline in the manufacturing sector
during the early to mid 2000s in aggregate data making it appear that these structural forces
were a “shock” that started at the onset of the Great Recession.
The labor supply shock we identify in our model can potentially be proxying for these
structural skill mismatch forces identified in the literature. Interpreted through that lens,
our findings suggest that a combination of both business cycle and structural forces may
have contributed to the sharp decline in employment during the Great Recession and can
explain why employment rates for prime age workers remain low through 2014. While
cyclical demand forces explained much of the employment decline in the early part of the
recession, it is these structural forces which manifested themselves as a labor supply shock
that potentially explains why employment remained persistently low during the recovery.
Finally, the literature has also highlighted two other factors that could appear as labor
supply shocks during the Great Recession. First, Aguiar et al. (2018) show how increased
leisure technology shifted the labor supply curve for individuals during the 2000s. However,
they estimate that such a change while potentially important for young men had only a very
small effect on total prime age employment rates during the 2007-2014 period. Alternatively,
both Mulligan (2012) and Hagedorn et al. (2016) discuss the importance of increased government transfers at the aggregate level in reducing labor supply. In particular, Hagedorn et al.
(2016) suggest that the large aggregate extension of unemployment benefits during the Great
Recession caused the aggregate unemployment rate within the US to increase by roughly 2
percentage points. However, Chodorow-Reich et al. (2018) use a different methodology and
suggest that the effect of the large unemployment benefit extension only had a negligible
effect on aggregate unemployment rates. To the extent that such aggregate policy changes
did affect aggregate employment during the Great Recession, it would show up as a negative
53

aggregate labor supply shock in our methodology.

8

Conclusion

We have argued that regional business cycles have interesting implications for our understanding of aggregate business cycles, but that drawing such inferences cannot be done by
naively extrapolating from regional variation alone without the aid of a formal model. Then,
we have presented a methodology that combines both regional and aggregate data in order
to estimate a medium-scale New Keynesian DSGE model of a monetary union.
Most of the literature estimates aggregate business cycle models without exploiting regional data. In doing so they have ignored valuable information in regional business cycles
that can help discipline theoretical mechanisms shaping aggregate business cycles but which
may be hard to pin down using aggregate data alone. In particular, we found that the wage
stickiness needed for aggregate demand shocks to jointly explain the behavior of aggregate
employment and wages during the Great Recession and its aftermath is inconsistent with
the flexibility of wages we estimated using cross-region variation. Instead, we found that
something akin to aggregate labor supply shocks —which are differenced out when exploiting cross-region variation—are needed to both explain the slow recovery in employment as
well as why aggregate wages fell little despite the large decline in aggregate employment.
A separate strand of literature naively extrapolates from well- identified regional elasticities to shocks in order to learn about the drivers of aggregate business cycles by performing
back-of-the-envelope calculations. We have also shown that this approach misses economic
channels and shocks that differ between regional and aggregate economies.
Given the wealth of regional data available to researchers that indeed allows for more
credible identification, we have shown how combining regional and aggregate data can help
discipline key structural parameters that under certain assumptions are common between
regional and aggregate economies. As such, we hope this paper provides a bridge between
researchers estimating structural models to perform quantitative exercises and those using
regional variation to estimate reduced-form responses to shocks, further improving our understanding of the causes of aggregate fluctuations as well as the consequences of fiscal and
monetary policy.

54

References
Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2017): “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor
Markets,” Working Paper 23285, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Adao, R., C. Arkolakis, and F. Esposito (2018): “Spatial Linkages, Global Shocks,
and Local Labor Markets: Theory and Evidence,” Mimeo.
Aguiar, M., M. Bils, K. K. Charles, and E. G. Hurst (2018): “Leisure Luxuries
and the Labor Supply of Young Men,” Working Paper.
Angeletos, G.-M., F. Collard, and H. Dellas (2017): “Quantifying Confidence,”
Working Paper w20807, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): “The China Syndrome: Local
Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic
Review, 103, 2121–2168.
Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland (1992): “International Real Business
Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 745–775.
Basu, S. and C. L. House (2017): “Allocative and Remitted Wages: New Facts and
Challenges for Keynesian Models,” Working Paper w22279, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Beraja, M. (2018): “Counterfactual Equivalence in Macroeconomics,” Working Paper.
Beraja, M., A. Fuster, E. Hurst, and J. Vavra (2017): “Regional heterogeneity
and the refinancing channel of monetary policy,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Berger, D., V. Guerrieri, G. Lorenzoni, and J. Vavra (2018): “House Prices and
Consumer Spending,” The Review of Economic Studies, 85, 1502–1542.
Berger, D. and J. Vavra (2018): “Dynamics of the U.S. Price Distribution,” European
Economic Review, 103, 60–82.
Blanchard, O. J. and L. F. Katz (1992): “Regional Revolutions,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 1.
Burstein, A., J. Neves, and S. Rebelo (2003): “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange
Rate Dynamics During Exchange-rate-based Stabilizations,” 50, 1189–2014.
55

Charles, K. K., E. G. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2016): “The Masking of
the Decline in Manufacturing Employment by the Housing Bubble,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 30, 179–200.
——— (2018a): “Housing Booms, Manufacturing Decline and Labor Market Outcomes,”
Economic Journal.
Charles, K. K., E. G. Hurst, and M. Schwartz (2018b): “The Transformation of
Manufacturing and the Decline in U.S. Employment,” Working Paper.
Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2011): “Are Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive
Margins,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 101, 471–75.
Chodorow-Reich, G. (2018): “Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Spending Multipliers:
What Have We Learned?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Chodorow-Reich, G., J. Coglianese, and L. Karabarbounis (2018): “The Macro
Effects of Unemployment Benefit Extensions: a Measurement Error Approach*,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 227–279.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
113, 1–45.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2015): “Understanding
the Great Recession,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 110–167.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): “Risk Shocks,” American
Economic Review, 104, 27–65.
Clarida, R., J. Galı́, and M. Gertler (2001): “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open
versus Closed Economies: An Integrated Approach,” American Economic Review, 91,
248–252.
Şahin, A., J. Song, G. Topa, and G. L. Violante (2014): “Mismatch Unemployment,”
American Economic Review, 104, 3529–64.
Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and F. Schorfheide (2015): “Inflation in the Great
Recession and New Keynesian Models,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
7, 168–196.
56

Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000): “Optimal monetary policy
with staggered wage and price contracts,” Journal of monetary Economics, 46, 281–313.
Evers, M. P. (2015): “Fiscal federalism and monetary unions: A quantitative assessment,”
Journal of International Economics, 97, 59–75.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2017): “Fiscal unions,” American Economic Review, 107,
3788–3834.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2017): “The Macroeconomic Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk Sharing in General
Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 125, 140–223.
Frankel, J. A. and A. K. Rose (1998): “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency
Criteria,” Economic Journal, 108, 1009–1025.
Galı́, J., M. Gertler, and J. David López-Salido (2005): “Robustness of the Estimates of the Hybrid New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52,
1107–1118.
Galı́, J. and T. Monacelli (2008): “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Currency
Union,” Journal of International Economics, 76, 116–132.
Gilchrist, S., R. Schoenle, J. Sim, and E. Zakrajek (2017): “Inflation Dynamics
during the Financial Crisis,” American Economic Review, 107, 785–823.
Giroud, X. and H. M. Mueller (2015): “Firm Leverage and Unemployment during the
Great Recession,” Working Paper w21076, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grigsby, J., E. G. Hurst, and J. Yildirmaz (2018): “State and Time Dependence
in Wage Dynamics: New Evidence from Administrative Payroll Data,” Working Paper,
University of Chicago.
Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2016): “Unemployment
Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects,” Working
Paper w19499, National Bureau of Economic Research.
House, C. L., C. Proebsting, and L. L. Tesar (2017): “Austerity in the Aftermath
of the Great Recession,” Working Paper 23147, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ivancic, L., W. E. Diewert, and K. J. Fox (2011): “Scanner Data, Time Aggregation
and the Construction of Price Indexes,” Journal of Econometrics, 161, 24–35.
57

Jones, C., V. Midrigan, and T. Philippon (2018): “Household Leverage and the
Recession,” Working Paper.
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): “Investment Shocks and
Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 132–145.
Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. L. Violante (2017): “The Housing Boom and Bust:
Model Meets Evidence,” Working Paper 23694, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35–78.
Kehoe, P. J. and F. Perri (2002): “International Business Cycles with Endogenous
Incomplete Markets,” Econometrica, 70, 907–928.
King, R. and S. Rebelo (2000): “Resucitating Real Business Cycles,” in Handbook of
Macroeconomics, North-Holland.
Linde, J., F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2016): “Challenges for Macro Models Used at
Central Banks,” Working Paper, Sveriges Riksbank Research Paper Series.
Mehrotra, N. and D. Sergeyev (2017): “Financial Shocks, Firm Credit and the Great
Recession,” Working Paper, Brown University Working Paper.
Melser, D. (2011): “Constructing High Frequency Price Indexes Using Scanner Data,”
Working Paper.
Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013): “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and
the Economic Slump,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1687–1726.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2011): “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US
Household Leverage Crisis,” American Economic Review, 101, 2132–2156.
——— (2014): “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?” Econometrica, 82,
2197–2223.
Mulligan, C. (2012): The Redistribution Recession: How Labor Market Distortions Contracted the Economy, Oxford University Press.
Mustre-del Ro, J. (2015): “Wealth and Labor Supply Heterogeneity,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 18, 619–634.

58

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014): “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US Regions,” American Economic Review, 104, 753–792.
——— (2017): “Identification in macroeconomics,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (2000): “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15, 339–390.
Park, C. (2017): “Consumption, Reservation Wages, and Aggregate Labor Supply,” Working Paper.
Pistaferri, L. (2003): “Anticipated and Unanticipated Wage Changes, Wage Risk, and
Intertemporal Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, 21, 729–754.
Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe (2003): “Closing Small Open Economy Models,”
Journal of International Economics, 61, 163–185.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” Econometrica, 97, 586–606.
Solon, G., R. Barsky, and J. A. Parker (1994): “Measuring the Cyclicality of Real
Wages: How Important is Composition Bias,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 1–25.
Vavra, J. (2014): “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an
Ss Interpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 215–258.
Werning, I. (2015): “Incomplete markets and aggregate demand,” Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Yagan, D. (2017): “Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession,” Journal of Political
Economy, Forthcoming.

59

Online Appendix:
“The Aggregate Implications of Regional Business
Cycles” (Not for Publication)

Appendix A

Data and Empirics

In this section of the Appendix, we describe the data used in our paper as well as discuss a
variety of empirical robustness specifications. We begin with a discussion of the ACS and
CPS data used to make our demographically adjusted wage indices. Next, we show descriptive statistics for the data underlying our Retail Scanner Price Index. We then discuss issues
with making our Retail Scanner Price Index including discussing how we deal with missing
data. This appendix also discusses how we can use cross-region variation in Retail Price
Index to learn about cross-region variation in a broader price index for a composite consumption good. We end with a description of the data used in both our regional estimation
as well as discussing some robustness exercises for our regional estimation.

Appendix A.1

Creating Composition Adjusted Wage Measures in
the ACS and CPS

To make the composition adjusted wage measures in the 2000 U.S. Census and the 20012012 American Community Survey (ACS), we start with the raw annual data files that we
downloaded directly from the IPUMS website.42 For each year, we restrict our sample to
only males between the ages of 25 and 54, who live outside of group-quarters, are not in
the military, and who have no self-employment income. For each individual, we create a
measure of hourly wages. We do this by dividing annual labor income earned during the
prior twelve month period by reported hours worked during that same time period. Hours
worked are computed by multiplying weeks worked during the prior twelve month period
by usual weekly hours worked. With the data, we compute wage measures for each year
between 2000 and 2014. We wish to stress that within the ACS, the prior year refers to the
prior 12 months before the survey takes place (not the prior calendar year). Individuals
interviewed in January of year t report earnings and weeks worked between January and
December of year t − 1.
Individuals in June of year t report earnings between June of
42

The ACS is just the annual survey which replaces the Census long form in off Census years. The
national representative survey started in 2001. As a result, the Census and ACS questions are identical.

60

year t − 1 and May of year t. Given that the ACS samples individuals in every month, the
wage measures we create for year t can be thought of as representing average wages between
the middle of year t − 1 through middle of year t. This differs slightly from the timing in
the Current Population Survey (CPS) which we discuss below. In the ACS, weeks worked
last year are only consistently measured in intervals. We take the mid-point of the range as
weeks worked during the prior year. Finally, we trim the top and bottom 1 percent of wages
within each year to minimize the effects of extreme measurement error in the creation of our
demographically adjusted wage indices.
Despite our restriction to prime-age males, the composition of workers on other dimensions may still differ across states and within a state over time. As a result, the changing
composition of workers could be explaining some of the variation in nominal wages across
states over time. For example, if lower wage workers are more likely to exit employment
during recessions, time series patterns in nominal wages will appear artificially more rigid
than they actually are. To partially clean our wage indices from these compositional issues,
we follow a procedure similar to Katz and Murphy (1992) by creating a composition adjusted wage measure for each U.S. state and for the aggregate economy (at least based on
observables). Specifically, within each state-year pair, we segment our sample into six age
bins (25-29, 30-34, etc.) and four education groupings (completed years of schooling < 12, =
12, between 13 and 15, and 16+). Our demographic adjusted nominal wage series is defined
as follows:
W^
agekt =

24
X

Sharegkτ W agegkt

(A1)

g=1

where W^
agekt is the demographic adjusted nominal wage series for prime age men in
year t of state k, W agegkt is the average nominal wage for each of our 24 demographic
groups g in year t of state k and Sharegkτ is the share of each demographic group g in
state k during some fixed pre-period τ . By holding the demographic shares fixed over time,
all of the wage movements in our demographic adjusted nominal wage series result from
changes in nominal wages within each group and not because of a compositional shift across
groups. When making our aggregate composition adjusted nominal wage series, we follow
a similar procedure as (A1) but omit the k’s. For the Census/ACS data, we set τ = 2005
when examining cross-state patterns during the Great Recession and set τ = 2000 when
examining time series patterns of aggregate wages during the 2000s.
Figure A1 compares the demographically adjusted nominal wage series in the ACS for
years 2000-2014 with the raw nominal wage series (with no demographics adjustments). For
the raw wage series, we use the exact same sample, but just measure W aget as the average
61

Figure A1: Demographically Adjusted vs. Demographically Unadjusted Nominal Wages,
ACS

27.00

Average Demographically Adjusted Nominal Wage

26.00

25.00

24.00

23.00

22.00

21.00

20.00

19.00

18.00
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

ACS: No Demographic Adj.

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

ACS: Demographic Adj.

Note: Figure compares the demographically adjusted nominal wage series in the ACS used in the
paper to the raw ACS nominal wage series. The x-axis refers to the survey year. The y-axis
measures the average nominal wage (in wage per hour). The sample restrictions are identical
between both series.

62

wage for those individuals with positive wages in year t. As seen from the figure, the two
wage series diverge over time in a way consistent with lower wage demographic groups leaving
the sample over time. The demographically adjusted wage series shows a less steep wage
increase during the 2000s.
To examine longer aggregate trends in composition adjusted wages, we use data from the
March Current Population Survey. We download the data directly from the IPUMS website.
As with the ACS data, we restrict the sample to men between the ages of 25 and 54 who do
not live in group quarters. We also exclude individuals in the military, those with non-zero
business or farm income, and those with non-positive survey weights. The benefit of the
Census/ACS data is that it is large enough to compute detailed labor market statistics at
state levels. However, one drawback of the Census/ACS data is that it not available at an
annual frequency prior to 2000. These longer run trends are an input into our aggregate
shock decomposition procedure discussed in subsequent sections.
We compute the demographic adjusted nominal wage indices using the CPS data analogously to the way we computed the demographic adjusted nominal wage indices within
the Census/ACS data.. Before proceeding, we wish to highlight one difference between the
measurement of wages between the two surveys. Within the March CPS, respondents are
asked to report their earnings over the prior calendar year as opposed to over the prior 12
months. Given this, March CPS respondents in year t report their earnings from year t − 1.
Given this, we refer to wages in year t within the CPS as being the responses provided by
survey respondents in year t + 1. This implies that the timing of the CPS wage data and
the ACS wage data differ, on average, by about 6 months.
We compute demographically adjusted wages in the CPS analogously to our methodology in the ACS. When comparing aggregate time series trends in demographically adjusted
wages between both the ACS and CPS during the 2000s, we set τ = 2000. When computing
aggregate time series trends in demographically adjusted nominal wages for our aggregate
shock decomposition, we set τ = 1975. The demographic adjustments for our long timer series results in the CPS necessitate one further adjustment. The education variables changed
in the CPS in 1992. Despite an attempt to harmonize the education variable by the CPS,
there is still slight seam in the data that causes a discrete downward decline in our demographically adjusted nominal wage series between 1991 and 1992 that is not present in the
raw data. When using the long time series data from the CPS in our shock composition
analysis, we simply smooth out this seam in the data by assuming there was no growth in
our demographically adjusted nominal wage measure between 1991 and 1992. Specifically,
we create a wage index between 1975 and 1991 and then a separate wage index between 1992
and 2016. We then anchor the 1992 value of the second index at the 1991 value of the first
63

Figure A2: Demographically Adjusted vs. Demographically Unadjusted Nominal Wages,
CPS

27.00

Average Demographically Adjusted Nominal Wage

26.00

25.00

24.00

23.00

22.00

21.00

20.00

19.00

18.00
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

CPS: No Demographic Adj.

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

CPS: Demographic Adj.

Note: Figure compares the demographically adjusted nominal wage series in the ACPS CS used
in the paper to the raw CPS nominal wage series between 2000 and 2014. The x-axis refers to
the survey year. The y-axis measures the average nominal wage (in wage per hour). The sample
restrictions are identical between both series.

index. This preserves the relative growth rates of nominal wages in all other years. None of
the results in the paper are altered by this adjustment.
Figure A2 compares the demographically adjusted nominal wage series in the CPS for
years 2000-2014 with the raw nominal wage series (with no demographics adjustments). For
the raw wage series, we use the exact same sample, but just measure W aget as the average
wage for those individuals with positive wages in year t. As seen from the figure, the two wage
series diverge over time in a way consistent with lower wage demographic groups leaving the
sample over time. The demographically adjusted wage series shows a less steep wage increase
during the 2000s. The divergence between the two series in the CPS is nearly identical to
the divergence found in the ACS data.

Appendix A.2

Descriptive Statistics For Retail Scanner Data

Online Appendix Table A1 shows descriptive statistics for the Nielsen Retail Scanner Database
for each year between 2006 and 2013. A few things are of particular note. The sample sizes
- in terms of stores covered - increased from 32,642 stores (in 2006) to 36,316 stores (in
2013). Second, notice that the number of observations (store*week*UPC code) is massive.
64

Table A1: Descriptive Data for the Nielsen Scanner Price Data, By Individual
Year
2006
12,013.1
Number of Obs. (million)
Number of UPCs
725,224
Number of Categories
1,085
Number of Chains
86
Number of Stores
32,642
Number of Zip Codes
10,869
Number of Counties
2,385
Number of MSAs
361
Number of States
49
Transaction Value (US billion)
187.9
Pct. Value used in Price Index 54.3%

2007
12,812.2
762,469
1,086
85
33,745
11,123
2,468
361
49
207.8
50.0%

2008
13,037.5
759,989
1,086
87
34,830
11,357
2,500
361
49
219.6
66.4%

Individual Years
2009
2010
2011
12,968.3 13,153.4 13,646.7
753,984 739,768 742,074
1,083
1,085
1,081
86
86
86
35,343
35,807
35,645
11,476
11,589
11,639
2,508
2,519
2,526
361
361
361
49
49
49
223.7
227.6
235.2
66.0%
68.3%
68.0%

2012
13,618.8
753,318
1,105
82
36,059
11,626
2,547
361
49
239.5
67.7%

2013
13,801.3
769,136
1,113
79
36,316
11,553
2,561
361
49
238.7
67.2%

Combined
Total
Average
105,051.0 13,131.4
1,487,003 750,745
1,113
1,091
88
85
40,350
35,048
11,797
11,404
2,593
2,502
361
361
49
49
1,779.9
222.5
63.9%
63.5%

Note: Table shows descriptive statistics for underlying data that we used to create our Nielsen
Scanner Price Index using the Nielsen Retail Scanner Database.

The database includes over 105 billion unique observations. Third, during the entire sample,
there is about 1.5 million unique UPC codes within the database. On average, each year
contains roughly 750,000 UPC codes. Fourth, the geographic coverage of the database is
substantial in that it includes stores for about 80 percent of all counties within the United
States. Moreover, the number of geographical units (zip codes) is very similar from year
to year highlighting that the geographical coverage is consistent through time. Finally, the
dataset includes between $188 billion and $240 billion of transactions (sales) within each
year. For the time periods we study, this represents roughly 30 percent of total U.S. expenditures on food and beverages (purchased for off-premise consumption) and roughly 2
percent of total household consumption.43

Appendix A.3

Creating the Scanner Data Price Index

In this sub-section, we discuss our procedure for computing the Retail Scanner Price Indices.44 Formally, the first step is to produce a category-level price index which can be
expressed as follows:
43

To make these calculations, we compare the total transaction value in the scanner data to BEA reports of total spending on food and beverages (purchased for off-premise consumption) and total household
consumption.
44
There is a large literature discussing the construction of price indices. Melser (2011) and Ivancic et al.
(2011) discuss problems that arise with the construction of price indices with scanner data. In particular,
if the quantity weights are updated too frequently the price index will exhibit “chain drift”. This concern
motivated us to follow the BLS procedure and keep the quantity weights fixed for a year when computing the
first stage of our indices rather than updating the quantities every month. While we briefly outline the price
index construction in this sub-section, the full details of the procedure are discussed in the Online Appendix
that accompanies our paper.

65

P
L,k
Pj,t

=

L,k
Pj,t−1

×P

i∈(j,k)

i∈(j,k)

pi,t q¯i,y

pi,t−1 q¯i,y

with {t, t − 1} ∈ y + 1 for all months except when t = January and t ∈ y + 1, t − 1 ∈ y
L,k
when t = January, where Pj,t
is the time t chained Laspeyres-type index for category j in
geography/region k, pi,t is the price at time t of good i (in category j and geography/region
k), q¯i,y is the average monthly quantity sold of good i in state k in the prior (base) year
y. For our analysis, geographies will either be U.S. states or the country as a whole. By
fixing quantities at their prior year’s level, we are holding fixed household’s consumption
patterns as prices change. We update the basket of goods each year, and chain the resulting
L,k
indices to produce one chained index for each category in each geography, denoted by Pj,t
.
In this way, the index for months in 2007 uses the quantity weights defined using 2006
quantities and the index for months in 2008 uses the quantity weights defined using 2007
quantities. This implies that the price changes we document below with changing local
economic conditions is not the result of changing household consumption patterns. Fixing
the basket also minimizes the well documented chain drift problems of using scanner data
to compute price indices (Dielwert et al. (2011)). Notice, this procedure is very similar to
the way the BLS builds category-level first stage for their price indices.
When computing our monthly price indices, one issue we confront is how to deal with
missing values from period to period. For example, a product that shows up in month m
may not have a transacted price in month m + 1 making it impossible to compute the price
change for that good between the two months. Missing values may be due to new products
entering the market, old products withdrawing from the market, and seasonality in sales.
Our results in the paper are robust to the various ways we dealt with missing values but
clearly the price indices will generally differ depending on how one treats such data points.
Although we could have used some ad hoc imputation methods like interpolation between
observed prices or keeping a price fixed until a new observation appears, we chose to follow a
more conservative approach. Looking at the above equation, we see that we can handle the
missing values without imputation by restricting the goods that enter the basket to those
that have positive sales over at least one month in the previous year and over the 12 months
of the current year. This is what we do when creating our indices. For example, when
computing the category prices in 2008 we use the reference basket for 2007. In doing so, we
only take the goods that have qi∈k,2007
¯
> 0 and qi∈k,t > 0 for all t ∈ 2008.45 This ensures
that for a given product in the price index during year t, we will have a weight for this
45

The database starts in 2006. As a result, our baseline specification of the 2006 price indices only includes
products that have positive sales in all months of 2006.

66

product based on t − 1 data and we will have a non-missing transaction price in all months
in which the price index is computed during that year.46 The bottom row of Appendix
Table A1 includes the share of all expenditures (value weighted) that were included in our
price index for a given year. In the last five years of the sample, our price index includes
roughly two-thirds of all prices (value weighted).
The second stage of our price indices also follows the BLS procedure in that we aggregate
the category-level price indices into an aggregate index for each location k. The inputs are
the category-level prices and the total expenditures of each category. Specifically, for each
state we compute:
t

Ptk
=
k
Pt−1

N
Y
j=1

L,k
Pj,t
L,k
Pj,t−1

t−1

! S̄j,k +2S̄j,k

t
where S̄j,k
is the share of expenditure of category j in month t in location k averaged
over the year. We calculate the shares using total expenditure on all goods in each category,
even though for the category-level indices some goods were not included due to missing
data. For the purposes of this paper, we make our baseline specification one that fixes the
weights of each category for a year in the same fashion as we did for the category-level
indices. However, as a robustness specification, we allowed the weights in the second step to
be updated monthly. The results using the two methods were nearly identical.

Appendix A.4

Benchmarking Our Nielsen Price Indices

As a consistency check, we compare our Nielsen retail scanner price index for the aggregate
US to the BLS’s CPI for food and beverages. We choose the BLS Food and Beverage CPI
as a benchmark given that approximately two thirds of the goods in our database can be
classified as food or drink. The top panel of Appendix Figure A3 shows that our retail
scanner aggregate price index matches nearly exactly the BLS’s Chained Food and Beverage
CPI at the monthly level between 2006 and 2013.47 The BLS also puts out local price indices
for 27 U.S. metro areas. These price indices have a high degree of sampling variation and the
BLS cautions researchers about using the metro area price indices to compute local changes
46

This procedure implies that we will miss products that are introduced within a given year. These
products, however, will be incorporated in next year’s basket as long as they have continuous sales during
the subsequent calendar year.
47
There is a slight deviation of the two indices starting in 2013. This results from a seam in when the
Nielsen data was upload to the Kilts Center. When we estimate our cross-state regressions, we will exclude
the 2013 data.

67

Figure A3: Nielsen Retail Scanner Price Index vs. BLS Price Index
1.24
Price Index (Normalized Jan 2006 = 1.00)

1.20

1.16

1.12

1.08

1.04

1.20
1.16
1.12
1.08
1.04
1.00

Month-Year
Retail Scanner Price Index

Sep-12

Jan-12

May-12

Sep-11

Jan-11

May-11

Sep-10

Jan-10

May-10

Sep-09

Jan-09

May-09

Sep-08

Jan-08

May-08

Sep-07

Jan-07

May-07

Jan-06

Sep-13

Jan-13

May-13

Jan-12

Sep-12

Sep-11

May-12

Jan-11

May-11

Jan-10

Sep-10

May-10

Sep-09

Jan-09

Sep-08

May-09

Jan-08

May-08

Sep-07

Jan-07

Sep-06

May-07

Jan-06

May-06

Sep-06

0.96

1.00

May-06

Price Index (Normalized Jan 2006 = 1.00)

1.24

Month-Year
NYC Retal Scanner Price Index

BLS Chained Food/Beverage CPI

Panel A: All U.S.

NYC BLS Local Food/Beverage CPI

Panel B: NYC

Note: In the left panel of this figure, we compare our monthly retail scanner index for the US as a
whole (dashed line) to the BLS’s chained food/beverage CPI (solid line). In the right panel of this
figure, we compare our monthly retail scanner index for New York City (dashed line) to the BLS’s
food/beverage CPI for New York City (solid line). We normalize all indices to 1 in January 2006.

in costs of living.48 For three MSAs – NY, Chicago and LA – the BLS releases monthly
price indices. For the other MSAs, the price indices are released bimonthly or semiannually.
For the most part, our Nielsen Retail Price Index matches well the BLS price indices for the
larger MSAs. The bottom panel of Appendix Figure A3 compares our scanner price index
for the New York metro area compared to the BLS’s food and beverage price index for the
New York metro area. The two series track each other closely. For smaller MSAs, the BLS
price indices are very noisy. Given the caution expressed by the BLS in using their local
price indices, this is not surprising. However, we take it as a good sign that our scanner
price index at the local level matches well the BLS price indices for similar goods for the
larger MSAs.

Appendix A.5

A State Level Composite Price Index from the Retail Scanner Index

We use the state level Nielsen Retail Price Indices as a measure of state level prices. There
are two concerns that one may have with such an analysis. First, at the aggregate level,
48

For example, the BLS notes that: ”local-area indexes are more volatile than the national or regional
indexes, and BLS strongly urges users to consider adopting the national or regional CPIs for use in escalator
clauses.” See https://www.bls.gov/cpi/questions-and-answers.htm.

68

food prices and prices for the broader composite CPI did not trend similarly during the
Great Recession. For example, food prices fell less than the price index for the broader CPI
basket between 2008 and 2010. This is not a concern for us because we are only interested
in regional differences in the price indices. We never use the Nielsen Retail Price Indices to
deflate aggregate variables. If the regional variation in food prices is similar to the regional
variation in prices of goods in a composite consumption basket, it does not matter if the
aggregate trends are different between the two series.
More substantively for us is whether the regional variation in the Nielsen Retail Price
Indices does, in fact, measure well regional differences in prices for a broader consumption
basket. Most goods in our Nielsen sample are produced outside a local market and are
simultaneously sold to many local markets. These intermediate production costs represent
the traded portion of local retail prices. If there were no additional local distribution and/or
trade costs, one would expect little variation in retail prices across states; the law of one price
would hold. This would be true for local variation in any tradable price index regardless of
whether those tradable price indices tracked each other at aggregate levels. However, “nontradable” costs do exist for the tradable goods in our sample, including the wages of workers
in the retail establishments, the rent of the retail facility, and expenses associated with local
warehousing and transportation.49 It is these cross-region differences in non-tradable prices
that constitute cross-region differences in the evolution of regional prices indices.
In this section of the Data Appendix, we describe conditions under which our local Retail
Scanner Price Index and a composite local price index differ only by a scaling factor. Under
certain conditions, this procedure holds despite the fact that the aggregate CPI for all goods
and the aggregate CPI for food are not perfectly correlated during the 2000s.
Most goods in our sample are produced outside a local market and are simultaneously sold
to many local markets. These intermediate production costs represent the traded portion
of local retail prices. If there were no additional local distribution and/or trade costs, one
would expect little variation in retail prices across states; the law of one price would hold.
This would be true for local variation in any tradable price index regardless of whether those
tradable price indices tracked each other at aggregate levels. However, “non-tradable” costs
do exist for the tradable goods in our sample, including the wages of workers in the retail
establishments, the rent of the retail facility, and expenses associated with local warehousing
and transportation.50 It is these cross-region differences in non-tradable prices that constitute
cross-region differences in the evolution of regional prices indices.
49

Burstein et al. (2003) document that such local costs represent more than 40 percent of retail prices in
the U.S..
50
Burstein et al (2003) document that distribution costs represent more than 40 percent of retail prices in
the US.

69

Assuming that the shares of these non-tradable costs are constant across states and
identical for all firms in the retail industries, we can express local retail scanner prices, P r ,
in region k during period t as:
r
N T κr
Pt,k
= (PtT )1−κr (Pt,k
)

where PtT is the tradable component of local retail scanner prices in period t (which does not
NT
is the non-tradable component of local retail prices in period t
vary across states) and Pt,k
(which potentially does vary across states). κr represents the share of non-tradable costs in
the total price for the retail scanner goods in our sample.
Analogously, we can express local prices in other sectors for which we do not have data
as:
nr
N T κnr
Pt,k
= (PtT )1−κnr (Pt,k
)
nr
where Pt,k
is local prices in these sectors outside of the grocery/mass-merchandising sector
and κnr is the share of non-tradable costs in the total price for these other sectors.51
Next, assume that the price of household’s composite basket of goods and services in a
r
) and
state can be expressed as a composite of the prices in the retail scanner sectors (Pt,k
prices in the other sectors (Ptnr ):

r s
N T κ̄
Pt,k = (Ptnr )1−s (Pt,k
) ≡ (PtT )1−κ̄ (Pt,k
)

where s is expenditure share of grocery/mass-merchandising goods in an individuals consumption bundle and κ̄ ≡ (1 − s)κnr + sκr is the non-tradable share in the aggregate consumption good, constant across all states.
Given these assumptions, we can transform the variation in retail scanner prices across
states into variation in the broader consumption basket across states. Taking logs of the
above equations and differencing across states we get that the variation in log-prices of the
composite good between two states k and k 0 , ∆ ln Pt,k,k0 , is proportional to the variation in
r
log-retail scanner prices across those same states, ∆ ln Pt,k,k
0 . Formally,

∆ ln Pt,k,k0 =

κ̄
κr

51



r
∆ ln Pt,k,k
0

The grocery/mass-merchandising sector is only one sector within a household’s local consumption bundle.
For example, there are other sectors where the non-tradable share may differ from those in our retail-scanner
data. For exmaple, many local services primarily use local labor and local land in their production (e.g.,
dry-cleaners, hair salons, schools, and restaurants). Conversely, in other retail sectors, the traded component
of costs could be large relative to the local factors used to sell the good (e.g., auto dealerships).

70

If κκ̄r > 1, the local grocery/mass-merchandising sector will use a lower share of nontradables in production than the composite local consumption good. In order to construct the
scaling factor κκ̄r , it would be useful to have local indices for both grocery/mass-merchandising
goods and for a composite local consumption good. While knowing the scaling factor is
interesting in its own right, the results we present in our paper our invariant to the scaling
factor as long as the scaling factor is constant across regions. Creating our Nielsen Retail
Scanner Price Index with a base year of 2006, all subsequent years of the price index will
differ by only the scaling factor κκ̄r . Given our assumptions that this is constant across states
and that we take logs when making our real wage measures, this term will become embedded
in the constant of our cross state regressions. The scaling factor, therefore, will not have
any effect on the elasticities we estimate in the paper. Furthermore, when estimating our
structural Wage Phillips Curve equations using state level data, we can even allow for the
scaling factor to vary over time. Any time variation in the scaling factor will be embedded
in the regression time dummies.
Again, the maintained assumption through out the paper is that the scaling factor is
common across states. We have no reason to believe that the scaling factor varies spatially.
Remember, the scaling factor is the non-tradable share of the regional composite consumption good relative to the non-tradable share of the grocery/mass-merchandising sector.52
For example, if a region has a large housing boom, this will increase both non-tradable costs
in the grocery industry and non-tradable costs in the local composite consumption bundle.
We cannot think of a reason why the ratio of the non-tradable share in groceries to the
non-tradable share in a composite consumption good will evolve differentially across space
in response to sector shocks that move housing prices.

Appendix A.6

Description of Data for Regional Analysis

Here we review the data we use in for our regional estimates of κw .
Nominal Wages: The measure of nominal wages in our main estimating equation (Wkt−1 ,
Wkt , and Wkt+1 ) are our demographically adjusted nominal wages measures calculated from
the ACS. We discuss the procedure for calculating these wages above. To make the state
level measures, we average the demographically adjusted nominal wages calculated using the
52

Some people who have read our paper have thought that the necessary assumption is that the food share
relative to the non-tradable share has to be constant across regions. This is NOT the case. What is important
is the non-tradable portion of the grocery sector relative to the non-tradable share of the composite local
consumption bundle is constant across space. If non-tradable costs are rising (due to rising land prices or
rising local wages), this will increase both non-tradable costs in the grocery sector and non-tradable costs in
a broader local composite consumption good.

71

underlying micro data over all individuals in a given state k in a given year t. We use the
underlying ACS survey weights when making this measure.
Employment Rate: To make state level employment rates, we use data from the U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS). We download directly from the BLS website state level measures
of total employment by year and state level total population by year. We compute state
level employment rates by dividing state measure employment by state level population for
each year.
Prices: Our measure of state level prices is the state level measures of prices made using the
Nielsen Retail Scanner Database. We discuss the creation of these price indices above.
Consumption: For state level consumption, we download measures of state level personal
consumption expenditures (PCE) directly from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
website.
Real Per Capita GDP: Our measure of per-capita GDP also comes directly from the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. We download the data directly from the BEA website.
House Price Data: Our measure of state level house price indices comes from the Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). For the data, we use the FHFA’s state level house price
indices based on all housing transactions. We download the data directly from FHFA website.

Appendix A.7

Controlling for Industry Mix in Our Estimation of
the Regional Wage Phillips Curve

When estimating of our Wage Phillips Curve using regional data we assume that all states
have the same parameters. One concern with our estimation, therefore, is that states could
potentially differ in their underlying wage setting parameters. This could be the case if the
parameters differ by industry and industrial mix differs by state. For example, unions are
more prevalent in the manufacturing sector and manufacturing employment is very spatially
concentrated.
To explore the robustness of our results to the possibility that different regions have
different exposures to aggregate shocks because of different industry composition, we perform two additional exercises. First, we include the state’s 2006 manufacturing share as
an additional regressor in our estimation of the Wage Phillips Curve using regional data.
Second, we omit any state with with a 2006 manufacturing share greater than 15 percent
72

and then re-estimate our Wage Phillips curve only using data from the remaining states.
The 13 states that had a 2016 manufacturing share greater than 15 percent were: Alabama,
Arkansas, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Mississippi, North Carolina, Ohio,
South Carolina, Tennessee, and Wisconsin.
Our IV estimates of κw are nearly identical under these two robustness exercises to what
we report in our base specification within the text. In particular, our estimates of κw was
0.38 when we include the state’s 2006 manufacturing share as a control and was 0.42 when
the high manufacturing states were excluded completely from the regression. The fact that
the estimate of κw is similar when the manufacturing states were excluded suggests that
if the underlying parameters of the Wage Phillips Curve differ across states with differing
industrial mixes, the parameters are not differing by much.

Appendix B

Model and Estimation

We begin this section by stating all equations describing the non-linear equilibrium in our
economy. Then, we derive the log-linearized equations describing the log-linearized equilibrium. Next, we prove the Lemmas 1 and 2. We then derive the aggregate and regional shock
elasticities described in section 4.7. Finally, we discuss our Bayesian estimation procedure,
along with the aggregate data we use to estimate the model, and show how some of our main
results change for intermediate values of ϑ that put more weight on the aggregate data when
estimating the degree of wage stickiness than in our benchmark case.

Appendix B.1

Shocks

1. Retail markup shock:
p
,
log λpkt = ρp log λpkt−1 + upt + vkt

upt ∼ N (0, σp2 ),

p
vkt
∼ N (0, σ̃p2 ).

(A2)
(A3)

2. Neutral technology shock:
zt ≡ Ψt /Ψt−1 ,
log zt = (1 − ρz ) log γ + ρz log zt−1 + uzt ,
uzt ∼ N (0, σz2 )

73

(A4)
(A5)
(A6)

3. Tradable technology shock:
x
,
log Axkt = (1 − ρx ) log Ψt + ρx log Axkt−1 + vkt
x
∼ N (0, σ̃x2 ).
vkt

(A7)
(A8)

4. Retail technology shock:
y
,
log Aykt = (1 − ρy ) log Ψt + ρy log Aykt−1 + vkt
y
vkt

∼ N (0, σ̃y2 ).

(A9)
(A10)

5. Demand shock:
b
log bkt = ρb log bkt−1 + ubt + vkt

ubt ∼ N (0, σb2 ),

b
vkt
∼ N (0, σ̃b2 );

(A11)
(A12)

6. Marginal efficiency of investment shock:
µ
log µkt = ρµ log µkt−1 + uµt + vkt

uµt ∼ N (0, σµ2 ),

µ
vkt
∼ N (0, σ̃µ2 );

(A13)
(A14)

7. Labor supply shock:
ϕ
log ϕkt = ρϕ log ϕkt−1 + uϕt + vkt

uϕt ∼ N (0, σϕ2 ),

ϕ
vkt
∼ N (0, σ̃ϕ2 ).

(A15)
(A16)

8. Government spending shock:
g
log gkt = ρg log gkt−1 + ugt + vkt
,
g
ugt ∼ N (0, σg2 ), vkt
∼ N (0, σ̃g2 ).

(A17)
(A18)

9. Monetary Policy shock:
log ηt = ρη log ηt−1 + uηt

(A19)

uηt ∼ N (0, ση2 ).

(A20)

74

Appendix B.2

Detrending

There are two sources of non-stationarity: retailer technology and inflation. We can construct
stationary variables as follows
• Stationary variables:
Nkt ,

y
,
Nkt

x
Nkt
,

ukt ,

qkt ,

Rt .

(A21)

• Scaled by technology:
ykt =

Ykt
,
Ψt

Ckt
,
Ψt

ckt =

ikt =

Ikt
,
Ψt

Kkt
Kx
Ky
y
x
, kkt
= kt , kkt
= kt ,
Ψt
Ψt
Ψt
Xkt
GDPt
Gkt
xkt =
, gdpt =
. gkt =
Ψt
Ψt
Ψt
kkt =

K̄kt
,
Ψt
Ax
axkt = kt ,
Ψt
(A22)

k̄kt =

• Scaled by price level:
pxkt =

Ptx
Pkt

K
Rkt
,
Pkt

K
rkt
=

mckt =

P̃kt
p̃kt =
,
Pkt

M Ckt
,
Pkt
Γ̃pkt,t+s

Pkt
,
Pkt−1
Pkt
.
= Γpkt,t+s
Pkt+s

(A23)

Bkt
,
Ψt Pkt
Pkt Ψt
= Γw
.
kt,t+s
Pkt+s Ayt+s

(A24)

πkt =

• Scaled by technology and price level:
τkt =
wkt =

Tkt
,
Ψt Pkt

Wkt
,
Ψt Pkt

Appendix B.3

w
πkt
=

Dkt =

Dkt
,
Ψt Pkt

λkt = Ψt Pkt Λkt ,

W̃kt
Wkt
, w̃kt =
,
Wkt−1
Wkt

Γ̃w
kt,t+s

Bkt =

Non-linear equilibrium conditions

• Marginal utility of consumption:
λkt =

bkt φkt
ckt − hckt−1

(A25)

• Euler equation for bonds:

λkt = βEt

λkt+1 Rt
zt+1 πkt+1


(A26)

• Capital utilization:
K
rkt
= a0 (ukt ) = ζuχkt

75

(A27)

• Tobin’s Q: (Euler equation for capital):

λkt = βEt

K
ukt+1 − a(ukt+1 ) + (1 − δ)qkt+1
λkt+1 rkt+1
zt+1
qkt


(A28)

• Investment:


ikt zt 0 ikt zt
−
S
λkt = qkt λkt µkt 1 − S
ikt−1
it−1
"

2 
#
λkt+1
i
z
ikt+1 zt+1
kt+1 t+1
+ βEt
qkt+1 µkt+1
S0
zt+1
ikt
ikt




ikt zt
it−1



(A29)

• Wage setting:
Et

∞
X



(βξw )s Nkt+s (j) bkt+s φkt+s ϕkt+s Nkt+s (j)ν λw − λkt+s Γ̃w
kt,t+s wkt w̃kt (j) = 0, (A30)

s=0

• Wage law of motion:
1
1−λw

1 = (1 − ξw )w̃kt
• Wage inflation:

+ ξw



Γ̃w
kt−1,t

 1−λ1

w

(A31)

wkt zt πkt
wkt−1

(A32)



(βξp )s λkt+s ykt+s (i) p̃kt (i) − λpkt+s mckt+s = 0

(A33)

w
πkt
=

• Price setting:
Et

∞
X
s=0

• Price law of motion:
1
1−λp

1 = (1 − ξp )p̃kt

+ ξp



Γ̃pt−1,t

1
 1−λ
p

(A34)

• Cost minimization:
kkt (i)
α1
wkt
=
,
y
K
Nkt (i)
1 − α1 − α2 rkt
kkt (i)
α1 pxkt
=
K
xkt (i)
α2 rkt

76

(A35)
(A36)

• Marginal cost:

mckt =

K
rkt
α1

α1 

pxkt
α2

α2 

wkt
1 − α1 − α2

1−α1 −α2
(A37)

• Tradable production:
x αx
x −αx
wkt = (1 − αx )pxkt (axkt )1−αx (kkt
) (Nkt
)

(A38)

K
x αx −1
x 1−αx
Rkt
= αx pxkt (axkt )1−αx (kkt
)
(Nkt
)

(A39)

• Effective capital:
kkt =

ukt k̄kt−1
zt

(A40)

• Physical capital law of motion:



(1 − δ)k̄kt−1
ikt zt
k̄kt =
+ µkt 1 − S
ikt
zt
ikt−1

(A41)

• Production function: (ignoring price and wage dispersion)
y α1 α2
y
ykt = (kkt
) xkt Nkt

1−α1 −α2

−F

(A42)

• Taylor rule:
Rt
=
R



Rt−1
R

ρR "

π t  φπ
π



gdpt /gdpt−1 zt
γ

φX #1−ρR
ηt

(A43)

• Government spending:


1
gkt = 1 − g ykt
kt

(A44)

gdpt = ct + it + gt

(A45)

• GDP identity:

• Goods market clearing:
ykt = ckt + ikt + gkt +

77

a(ukt) k̄kt−1
zt

(A46)

• Labor market clearing:
y
x
Nkt = Nkt
+ Nkt

(A47)

y
x
kkt = kkt
+ kkt

(A48)

• Capital market clearing:

• Tradable good market clearing:
X

xkt =

k

X

x αx
x 1−αx
(kkt
) (axkt Nkt
)

(A49)

k

• Island resource constraint (balance of payments):
Bkt −

 x αx x x 1−αx

Rt−1
Bkt−1 = pxkt (kkt
) (akt Nkt )
− xkt + τkt + gkt
πkt zt

(A50)

• Budget constraint of federal government:
Dkt −

Appendix B.4

X
Rt−1
[gkt + τkt ]
Dt−1 =
πkt zt
k

(A51)

Log-linearized equilibrium conditions

Lowercase variables with “ ˆ ” denote log-deviations from the balanced-growth path.
• Marginal utility of consumption:
λ̂kt = b̂kt + φ̂kt +

h
1
ĉkt−1 −
ĉkt
1−h
1−h

(A52)

where the endogenous component of the discount factor follows
!
φ̂kt+1 = φ̂kt + φ0 B̂kt−1 −

X

B̂kt−1

k

• Euler equation for bonds:
h
i
λ̂kt = R̂t + Et λ̂kt+1 − ẑt+1 − π̂kt+1

(A53)

K
r̂kt
= χûkt

(A54)

• Capital utilization:

78

• Tobin’s Q: (Euler equation for capital):


h
i
 k 
β(1 − δ)
β(1 − δ)
Et [q̂kt+1 ] + 1 −
Et r̂kt+1 − Et R̂t − π̂kt+1
q̂kt =
γ
γ

(A55)

• Investment:
2

0 = q̂kt + µ̂kt − γ S

00

h

i

2

00

h

îkt − îkt−1 + ẑt + βγ S Et îkt+1 − îkt + ẑt+1

i

(A56)

• New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve (NKWPC):
 w

1
1
β
w
Et π̂kt+1
− ιw π̂kt −
(π̂kt
− ιw π̂kt−1 ) +
(ĉkt − hĉkt−1 ) + ν n̂kt + ϕ̂kt ,
κw
κw
1−h
(A57)
(1−βξw )(1−ξw )
λw −1
where κw =
is the slope of the NKWPC.
ξw
λw (1+ν)−1
ŵkt =

• Wage inflation:
w
π̂kt
= ŵkt + ẑt + π̂kt − ŵkt−1

(A58)



π̂kt − ιp π̂kt−1 = βEt [π̂kt+1 − ιp π̂kt ] + κp mc
c kt + λ̂pkt

(A59)

• Price setting:

where κp =

(1−ξp β)(1−ξp )
ξp

is the slope of the NKPC.

• Cost minimization:
y
y
K
k̂kt
− N̂kt
= ŵkt − r̂kt

(A60)

y
K
k̂kt
− x̂kt = p̂xkt − r̂kt

(A61)

K
mc
c kt = α1 r̂kt
+ α2 p̂xkt + (1 − α1 − α2 )ŵkt

(A62)

• Marginal cost:

• Tradable production:
h
i
x
− n̂xkt
ŵkt = p̂xkt + (1 − αx )âxkt + αx k̂kt
h
i
K
x
r̂kt
= p̂xkt + (1 − αx )axkt + (1 − αx ) n̂xkt − k̂kt

79

(A63)
(A64)

• Effective capital:
k̂kt = ûkt + k̄ˆkt−1 − ẑt

(A65)


i 
i
1−δ h
1 − δ hˆ
ˆ
k̄kt−1 − ẑt + 1 −
µ̂kt + îkt
k̄kt =
γ
γ

(A66)

• Physical capital law of motion:

• Production function:
ŷkt =

i
y+F h
y
α1 k̂kt
+ α2 x̂kt + (1 − α1 − α2 )n̂ykt
y

(A67)

• Taylor rule:



d t − gdp
d t−1 + ẑt
+ η̂t
R̂t = ρR R̂t−1 + (1 − ρR ) φπ π̂t + φX gdp
• Government spending:
ĝkt = ŷkt +

1−g g
ˆ
g kt

(A68)

(A69)

• GDP identity:
k
d t = ŷt − r k ût
gdp
y

(A70)

c
i
g
rk k
ŷkt = ĉkt + îkt + ĝkt +
ûkt
y
y
y
y

(A71)

• Goods market clearing:

• Labor market clearing:
N̂kt =

Nx x Ny y
N̂ +
N̂
L kt
L kt

(A72)

kx x
ky y
k̂kt + k̂kt
k
k

(A73)

• Capital market clearing:
k̂kt =
• Tradable good market clearing:
X
k

x̂kt =

X

x
αx k̂kt
+ (1 − αx ) [âxkt + n̂xkt ]

k

80

(A74)

• Island resource constraint (balance of payments):
B̂kt − β

px (k x )αx (N x )1−αx
B

−1

h

i

B̂kt−1 + R̂t−1 − π̂kt − ẑt =
n
o g
τ
x
αx k̂kt
+ (1 − αx ) [âxkt + n̂xkt ] − x̂kt + ĝkt + τ̂kt
B
B

(A75)

• Budget constraint of federal government:
h
i Xh g
τ i
ĝkt + τ̂kt
D̂t − β −1 D̂t−1 + R̂t−1 − π̂t − ẑt =
D
D
k

(A76)

• Price of tradables:
π̂tx = π̂kt + p̂xkt − p̂xkt−1

81

(A77)

Appendix B.5

Proof of Lemma 1

The proof proceeds as follows. First, we aggregate the economy by adding up all loglinearized model equations over k. Since this amounts to dropping the island subscripts,
we will not write them out explicitly. Second, we show that, in the aggregate log-linearized
economy, the tradable and non-tradable sectors collapse to one sector using Cobb-Douglas
technology in labor and capital. This result is established in claims 1–4. Third, assuming
that the endogenous discount factor only depends on island level bonds in log-deviations from
the aggregate, it disappears from the system of equation characterizing aggregate variables
while achieving stationary of island level economies. Finally, we show that the sum of all
island-level household bond holdings aggregates up to the federal debt.
• Claim 1: n̂xt = n̂yt = n̂t .
Note that the tradable shock has no aggregate component, and thus axt = 0. This
implies that (A74) becomes x̂t = αx k̂tx + (1 − αx )n̂xt , and (A63) becomes ŵt − p̂xt =
αx (k̂tx − N̂tx ). Next, subtract (A61) from (A60) to get x̂t − n̂yt = ŵt − p̂xt . These three
equations can hold together iff n̂xt = n̂yt . Finally, (A72) implies that they equal n̂t .
• Claim 2: k̂ty = k̂tx = k̂t
Claim 1 implies that (A60), (A63), (A64) become
k̂ty − n̂t = ŵt − r̂tK ,
ŵt = p̂xt + αx [ktx − n̂t ] ,
h
i
K
x
x
r̂t = p̂t + (1 − αx ) n̂t − k̂t .

(A78)
(A79)
(A80)

Subtracting (A80) from (A79) implies that ŵt − r̂tK = k̂tx − n̂t . Combine this with (A78)
to get k̂ty = k̂tx . The capital market clearing condition (A73) implies that they equal
k̂t .
• Claim 3: mc
c t = (α1 + α2 αx )r̂tK + (1 − α1 − α2 αx )ŵt
The previous claims imply that the aggregate cost minimization equation is
k̂t − n̂t = ŵt − r̂tK
Combine this with (A79) to get
p̂xt = (1 − αx )ŵt + αx r̂tK .
82

Substituting for p̂xt in the marginal cost equation (A62) proves the claim.
h
i
• Claim 4: ŷt = y+F
(α
+
α
α
)
k̂
+
(1
−
α
−
α
α
)n̂
1
2 x t
1
2 x
t
y
Plug in the previous results into the production function (A67).
• Claim 5: the endogenous discount factor cancels from (A52).
• Claim 6: B̂t = D̂t .
Combine the island resource constraint (A75) with tradable market clearing (A74),
then compare to federal budget constraint (A76).

Appendix B.6

Proof of Lemma 2

Let tilde refer to log-deviations from aggregates. Since we assume that islands are identical
in the balanced-growth path, the following holds for any variable
x̃kt = log(xkt ) − log(xt )


= log(xkt ) − log(x) − log(xt ) − log(x)
= x̂kt − x̂t
The proof consists of rewriting equations and verifying that aggregate variables cancel. The
resulting system of equations is identical to the original one where we have set R̂t = P̂tx = 0
and dropped the market clearing condition in the intermediate goods market.

Appendix B.7

Derivation of Aggregate v.

Regional Shock re-

sponses
In the simplified model, the system of equations characterizing the aggregate equilibrium
behavior of n̂t , ŵt is:

0 = βEt [ŵt+1 − ŵt ] − (ŵt − ŵt−1 ) + κw ((1 − α + ν)n̂t − ŵt )
0 = −Et [(1 − α)n̂t+1 ] + ϕy (1 − α)n̂t − (1 − ρb )b̂t + (1 − α)n̂t
Assuming the endogenous discount factor follows φ̃kt+1 = φ̃kt + φ0 B̃kt−1 , the system characterizing the regional equilibrium behavior of ñkt , w̃kt , B̃kt is:

83

0 = βEt [w̃kt+1 − w̃kt ] − (w̃kt − w̃kt−1 ) + κw ((1 + ν)ñkt − w̃kt )
0 = −Et [ñkt+1 ] − (1 − ρb )b̃kt + ñkt − φ0 B̃kt−1
βpx x
0 = B̃kt−1 − β B̃kt −
ñkt
B
Using the method of undetermined coefficients, we find the aggregate policy functions:
κw (1 − α + ν)
n̂t + aww ŵt−1
1 + κw − β(ρb + aww − 1)
1 − ρb
1
b̂t
n̂t =
(1 − α) (1 − ρb ) + ϕy

ŵt =

and regional policy functions:
w̃kt = awb b̃kt + aww w̃kt−1 + awB̃ B̃kt−1
ñkt = anb b̃kt +
B̃kt = −

(1 − βaB̃B̃ )
βpx x
B

B̃kt−1

px x
anb b̃kt + aB̃B̃ B̃kt−1
B

where {anb , awb , aww , awB̃ , aB̃B̃ } solve:
0 = β(aww )2 − (1 + β + κw )aww + 1
βpx x
0 = (1 − βaB̃B̃ )(1 − aB̃B̃ ) −
φ0
B
(1 − ρb )
anb =
(1 − ρb ) + β1 − aB̃B̃
κw (1 + ν)
1 + κw − βaww
anb
1 + κw − β(aww + ρb − 1) 1 + κw − βaww + β(1 − aB̃B̃ )
κw (1 + ν)
(1 − βaB̃B̃ )
=
βpx x
1 − aB̃B̃ + β(1 − aww ) + κw
B

awb =
awB̃

The expressions for the employment responses and wage response on impact to a discount factor shock follow directly from the policy functions evaluated at t = 0 and setting
ŵt−1 = w̃t−1 = B̃kt−1 = 0. The expressions for the wage elasticities follow from dividing the
employment and wage responses on impact.

84

Appendix B.8

Bayesian Estimation and Aggregate Data

The model is estimated via full-information Bayesian techniques in the tradition of Linde
et al. (2016), Christiano et al. (2014) and Justiniano et al. (2010). We follow their choices
as closely as possible while ensuring consistency with our state-level data and regressions.
All estimations were done with Dynare. We use the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, using 2
chains with 120,000 draws, discarding 24,000 of them.
The likelihood is based on seven US time series: the annual growth rate of real GDP,
of real consumption, of real investment, and of the real wage, then log employment, inflation, and the federal funds rate. There are a few differences in the data compared to the
aforementioned literature estimating medium scale New Keynesian models. First, our frequency is annual because our state-level data is not available on a quarterly basis. Higher
frequency variables are annualized by taking the mean of all observations within a calendar
year. This time aggregation is always done for levels, not the growth rates. Second, for
wages and employment, we use the aggregated versions of our state-level measures. That
is, the composition-adjusted male wages and male employment rate from Section 3. Third,
we use the CPI instead of the GDP deflator to deflate nominal variables as well as to define
inflation. This is because, as we show in Section 2, the CPI is consistent with the Nielsen
scanner data.
Table A2 below clarifies what each of the underlying aggregate time series are. The time
span is 1975–2015, again dictated by the availability of state-level data. The observable
Table A2: Raw data downloaded from FRED
name
Nominal GDP (GDP)
Nondurable consumption ( PCND )
Services consumption (PCESV)
Durable consumption (PCDG)
Private investment ( GPDI)
CPI (CPIAUCSL)
Population (CNP16OV )
Federal funds rate (FF)

notation

units

seasonally adj.

Y
Cnd
Cse
Cdu
I
P
P op
R

billions of $, annual
billions of $, annual
billions of $, annual
billions of $, annual
billions of $, annual
index 2009 = 100
thousands of persons
percent, annualized

X
X
X
X
X
X

series is constructed as follows. First, we aggregate to an annual frequency by taking the
mean of the monthly/quarterly observations. Second, P op is HP-filtered with λ = 10, 000
to get rid of spurious hikes in its growth rate due to revisions after national censuses.

85

Then, the observation equations are defined as



Yt
= 100 · ∆ log
P opt · Pt


Cnd,t + Cse,t
= 100 · ∆ log
P opt · Pt


It + Cdu,t
= 100 · ∆ log
P op · P
 t t
Wt
= 100 · ∆ log
Pt


Ht
= 100 · log
P opt

= x̂t − x̂t−1 + ẑt + 100 log γ

(A81)

= ĉt − ĉt−1 + ẑt + 100 log γ

(A82)

= ît − ît−1 + ẑt + 100 log γ

(A83)

= ŵt − ŵt−1 + ẑt + 100 log γ

(A84)

= N̂t + log N

(A85)

πobs = 100 · ∆ log Pt

= π̂t + 100 log π

(A86)

Robs = Rt

= R̂t + 100 log R.

(A87)

xobs
cobs
iobs
wobs
Nobs

Finally, and following Christiano et al. (2014), we take the sample mean out of
{xobs , cobs , iobs , wobs } to minimize the problem of violating balanced-growth at low frequencies.
This would be particularly problematic given our goal of interpreting wage and employment
movements in the Great Recession, because real wages have been growing much less than
consumption, investment, or GDP since the 90’s.

Appendix B.9

Sensitivity to varying ϑ

We re-estimate our model using intermediate values for ϑ in our methodology of Section 5.
Then, we reproduce of our main results for the Great Recession in Figures 5 and 6.

86

Figure A4: Employment Response to 2007-2010 Household Demand shocks

87

Figure A5: Employment shock decomposition

88

