NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BRIGHT SIDE OF PATENTS
Joan Farre-Mensa
Deepak Hegde
Alexander Ljungqvist
Working Paper 21959
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21959

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

We are grateful to Lauren Cohen, Wesley Cohen, Lee Fleming, Alberto Galasso, Zorina Khan, Josh
Lerner, Alan Marco, Ramana Nanda, Bhaven Sampat, Ted Sichelman, Scott Stern, Rick Townsend,
Rosemarie Ziedonis, and audiences at the NBER Productivity Lunch Seminar, the Center for the Protection
of Intellectual Property at George Mason University, University of Minnesota, University Carlos III
(Madrid), Singapore Management University, Nanyang Technological University, National University
of Singapore, and Hong Kong University for helpful comments. We also thank the Institute for Exceptional
Growth Companies for granting access to the NETS database. Hegde gratefully acknowledges the
support of the United States Patent and Trademark Office’s Thomas Alva Edison Visiting Scholars
program and the Kauffman Junior Faculty Fellowship. The views and comments expressed herein
are solely the opinion of the authors, do not reflect the performance of duties in the authors’ official
capacities, and are not endorsed by, nor should be construed as, any viewpoint official or unofficial
of the United States Patent and Trademark Office or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The authors confirm to the best of their knowledge that no information contained herein is privileged,
confidential or classified.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Joan Farre-Mensa, Deepak Hegde, and Alexander Ljungqvist. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Bright Side of Patents
Joan Farre-Mensa, Deepak Hegde, and Alexander Ljungqvist
NBER Working Paper No. 21959
February 2016
JEL No. D23,G24,L26,O34
ABSTRACT
Motivated by concerns that the patent system is hindering innovation, particularly for small inventors,
this study investigates the bright side of patents. We examine whether patents help startups grow and
succeed using detailed micro data on all patent applications filed by startups at the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO) since 2001 and approved or rejected before 2014. We leverage the fact
that patent applications are assigned quasi-randomly to USPTO examiners and instrument for the probability
that an application is approved with individual examiners’ historical approval rates. We find that patent
approvals help startups create jobs, grow their sales, innovate, and reward their investors. Exogenous
delays in the patent examination process significantly reduce firm growth, job creation, and innovation,
even when a firm’s patent application is eventually approved. Our results suggest that patents act as
a catalyst that sets startups on a growth path by facilitating their access to capital. Proposals for patent
reform should consider these benefits of patents alongside their potential costs.

Joan Farre-Mensa
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 218
Boston, MA 02163
jfarremensa@hbs.edu
Deepak Hegde
Stern School of Business
New York University
40 West Street
Suite 722
New York, NY 10012
dhegde@stern.nyu.edu

Alexander Ljungqvist
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu

Patents strike a delicate balance between the benefits of rewarding inventors and the costs of
blocking future inventions (Nordhaus 1969). Whether the U.S. patent system strikes the right
balance is currently the subject of much debate. Academic studies have emphasized the “dark
side” of patents, arguing that patent holders engage in frivolous litigation, demand excessive
payments from alleged infringers, and stifle innovation, particularly for small entrepreneurial
firms (Heller and Eisenberg 1998; Lemley and Shapiro 2007; Cohen, Gurun, and Kominers
2014; Tucker 2014). In a 2015 letter to the U.S. Congress, 51 economists and legal scholars urge
reform of the patent system, noting that “the preponderant economic picture these [academic]
studies present is that patent litigation now imposes substantial costs, particularly on small and
innovative firms, and that these costs have tended overall to reduce R&D, venture capital
investment, and firm startups” (Asay et al. 2015).1 Rising to the challenge, Congress is currently
considering no fewer than six patent reform bills.
Mounting evidence on the dark side of patents and the accompanying chorus of calls for
patent reform beg the question: do patents have a “bright side”? Economists agree that in theory,
patent rights should benefit and incentivize inventors. Yet these benefits have been hard to
establish empirically, leading Boldrin and Levine (2013) to observe: “There is no empirical
evidence that [patents] serve to increase innovation and productivity.”
Our goal is to identify whether patents have a bright side and, if so, shed light on the
channels through which this bright side operates. Specifically, we investigate whether patents
play a causal role in innovative startups’ growth, follow-on innovation, and economic success.
1

The letter is just one of several examples arguing the patent system is failing the needs of the U.S. economy.
Writing with Richard Posner, Gary Becker (2013) opined that “reforms of the [patent] system are needed that
greatly narrow the granting of patents in order to cut down … costly and unproductive litigation.” The Economist
joined the chorus of those calling for patent reform, asserting that “Patents are protected by governments because
they are held to promote innovation. But there is plenty of evidence that they do not. […] A top-to-bottom reexamination of whether patents … actually do their job, and even whether they deserve to exist, is long overdue.”
(The Economist, Aug. 8, 2015).

1

We focus on startups both because they are a key source of innovation, economic growth, and
job creation, and because the literature on the dark side of patents portrays small inventors as
suffering the most from the shortcomings of the patent system: they likely face the greatest
resource constraints when applying for patents, enforcing their patent rights, and defending
themselves when sued by larger rivals. An important contribution of our approach, which we
detail shortly, is that we exploit plausibly exogenous variation in the patent approval process.
This allows us to identify the causal effects of patents on economic activity.
We find that patents indeed have a bright side. We focus on the 45,817 first-time patent
applications filed by U.S. startups at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) since 2001
that received a preliminary decision by 2009 and a final decision by December 31, 2013. Our
analysis shows that patent approvals help startups create jobs, grow their sales, innovate, and
eventually succeed. Our causal estimates suggest that the approval of a startup’s first patent
application increases its employment growth over the next five years by 36 percentage points on
average. The effect on sales growth (a 51 percentage-point increase) is even larger. A first patent
grant also has a strong causal effect on a firm’s ability to continue innovating, increasing both
the number of subsequent patents the firm is granted (by 49%) and their quality (with the average
number of citations per subsequent patent increasing by 26%). In addition, patent grants more
than double the probability that a startup is eventually listed on a stock exchange—a commonly
used metric of startup success.
A chief criticism of the U.S. patent system is that it takes too long to approve or reject patent
applications, thus prolonging uncertainty about property rights and diminishing the value of
patents to their owners (Cohen and Merrill 2003; Jaffe and Lerner 2004).2 We find that

2

On average, it takes the USPTO 1.75 years to make a preliminary decision on the patent applications in our
sample, and a full 3.2 years to make a final decision—a lifetime for a startup.

2

processing delays indeed impair startups’ ability to create jobs, grow their sales, be innovative,
and gain a stock market listing. These negative effects are substantial: each year of delay in
reviewing a firm’s first patent application that is eventually approved reduces the firm’s
employment and sales growth over the five years following approval by 21 and 28 percentage
points, respectively. Delays also negatively affect subsequent patenting, with each year of delay
reducing the number of subsequent patents the firm is granted by 13% and the number of
citations-per-patent these patents receive by 7%. Delays even reduce the probability of going
public, by as much as a half for each year of delay. Economically, a two-year delay has the same
negative impact on a startup’s growth and success as outright rejection of the patent application.
What are the mechanisms through which early patenting conveys such large and persistent
benefits to startups? We find that first-time patent grants play a causal role in helping startups
raise external finance. A patent grant increases a startup’s probability of securing funding from
professional investors (venture capitalists, or VCs) over the next three years by 2.3 percentage
points—a 53% increase over the unconditional probability. The effect is strongest for startups
that (i) had raised little or no VC funding before the USPTO’s decision, (ii) were founded by
inexperienced entrepreneurs, (iii) are located in areas where attracting investors’ attention is
harder, and (iv) operate in the IT sector. We interpret these findings as evidence that patents
facilitate startups’ access to capital by mitigating information frictions between entrepreneurs
and potential investors. Access to capital in turn sets startups on a growth path that transforms
ideas into products and services that generate jobs, revenues, and follow-on innovation.
One reason the economic effects of patent grants and processing delays remain understudied
is that researchers, until recently, have lacked access to data on rejected patent applications. A
unique feature of our study is that we have access to the USPTO’s internal databases, which

3

contain detailed information on the review histories of all applications, whether approved or
rejected.3 Of course, comparing the outcomes of firms whose applications are approved to those
whose applications are rejected poses an identification challenge: higher quality firms are both
more likely to produce patentable innovations and to grow into successful companies. Thus, any
observed correlation between patent grants and firm outcomes could be spurious. Similarly,
complex or marginal applications may take longer to review, biasing estimates of the effect of
processing delays on firm outcomes. To overcome these identification challenges, our empirical
strategy exploits two key institutional features of the USPTO’s review process.
The first feature is that the USPTO assigns applications in a given technology area to patent
examiners based on their predetermined workloads. Thus, which examiner an application is
assigned to is effectively random with respect to application (or applicant) quality. Importantly,
examiners vary in their propensity to approve applications (Cockburn, Kortum, and Stern 2002;
Lemley and Sampat 2012). The quasi-random allocation of applications to examiners thus results
in the assignment of similar applications to examiners who differ in their propensity to approve
patents. We use this variation in individual examiners’ approval rates to instrument for the
probability that a given startup’s first patent application is approved, which allows us to isolate
the effect of exogenously granted patent rights on startups’ subsequent growth and success.4
To identify the effects of patenting delays, we exploit a second feature of the USPTO review
process. Review times can be broken into two parts: the time it takes the USPTO to assign an
application to an examiner (which reflects quasi-random administrative delays unrelated to the

3

Another reason is that data on privately held firms are scarce in the U.S., making it difficult to observe firm
outcomes. We get around this obstacle by obtaining data from a variety of sources, including Dun & Bradstreet’s
National Establishment Time Series (NETS) database, which contains employment and sales data for a large crosssection of business establishment in the U.S.
4
Sampat and Williams (2015) first proposed this instrument to measure the effect of gene patents on follow-on
innovation in the human genome field.

4

application’s quality or complexity) and the time the examiner takes to make a decision (which
we instrument with the examiner’s historical review speed). We then use these two sources of
exogenous variation in review lags to identify the effect of patenting delays on firm outcomes.
We seek to contribute to the current debate about the state of the patent system in three ways.
First, we provide the first causal evidence that patents help startups grow, create jobs, and
generate follow-on innovations and that they do so by facilitating access to capital.5 These
findings on the real benefits of patents to startups stand in contrast to the criticism that the
USPTO grants patents to almost anyone who applies and that firms’ expenditures on patents are
wasteful, or at best useful only as defensive shields against infringement charges (Quillen and
Webster 2001; Boldrin and Levine 2013). We show that patents—along with their welldocumented dark side—offer a substantial bright side to startups.
Second, we illuminate the channels through which this bright side operates, thus informing
the design of reforms that seek to reinforce the beneficial features of the patent system. We find
that patents help mitigate information frictions in the market for entrepreneurial finance in at
least four ways: they alleviate investors’ concerns regarding a startup’s ability to monetize its
invention; they reduce information asymmetry by making it easier for entrepreneurs to disclose
details of their invention to investors without fear of expropriation; they allow these details to be
communicated more credibly; and they help startups signal their quality to investors. Thus, it is
important that reforms to either weaken patent rights or do away with them altogether consider if
substitute mechanisms can address these frictions and help startups grow and succeed.
We emphasize that our study does not imply that the U.S. patent system is optimal, or even
net-welfare enhancing, and so should not be reformed. Rather, our findings alter the balance of
5

Prior work on the relation between patents and startup growth (Balasubramanian and Sivadasan 2011) or access to
capital (Hsu and Ziedonis 2013; Conti, Thursby, and Thursby 2013; Conti, Thursby, and Rothaermel 2013) stresses
the difficulty of overcoming the endogeneity of patent grants.

5

evidence available to those considering a major revamp of the system by highlighting the real
benefits of patents, particularly for startups. In addition to informing the current debate on patent
reform, our study provides micro-evidence on the mechanisms through which institutions that
secure property rights alleviate information frictions and stimulate innovation and
entrepreneurship—activities that underpin modern macroeconomic growth models such as
Aghion and Howitt (1992) and Acemoglu and Akcigit (2012).
Third, we show that patent review delays can significantly hamper the success of innovative
startups by adversely affecting their ability to raise the capital necessary for their growth. These
novel findings highlight the importance of a quick patent review process, particularly in fast
moving industries, to resolve uncertainty surrounding applicants’ property rights and their ability
to produce patentable innovations.
1. Institutional Setting and Data
1.1 The patent examination process
When an inventor applies for a patent at the USPTO, the Office of Initial Patent Examination
(OIPE) assigns the application to an “art unit” for review based on the application’s technology
field.6 Each art unit consists of several patent examiners who share a specialization in a narrowly
drawn technology field.7 Over our sample period, the USPTO employed some 13,000 examiners
in over 900 art units. The median art unit has 13 examiners; the largest more than 100.
Applications in each art unit’s holding queue are assigned to one of the unit’s examiners,
who is responsible for assessing whether the claims in the application meet the legal thresholds
of novelty, usefulness, and non-obviousness. While the details of this assignment process differ

6

The technology field is determined through automated textual analysis of the description of the invention.
To illustrate, the examiners in art unit 1641 are in charge of examining patent applications related to “peptide or
protein sequence,” examiners in art unit 2831 are in charge of applications related to “electrical connectors,”
examiners in art unit 3676 are in charge of applications related to “wells and earth boring,” and so on.
7

6

across art units,8 one key characteristic remains constant: the assignment of applications to
examiners within a given art unit is effectively random; in particular, it is orthogonal to the
quality of the application or the applicant (Lemley and Sampat 2012; Sampat and Williams
2015). This conditional random assignment of applications to examiners (confirmed by our own
interviews with patent examiners) is central to our identification strategies.
After receiving an assignment (on what is known as “docket date”), the examiner evaluates
the application and makes a preliminary ruling on its validity. This ruling, called the “first-action
decision,” is communicated to the applicant via an official letter signed by the examiner. On
average, applications in our sample take 0.7 years to be assigned to an examiner, and examiners
take an additional year to make a first-action decision. The final decision on the application is
then made on average 1.5 years later (i.e., 3.2 years after the application date).
Carley, Hegde, and Marco (2015) show that the first-action decision resolves substantial
uncertainty about the application’s ultimate fate.9 Hence, we take the first-action date (rather
than the final decision date) as our starting point for estimating how patent decisions affect firm
outcomes. However, since our data do not include the content of the first-action letter (only its
date), we use the final outcome of the application (i.e., approval or rejection) as a noisy proxy for
the first-action decision. The data support this modeling choice: in Section 4, we show that
successful applications help facilitate a startup’s access to VC funding within a few months of
the first-action decision, that is, well before the final decision is made.10

8

For example, some units assign applications based on the last digits of the application number assigned
sequentially by the OIPE, while others automatically assign the oldest application to the first available examiner.
9
Strictly speaking, patent applications are never irrevocably rejected by the USPTO; they are abandoned by
applicants following what technically are appealable rejections issued by examiners (Lemley and Sampat 2008). For
expositional clarity, we follow Sampat and Williams (2015) and refer to abandoned applications (i.e., the
complement of those applications that are approved) as “rejected.”
10
Measuring firm outcomes from the first-action date instead of the final decision date has an additional advantage:
the final decision date for rejected applications is endogenous, as unsuccessful applicants effectively choose their
final decision date by choosing when to abandon their applications.

7

1.2 Patent data and sample selection
Our patent data are drawn from the USPTO’s internal databases.11 A key advantage of these
is that they include detailed information on the review histories of both approved and rejected
patent application.12 Until recently, publicly available datasets on U.S. patents, such as those
maintained by the NBER or Harvard Business School, only covered approved patents (Lerner
and Seru 2015).13 As a result, most prior studies of the relation between patenting activity and
firm-level outcomes have measured the former as stocks of granted patents.14 A challenge of
working with data on only granted patents is that the counterfactual for firms with patent rights
includes both firms that applied for patents but were unsuccessful and firms that never applied
for patents (either because they did not engage in innovation or because they pursued alternative
mechanisms to protect their intellectual property). This makes it impossible to separate the
effects of investing in innovation (which increases both the probability of applying for and
receiving patents) from the economic effects of patent rights.
From the USPTO’s internal databases, we extract data for all patent applications filed from
1991 onwards that have received a final decision by the end of 2013. Our goal is to identify the
real effects of early patent grants on the success of startups. The USPTO does not tag whether an
applicant is a startup, so we code as startups those patent applicants that satisfy the following two
filters: (1) the applicant is a U.S.-based for-profit firm whose primary inventor is located in the
U.S. and which is not listed on a stock market at the time of the first-action decision; and (2) the

11

Access to the USPTO’s internal databases was granted through the agency’s Edison Visiting Scholars program.
Carley, Hegde, and Marco (2015) provide a comprehensive description of these data.
13
Some recent papers use publicly available data from the USPTO’s Patent Application Information Retrieval
(PAIR) system, which covers both approved and rejected applications filed after 2000. A drawback of PAIR
compared to the internal databases we use is that PAIR provides no data on applications that are abandoned prior to
public disclosure (around 15% of all unsuccessful applications) and no data on rejected applications before 2001.
14
A prominent example is Balasubramanian and Sivadasan (2011), who match the NBER patent data to Census
microdata for U.S. manufacturers and show that increases in a firm’s patent stock are associated with increases in
the firm’s size, scope, skill intensity, and capital intensity.
12

8

applicant has filed at least one application on or after January 1, 2001 and no applications
between 1991 and 2000. The first filter screens out established firms (such as research labs and
listed companies) as well as foreign applicants. The second filter ensures that we capture firsttime patent applicants, which are likely to be young entrepreneurial firms.
Throughout the paper, our analysis focuses on how the outcome of a firm’s first patent
application affects its ability to grow, continue innovating, raise funding, and eventually go
public.15 To ensure we have sufficient time to study the long-term effects of patent grants, we
require firms to receive the first-action decision on their first application by December 31, 2009.
Our final sample consists of 45,817 first-time patent applicants (called startups from here
on). Of these, 32.7% operate in the electronics, computers, and communications industries
(henceforth, IT); 18.7% are active in the pharmaceutical and bio-chemical industries (henceforth,
biochemistry); and the remaining 48.6% operate in other industries. Just under two-thirds
(65.7%) of first-time applications in our sample are successful over our sample period.
1.3 Data on firm outcomes
Being privately held, the startups in our sample are not covered in standard financial
databases such as Compustat, so we obtain data on firm outcomes from three other sources.
First, we extract employment, sales, and age data from Dun and Bradstreet’s National
Establishment Time Series (NETS) database, which covers a large cross-section of business
establishments in the U.S. going back to 1989. We are able to match 65.4% of our sample firms
to firms in NETS. For 25.9% of the matched firms, NETS reports no data for the year of the firstaction decision on the first patent application, typically because NETS coverage does not begin

15

The firm’s “first application” is the first application the USPTO rules on. (In 8% of cases, the first ruling a firm
receives is not for its first-ever application but for a later application.) Identifying each firm’s first application
requires standardizing the assignee names in the USPTO data, to ensure that we can accurately capture each firm’s
patenting history. Our standardization process follows Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2015).

9

until later. This leaves a NETS sample of 22,213 startups with data on employment and sales as
of the first-action date. These firms form the basis of our analysis of the effects of patents on
employment growth and sales growth.16 Second, we use VentureXpert to identify which sample
firms go on to raise VC funding at some point after the first-action date. Third, we use data from
Thomson Reuter’s Securities Data Company (SDC) database to identify firms that go public or
are acquired after the first-action date. The algorithm used to match our sample firms to NETS,
VentureXpert, and SDC follows Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2015).
Table 1 compares startups whose first patent application is approved or rejected. Panel A
shows that at the time of application, successful and failed applicants look similar: the median
startup is two years old, has eight employees, and around $1 million in sales. (Unsuccessful
applicants have slightly lower pre-filing growth in employment and sales than successful ones.)
After the USPTO’s decision, successful applicants grow employment and sales substantially
faster (Panel B); produce more and higher-quality follow-on inventions (Panel C); and are more
likely to raise VC funding and to eventually go public or be acquired (Panel D). These patterns
suggest that startups whose first patent application is approved tend to have superior outcomes.
2. The Real Effects of Patent Grants
2.1 Empirical setup and identification challenge
In order to identify how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects subsequent
outcomes at the firm, we estimate the following equation:
Firm outcomeitja   First patent application approveditja  X itja   itja ,

(1)

16

The firms in the NETS sample are somewhat more likely to have their first patent application approved (66.4%)
than firms that cannot be matched to NETS (65.2%; the p-value of the difference is 0.008). The NETS firms are also
more likely to go on to raise VC funding in the three years following the patent decision (7.0% vs. 1.8%; p<0.001)
and to eventually go public (0.9% vs. 0.3%; p<0.001). These patterns suggest that unsuccessful startups are more
likely to be short-lived and fall off the NETS radar. (Name changes are another reason why we cannot match some
firms to NETS.) To the extent that a bias towards successful startups reduces the variation in firm outcomes in the
NETS sample, we are likely to underestimate the effect of patent grants on growth in employment and sales.

10

where i indexes startups, t application years, j examiners, and a art units. We model four
outcomes: (i) growth in the startup’s employment, (ii) growth in its sales, (iii) subsequent
innovative activity (as measured by the quantity and quality of the firm’s later patents), and (iv)
whether the firm eventually lists on a stock market or is acquired by another company. We
measure these outcomes over various windows starting from the first-action date.
One concern in estimating equation (1) is the potential for unobserved demand or technology
shocks to affect both patent applications and firm outcomes. For example, a breakthrough in a
technology field may lead to an increase in both the number of patentable inventions and the
growth rate of firms operating in that field. To deal with this confound, we include a full set of
2,821 art-unit-by-application-year fixed effects.17 Since art units are quite narrowly defined (the
art units in our sample span 495 different technology fields), including these fixed effects allows
us to hold demand and technological conditions constant at a very fine level and so ensures that
our findings are not confounded by unobserved industry-level shocks. Following Lerner and
Seru (2015), we also control for geographical differences in outcomes by including firmheadquarter-state fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the art unit level to allow for
arbitrary correlation of the errors within each art unit.
Ideally, First patent application approved would capture the outcome of the first-action
decision. In practice, while the first-action decision letter resolves much uncertainty about
whether the application will eventually be approved or rejected, we do not observe its content.
Instead, we set First patent application approved equal to one if the examiner’s final decision is
to approve the application, and zero otherwise.
As discussed in the introduction, the OLS estimate of β will likely be biased upwards, as it
will capture both the average treatment effect of patent grants on firm outcomes and the bias
17

Including art-unit-by-year fixed effects subsumes art unit (i.e., industry) fixed effects.

11

induced by not controlling for ex ante firm quality. For example, a firm of higher unobserved
quality at the time of filing is both more likely to have produced a “novel, useful, and nonobvious” invention worthy of a patent and to perform better going forward.
The ideal experiment to identify the causal contribution of a patent to a firm’s success would
randomize patent approvals, thus ensuring that successful applicants do not differ systematically
from unsuccessful ones ex ante. We can get close to this ideal experiment by exploiting features
of the review process that induce quasi-random variation in patent approvals.
2.2 Identification strategy: Patent examiners’ approval rates as IV
To identify the causal effect of patent grants on firm outcomes, we leverage the random
assignment of applications to examiners within art units and exogenous variation in examiners’
propensity to approve patents. Specifically, we use the examiner’s past approval rate as an
instrument for whether a firm’s first application is approved and estimate equation (1) using twostage least squares (2SLS). We calculate the approval rate of examiner j belonging to art unit a
assigned to review firm i’s first patent application submitted at time t as follows:
Examiner approval rateijta 

ngranted jta
nreviewed jta

,

(2)

where nreviewed jta and ngranted jta are the numbers of patents examiner j has reviewed and granted,
respectively, prior to date t.18 Sampat and Williams (2015) use this instrument to analyze the
effect of patent rights on follow-on innovation in the human genome industry.19

18

Neither the numerator nor the denominator in (2) includes patent application i, as it had not been reviewed prior to
date t. Also, to ensure that we measure approval rates accurately, we exclude firms whose first patent application is
assigned to an examiner with fewer than 10 prior reviews. All results are robust to using alternative cutoffs.
19
The IV is determined before the first-action decision and so addresses not only omitted-variable concerns but also
potential simultaneity or reverse causality problems associated with using the final outcome to proxy for the firstaction decision. To illustrate the latter problems, consider a firm that manages to raise funding between first-action
and the final decision. Such a firm could afford to spend more on lawyers to respond to concerns raised in the firstaction letter, thereby increasing the likelihood of a positive final decision. Since the IV is determined before firstaction, it purges the effect of unobserved actions that affect a firm’s approval probability subsequent to first-action.

12

2.2.1 Instrument relevance
Since patent applications are assigned to examiners quasi-randomly within an art unit, we
include art-unit-by-application-year fixed effects in all regressions.20 Thus, for our IV to predict
whether a patent application is approved, there needs to be sufficient variation within an art unit
and year in the propensity of different examiners to approve patent applications. Previous
research suggests that the patent review process leaves enough discretion in the hands of
examiners for this to be the case (Lichtman 2004; Sampat and Lemley 2010; Lemley and Sampat
2012; Sampat and Williams 2015). This discretion is perhaps best illustrated by Cockburn,
Kortum, and Stern (2003), who, after studying the USPTO’s patent examination process in
depth, conclude that “there may be as many patent offices as there are patent examiners.”
Our data confirm the existence of meaningful variation in the propensity of examiners to
approve patent applications. The top graph in Figure 1 shows the distribution of examiner
approval rates, defined as in equation (2), in our sample. The median examiner approves 62.2%
of applications, and the interquartile range is 32.7%. Part of this variation is driven by variation
in approval rates across art units and time. The bottom graph in Figure 1 shows the distribution
of residual approval rates (obtained from a regression of approval rates on a full set of art-unitby-application-year fixed effects). As expected, the fixed effects account for a sizable fraction of
the raw variation in approval rates (the R2 is 56.3%), but we are still left with substantial
variation in residual approval rates, with an interquartile range of 17.7%.
Our approval rate estimates are based on a large number of reviewed applications: the
average (median) examiner had reviewed 771 (418) applications by the time we measure her
approval rate (the 10th percentile is 52). This suggests that the variation shown in Figure 1
reflects persistent inherent differences in examiners’ propensity to approve applications and not
20

Applications belonging to art-unit-by-year singletons do not contribute to identification and are excluded.

13

small-sample random differences in the quality distribution of the applications they review.
Table 2 reports the first stage of our 2SLS models, that is, the results of regressing patent
approval on the instrument using the following linear-probability model:
First patent application approveditja   Examiner approval rateitja  X itja  uitja

(3)

As required for identification, the instrument is a strong predictor of whether an application
is approved. The coefficient estimate in column 1 implies that each percentage-point increase in
an examiner’s approval rate leads to a 0.67 percentage-point increase in the probability that a
patent she reviews is approved (p<0.001). Thus, moving from an examiner in the 25th percentile
to one in the 75th percentile would increase the approval probability by 11.9 percentage points
(=0.67 × 17.7), all else equal. Controlling for firm size using the log number of employees
(column 2) or log sales (column 3) has next to no bearing on the point estimate, even though
these variables are only available for just under 50% of our sample firms.
The effect of an examiner’s approval rate on the probability of receiving a patent is not only
large economically, it is also strong statistically, with F statistics exceeding the critical value of
10 (Stock and Yogo 2005). This ensures that our results are not subject to weak instrument bias.
2.2.2 Exclusion restriction
In order to satisfy the exclusion restriction, the IV must only affect firm outcomes, following
the examiner’s first-action decision, through its effect on the likelihood that the examiner’s firstaction letter indicates that the application will be approved. As noted by Angrist and Pischke
(2009, p. 117), for the exclusion restriction to be satisfied, the instrument must be “as good as
randomly assigned conditional on covariates.” Since applications are assigned to examiners
within an art unit randomly with respect to quality, once we include art-unit-by-application-year
fixed effects, the IV has a plausible claim to satisfying the exclusion restriction.

14

While conditional random assignment of patent applications to examiners is necessary for
our IV to satisfy the exclusion restriction, it is not sufficient. To see why, consider the following
scenario. If a startup were to learn the approval rate of its randomly assigned examiner at the
time of application, it could try to predict the examiner’s first-action decision based on her past
review record. This prediction could then affect the startup’s effort (and hence outcomes) before
the first-action decision. In this scenario, even a randomly assigned instrument would violate the
exclusion restriction, as it would affect outcomes via a channel—effort before the application is
decided—other than the first stage. In practice, applicants do not learn their examiner’s identity
until they receive the first-action letter. As a result, by the time applicants learn who the
examiner is, it is too late to use the examiner’s review record to predict her first-action decision.
In sum, the institutional features of the USPTO review process support the identifying
assumption that any effect that the examiner’s leniency has on firm outcomes operates via the
first stage (i.e., via the effect that leniency has on the application’s likelihood of approval).
2.3 Results
2.3.1 Employment growth and sales growth
Table 3, Panel A examines how the outcome of a firm’s patent application affects its
employment growth over the next five years. We first discuss naïve OLS regressions ignoring
the endogeneity of patent decisions. Column 1 shows that firms granted a patent grow their
employment by 7.3 percentage points more on average in the year following the patent decision
than firms whose application is rejected. The difference continues to widen over time: successful
applicants’ employment growth is 15.4 percentage points higher after three years (column 3) and
24.9 percentage points higher after five years (column 5).21 These differences are not only large

21

We omit the two- and four-year growth results to conserve space; they are in line with those shown in the table.

15

economically but also highly statistically significant (p<0.001 in all three cases).22
Instrumenting grants using approval rates subtly changes the inference. The 2SLS results in
column 2 show that a favorable decision has no significant effect on employment growth in the
first year after the decision. Economically, this seems more plausible than the large OLS estimate
shown in column 1: surely it takes time for patent grants to boost employment growth. It is only
after a while that the effect becomes significant, leading to employment growth that is 20.3
percentage points higher over three years (p=0.019, column 4) and 36 points higher over five
years (p= 0.018, column 6). To illustrate the economic significance, consider the median startup,
which in our sample has eight employees at first-action. Approval leads to faster growth that
translates into the firm having 2.9 (=8 × 0.36) more employees on average five years later than if
the application had been rejected as a result of being assigned to a stricter examiner.
Panel B reports results for sales growth. The OLS estimates show that successful applicants
grow their sales by 7.8, 15.7, and 29.1 percentage points more on average over the one, three,
and five years following the patent decision than their unsuccessful counterparts (p<0.001). Once
we instrument patent grants, the one-year growth effect again becomes insignificant (p=0.284 in
column 2). But over three and five years, we find that patent approvals lead to sales growth that
is 22 and 51.4 percentage points higher (p=0.022 and 0.008 in columns 4 and 6, respectively).
Figure 2 helps visualize these increases by plotting the estimated patent approval effect on
the growth in employment (Panel A) and sales (Panel B) over the five years following firstaction. The figure leaves little doubt that patent approvals play an important causal role in
fostering startup growth as evidenced by sizeable gains in employment and sales.

22

In addition to including art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects, we also control for the log number of
employees that the firm has at first-action. As expected, larger firms tend to grow more slowly, all else equal.

16

2.3.2 Subsequent patenting
We next model how the outcome of a firm’s first patent application affects the firm’s ability
to continue innovating and patenting. We capture a firm’s subsequent innovation using the log
number of patent applications filed by the firm after the first-action decision on its first patent
application; the log number of such subsequent applications that are approved; the approval rate
of these subsequent applications; the log number of citations received by all subsequent
applications combined; and the log average number of citations per subsequent approved
patent.23 (See Table 1 for descriptive statistics.)
Table 4 reports the IV results.24 (The naïve OLS results can be found in Table IA.1 in the
Internet Appendix.) Columns 1 and 2 show that approval of the first patent application leads to a
66.9% (=e0.512−1) increase in the number of patents the firm subsequently applies for and a
48.8% increase in the number of patents it subsequently obtains (p<0.001 in each case). This
may not be surprising; after all, Table 3 shows that successful applicants enjoy faster growth. But
it is not just the volume of subsequent patent applications and grants that increases. Column 3
shows that success in the first application leads to a 17.7 percentage-point increase in the
approval rate of a startup’s subsequent applications (p<0.001), suggesting that its subsequent
applications are of higher quality. Consistent with this interpretation, we find that the approval of
a firm’s first application boosts the number of citations received by the patents it is subsequently
granted, both overall (up by 68.9% in column 4) and per patent (up by 26.5% in column 5).
We emphasize that the IV estimates in Table 4 are not contaminated by unobserved quality

23

There is no mechanical relation between the outcome of a firm’s first patent application and our subsequent
patenting measures, as these only include patent applications filed after the first application is decided.
24
The analysis in Table 4 is fundamentally different from Sampat and Williams (2015), who examine how patents
on a particular gene affect follow-on scientific research, by any firm, in that same gene. Our analysis examines how
approval of a firm’s first patent application affects the quantity and quality of that firm’s subsequent patents. We do
not require subsequent patents to be in the same field as the first application, although, naturally, they often are.

17

differences between successful and unsuccessful first-time applicants. Our results thus indicate
that the approval of a firm’s first patent application leads to changes in the firm’s resources and
environment that help increase both the quantity and quality of its subsequent innovations.
2.3.3 IPOs and acquisitions
We next test if a first patent grant affects the probability that the startup subsequently goes
public or is acquired. Column 6 reveals that a successful patent application boosts the probability
of an IPO by 0.9 percentage points (p=0.006), a 153% increase over the unconditional sample
probability of 0.59%.25 We find similar results in column 7, which includes acquisitions: a
successful application increases the probability of going public or being acquired by 2.1
percentage points (p=0.001), an 84% increase over the unconditional probability of 2.5%.
On average, successful first-time applicants are acquired 3.3 years or go public 4.9 years
after the USPTO decision. These long lags underscore the notion that the causal link between the
approval of a firm’s first patent application and the likelihood that the firm is eventually sold or
goes public is unlikely to be direct, in that potential IPO investors or acquirers are unlikely to
directly use the outcome of the application in their investment decisions. Rather, our findings
suggest that early patent grants act as catalysts that set startups on a path to success. We defer an
analysis of the channels through which patents affect long-term growth and success to Section 4.
3. The Real Effects of Patent Review Delays
Section 2 shows that patent grants have real effects for startups in the form of faster growth,
more and higher-quality subsequent innovations, and an increased chance of eventually going
public or being acquired. Motivated by concerns that delays in the patent review process create
uncertainty and diminish the value of patents to their owners (Gans, Hsu, and Stern 2008), we
25

We observe IPOs through the end of 2014. Firms that remain private by then may yet go public in the future. The
art-unit-by-application-year fixed effects control for the fact that firms that applied for their first patent in the later
years of our sample have had less time to go public than earlier applicants.

18

now investigate whether, conditional on a startup’s first patent being approved, delays in the
patent review process have harmful effects.
3.1 Empirical setup and identification challenge
To identify how the time the USPTO takes to review a startup’s first patent application
affects firm outcomes, we estimate the following regression:
Firm outcomeitja   First patent review lagitja  X itja   itja ,

(4)

restricting the sample to startups whose first application is approved. First patent review lag is
the time between the filing of the firm’s first patent application and the first-action date (on
average, 1.6 years). We model the same firm-level outcomes as in Section 2 and continue to
include headquarter-state and art-unit-by-application-year fixed effects. The former control for
time-invariant geographic variation in firm outcomes. The latter ensure that our findings cannot
be confounded by unobserved time-varying shocks at the art-unit level, such as competitive or
technological shocks that might increase the level of patent applications, thereby causing delays,
and at the same time affect an applicant’s subsequent performance.
The primary identification challenge is that review delays may be related to unobservables
(such as innovation quality or application complexity) and thus be potentially endogenous.
Estimating equation (4) consistently thus requires an instrument.
3.2 Identification strategy: Decomposing and instrumenting review lags
The time it takes to receive a first-action decision on a patent application can be decomposed
into two parts: the time from filing to the application being assigned to the examiner’s docket,
and the time from docket to first-action. The former reflects quasi-random administrative delays
at the USPTO that are unrelated to invention quality or application complexity. Delays depend
on factors such as the workload of the OIPE or the different art units, staffing issues (sickness,

19

hiring freezes, maternity leaves, etc.), and the USPTO’s budget situation. Delays at this stage are
thus orthogonal to the application’s characteristics and so plausibly exogenous.26
The time from docket to first-action, by contrast, could be influenced by the characteristics of
the application and so is potentially endogenous. To address this endogeneity, we use only that
part of the variation in time from docket to first-action that is orthogonal to application
characteristics. We obtain this by regressing the time from docket to first-action on the average
time the application’s examiner has previously taken to process applications from docket to firstaction. Our review-lag instrument then is the sum of the time from application to docket and the
average time the examiner has taken in the past from docket to first-action.
The exclusion restriction requires the IV to affect outcomes only via the first stage and not
directly. Time-to-docket is exogenous and so enters the IV directly. Using an examiner’s prior
review speed to instrument time-from-docket-to-first-action is analogous to using her approval
rate to instrument for the likelihood of patent approval. In both cases, the key institutional
features that motivate the exclusion restriction are that applications are assigned to examiners
quasi-randomly within art units and that applicants learn their examiner’s identity only at the
time of first-action. These features suggest that, once we include art-unit-by-year fixed effects,
idiosyncratic examiner characteristics can only affect outcomes via the first stage (here, through
the effect that the examiner’s prior review speed has on an application’s review lag).
The top graph in Figure 3 shows that there is substantial variation in our review-lag IV. The
interquartile range is one year, with each of the two components of the IV driving half of this
variation. In part, the variation reflects differences across art units and time. The bottom graph in
Figure 3 shows the distribution of the residuals obtained after regressing the IV on a full set of
26

As noted above, the art-unit-by-year fixed effects absorb the component of this variation in delays that is related
to competitive or technological shocks that affect both the number of applications in a technology field and
subsequent firm outcomes in that field.

20

art-unit-by-year fixed effects (the R2 of this regression is 60.4%). This gives an interquartile
range of just over half a year, which suggests that after stripping out time-varying art-unit
specific effects, we continue to have meaningful variation in the IV to drive our first stage.
Column 1 in Table 5 shows the results of estimating the first-stage regression,
First patent review lagitja   Review lag IVitja  X itja  uitja .

(5)

The results leave little doubt that the review-lag IV is strong: the estimate of θ is large ( ˆ =0.54)
and highly significant, with an F statistic over 1,000. We obtain similar estimates in columns 2
and 3 when we control for firm size using the log of the number of employees or sales.
3.3 Results
3.3.1 Employment growth and sales growth
Table 6 relates the time it takes the USPTO to make a first-action decision on a startup’s
(eventually approved) first patent application to employment growth (Panel A) and sales growth
(Panel B) over the five years following the decision. The naïve OLS estimates show that longer
reviews are associated with slower growth once the USPTO finally grants the patent. For
example, for each year of delay, employment growth declines by 2.4 percentage points in the
first year after a patent grant, and by a cumulative 12.8 and 19.4 percentage points over three and
five years, respectively. Sales growth exhibits a similar negative post-decision trend.
The instrumented estimates show that each year of delay causes employment growth to
decline by an insignificant 2.6 percentage points one year after the patent is granted (p=0.102),
by 8.5 percentage points over three years (p=0.031), and by 21.2 percentage points over five
years (p=0.014). For the median startup with eight employees at first-action, each year of delay
thus implies 1.7 (=8 × 0.212) fewer jobs five years later, all else equal. The instrumented effects
on sales growth are even larger. Each year of delay causes sales growth to slump by 3.6, 12.8,
21

and 28.4 percentage points over the one, three, and five years following the first-action decision
(p=0.034, 0.007, and 0.009, respectively). Figure 4 illustrates these effects graphically.
3.3.2 Subsequent patenting
Review lags similarly hamper subsequent innovative activity. Columns 1 through 5 in Table
7 report the instrumented effects of review lags on the quantity and quality of the applications a
startup files after receiving approval on its first patent application. (Table IA.2 in the Internet
Appendix reports OLS estimates.) Each year of delay causes the number of subsequent patent
applications to decline by 13.1% (column 1). The number of patents granted falls in lockstep, by
12.7% (column 2), partly as a result of fewer applications and partly because the firm’s approval
rate falls by 4.1 percentage points (column 3). The quality of the firm’s subsequent applications
also deteriorates: each year of delay is followed by a 17% decline in the firm’s total number of
citations (column 4) and a 7.1% decline in the average number of citations-per-patent (column
5). Each of these estimates is not only economically large but also highly statistically significant.
3.3.3 IPOs and acquisitions
Slower growth and less innovation as a result of delays at the USPTO hurt a startup’s
chances of going public or being acquired. Column 6 in Table 7 shows that each additional year
the USPTO takes to review an application that is ultimately approved reduces a startup’s
subsequent probability of going public by 0.39 percentage points (p=0.025)—a 58% reduction
from the unconditional 0.67% probability among successful first-time applicants. The combined
probability of going public or being acquired in column 7 falls by 0.62 points (p=0.072).
Collectively, the findings in this section highlight that it is not simply the outcome of a
startup’s first patent application that affects its future growth: even conditioning on approval, the
speed with which the USPTO reviews the application has lasting consequences for the applicant.

22

4. What Drives the Real Effects of Patents?
Sections 2 and 3 show that first-time patent grants appear to act as catalysts that help startups
grow, innovate, and eventually go public or be acquired. Our goal in this section is to probe how
they do so, and thus provide large-sample evidence that complements evidence from surveys
about the various ways in which startups use patents (Graham and Sichelman 2008). Our search
for a mechanism focuses on the role patents play in alleviating information frictions in the
market for entrepreneurial capital.
4.1 Patents and frictions in the entrepreneurial finance market
The entrepreneurial finance market is plagued by information frictions (Leroy and Singell
1987; Evans and Jovanovic 1989; Gompers 1995; Black and Gilson 1998; Kortum and Lerner
2000; Kaplan and Strömberg 2003; Sorensen 2007). Startups, by definition, have few assets they
can pledge as collateral and have little track record to help investors assess their risk and upside
potential. The resulting financing frictions are particularly severe for innovative startups such as
those in our study, which by definition aim to commercialize new ideas for which precedents are
limited (Gans, Hsu, and Stern 2002). It is thus often challenging to ascertain whether their ideas
will work as claimed, will result in sufficient demand, or can easily be imitated by competitors.
Patents can help alleviate these information frictions in four key ways. First, by securing a
startup’s property rights on its invention, a patent can facilitate transactions in the market for
ideas and alleviate investors’ concerns regarding the firm’s ability to monetize the invention
(Arora, Fosfuri, and Gambardella 2001). Second, a patent reduces information asymmetry by
making it easier for an entrepreneur to share details of her invention with investors without fear
of expropriation (Arrow 1962; Anton and Yao 1994; Biais and Perotti 2008). Third, the patent
itself helps communicate the technical details of the invention credibly (Hegde and Luo 2016).

23

Fourth, a patent can help the startup signal its quality to investors.27
4.2 Empirical strategy
In examining whether patents alleviate information frictions in the entrepreneurial finance
market, we focus on access to VC funding. VCs have been shown to be critical to the success of
innovative startups (Hellmann and Puri 2000; Gompers and Lerner 2001), not only by offering
funding, but also by providing monitoring and advice (Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend 2015),
access to networks of potential customers, suppliers, and strategic partners (Hochberg,
Ljungqvist, and Lu 2007), and help recruiting talented individuals (Gorman and Sahlman 1989).
This is not to say that patents may not also facilitate access to funding from angel investors
(Sudek 2006), strategic alliance partners, or lenders (Hochberg, Serrano, and Ziedonis 2014;
Mann 2015). But systematic data on these funding sources are not readily available.
To identify how patents affect access to VC funding, we estimate the following regression:
Firm raises VC fundingitja   First patent application approveditja  X itja   itja .

(6)

The dependent variable is an indicator set equal to one if the firm raises VC funding at some
point in the n=1 to 5 years following the USPTO’s first-action decision on the firm’s first patent
application. Of the startups in our sample, 92.5% have raised no VC funding before the firstaction date. For these, equation (6) identifies the effect of patent approval on their ability to raise
their first VC round. For firms with at least one prior VC round, equation (6) identifies the effect
on their ability to raise a follow-on round.28 In addition to including art-unit-by-year and
headquarter-state fixed effects, we control for the log number of prior VC rounds the firm has
27

Long (2002), for example, notes that “if an easily measurable firm attribute such as patent counts is positively
correlated with other less readily measurable firm attributes such as knowledge capital, then patent counts can be
used as a means of conveying information about these other attributes” (p. 627). To the extent that the entrepreneur
is unsure about the quality of her invention, the signal provided by a patent can also be valuable to the entrepreneur
herself, increasing her motivation and effort once a patent has been secured.
28
Specifically, 2.4% of our sample firms have raised one VC round at the time of their first-action; 1.9% have raised
two VC rounds; 1.4% have raised three rounds; and the remaining 1.8% have raised four or more rounds.

24

raised. We also consider sample splits based on the number of prior VC rounds.
Estimating equation (6) requires an instrument, as firms of higher unobservable quality are
both more likely to be granted patents and to raise VC funding. We thus again use the examiner’s
prior approval rate to instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. For
completeness, we report the naïve OLS results in the Internet Appendix.
4.3 Baseline results
Table 8 reports the results. Approval of a firm’s first patent application causes a startup’s
chances of raising VC funding in the following year to increase by 1.2 percentage points
(p=0.048 in column 1). Extending the window increases the effect to 2.1, 2.3, 2.7, and 2.8
percentage points over two, three, four, and five years, respectively (p<0.01 in columns 2 to 5).
These effects are economically large. To illustrate, the 2.3 percentage-point increase in column 3
represents a 53% increase relative to the 4.3% unconditional probability of a sample firm raising
VC funding in the three years following the first-action decision.
Successful applicants tend to raise VC funding quite quickly: the median successful applicant
that raises VC funding during the five-year window does so a mere 10 months after the firstaction decision. This bunching of fundraises shortly after first-action, illustrated in Figure IA.1 in
the Internet Appendix, is consistent with our hypothesis that patents play a direct causal role in
facilitating startups’ access to capital.
4.4 Heterogeneous effects of patents
If patents facilitate access to funding by addressing information frictions, we expect this
effect to be most beneficial to firms surrounded by the greatest frictions. Frictions are likely
greatest among firms (i) trying to raise an early VC round, (ii) led by inexperienced founders,
(iii) located in states with a large startup population, where attracting investors’ attention is more

25

challenging, and (iv) operating in industries in which the quality of ideas and entrepreneurs is
difficult to evaluate and where patents are most effective at mitigating expropriation risk.
For brevity, we focus on how patent grants affect firms’ ability to raise VC funding in the
three years following first-action. Our conclusions are robust to using alternative time windows.
4.4.1 Variation in funding round
Table 9, Panel A splits startups by the number of VC rounds raised before first-action. If
early-stage startups face the greatest frictions, we expect patent approval to be most beneficial to
them. The data support this prediction. Approval increases the likelihood of subsequently raising
the first VC round (often called the seed round) by one percentage point (p=0.044 in column 1).
Conditional on having raised a first round, patent approval increases the chances of raising a
second round by as much as 46.7 percentage points (p=0.003 in column 2). These are large
effects economically, given that the unconditional probability of raising a first round is only
1.2% and the probability of raising a second round, conditional on having raised a first, is 39.6%.
Beyond the second round, the effect of patent approval on access to VC funding all but
disappears. The effect is insignificant in column 3, which focuses on mature startups with two
prior VC rounds by the time of first-action (p=0.354), and in column 4, which pools all firms that
have raised three or more VC rounds before their first application is decided (p=0.307).29
These patterns are what we would expect if patents alleviate information frictions by serving
as easy-to-acquire signals of startup quality or by allowing early-stage entrepreneurs to credibly
communicate their ideas to investors without the fear of expropriation. Indeed, by the time a
startup is trying to raise a third (or subsequent) funding round, VC investors—who typically sit
on the firm’s board and monitor it closely—already have a wealth of information about the firm.
29

These insignificant effects do not appear to be the result of our IV being weak in these relatively small
subsamples: in both columns 3 and 4, the first-stage F statistic is over 10 and the standard errors of the patent
approval effect are similar to the standard error of column 2’s highly significant patent effect.

26

As a result, the incremental information content of a patent grant should be much smaller than
when VCs evaluate a firm for the first or second time.
4.4.2 Variation in prior entrepreneurial experience
An alternative proxy for the uncertainty surrounding a startup is the experience of its
founders (Hsu and Ziedonis 2013). Table 9, Panel B splits startups by prior founder experience,
using data obtained from Capital IQ that are only available for startups that raise VC funding at
some point in their lives. The sample is thus restricted to firms with at least one prior VC round
before first-action. Of these firms, 57% have a founding team with at least one experienced
founder, while the rest are run by teams made up exclusively of first-time entrepreneurs.
The results confirm that patent approval facilitates access to capital the most among
inexperienced founders. Patent approval increases a startup’s likelihood of raising VC funding in
the next three years by 44.5 percentage points for inexperienced founders (p=0.094 in column 1);
for experienced founder teams, the effect is virtually zero (p=0.801 in column 2). Column 3
pools startups with experienced and inexperienced founders and allows the patent approval effect
to vary with the founder’s experience.30 As predicted, the patent approval effect is significantly
larger for firms with inexperienced founders (p=0.024).
4.4.3 Variation in startup agglomeration across U.S. states
Two facts combine to suggest that the value of a patent grant in obtaining VC funding varies
geographically. First, VCs have a well-known preference for investing locally (Lerner 1995;
Sorenson and Stuart 2001). Second, startup activity varies considerably across the country, with
hotspots like California, Massachusetts, and New York being particularly popular places to start
an innovative business. Combined, this implies that VCs operating in areas with larger startup
30

The sample of startups with inexperienced founders in column 1 is small, which results in a weak first stage
(F=8.7). Pooling startups with inexperienced and experienced founders in column 3 allows us to work with a larger
sample, resulting in a stronger first stage (F=27.9).

27

populations have more potential investments to choose among than those operating in areas with
fewer startups. To deal with the larger number of investments to screen, VCs may rely more on
easily observable signals such as patent grants in areas with high startup activity.
Table 9, Panel C splits the sample according to whether a startup is headquartered in a state
with above or below median startup agglomeration in the year of its first patent application.31
Column 1 shows that in states with high levels of startup activity, patent approval increases a
startup’s likelihood of raising VC funding in the next three years by 3.9 percentage points (a
67% increase relative to the unconditional likelihood; p=0.001). In states with low levels of
startup activity, by contrast, the patent effect is negligible (p=0.377 in column 2).
Pooling all states, columns 3 shows that a startup whose first patent application is rejected is
significantly less likely to raise VC funding in a startup hub like California or Massachusetts
than in a state with low startup activity (p=0.015 in column 3); for successful applicants, the
opposite is true (p<0.001). While these results need to be interpreted with caution as location is
chosen endogenously, they are consistent with the idea that patents play a key role in helping
startups located in hubs of innovative activity stand out from the crowd.
4.4.4 Variation across industries
IT (electronics, computers, and communications) and biochemistry (pharmaceuticals and
biochemicals) have, for a long time, been the main focus of VCs in the U.S (Gompers and Lerner
2001; Graham et al. 2009). There are reasons to expect the information value of a patent to be
different in these two industries (Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh 2000). IT startups tend to be
founded by younger entrepreneurs (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2015) and their inventions
often face substantial demand uncertainty and imitation risk. Thus, a favorable decision on an IT
31

We measure startup agglomeration using the number of first-time patent applicants in the state. We obtain similar
results if we code California, Massachusetts, and New York (which have consistently been the three states with the
most startup activity according to the 2015 NVCA Yearbook) as states with high startup agglomeration.

28

startup’s first patent application can provide a particularly valuable early signal about the quality
of its technology and its founders, while also allowing the founders to more freely discuss their
idea with VCs without the fear of expropriation. Evidence from interviews at semiconductor
firms suggests that the primary function of a patent in that industry is “securing capital from
private investors [for firms] in the startup phase” (Hall and Ziedonis 2001).32 In addition, recent
evidence by Galasso and Schankerman (2015) indicates that patents are particularly effective in
blocking downstream innovation and imitation in the IT sector.
Biochemistry startups, in contrast, tend to be founded by experienced scientists, the quality of
whose research can be evaluated using a variety of sources such as academic publications and
National Institutes of Health grants (Li and Agha 2015). Biochemistry startups face relatively
little demand uncertainty or risk of imitation, with the greatest uncertainty coming from the
probability of technical success and the regulatory process (DiMasi 2003). As a result, early
patent decisions reveal little information about the quality of the founders or the potential
commercial success of their inventions.
Table 9, Panel D shows that the approval of an IT firm’s first patent increases its probability
of raising VC funds in the next three years by 4.2 percentage points (p=0.010). In biochemistry,
on the other hand, patent approval has essentially a zero effect on VC funding (p=0.686), in line
with our prior. These point estimates are significantly different from each other (p=0.051).
4.5 External validity
Instruments identify the local average treatment effect of the endogenous variable on the
compliant subpopulation (Angrist and Pischke 2009; Imbens and Wooldridge 2009). This means,
in our context, that our 2SLS estimates identify how early patent grants affect the likelihood of

32

Hochberg, Serrano, and Ziedonis (2014) and Mann (2015) document the existence of a well-developed secondary
market for IT patents, which alleviates investors’ downside risk if the firm ends up not being viable.

29

raising VC funding only for the subpopulation of startups whose first patent application is
affected by their examiner’s leniency. These are likely to be marginal applicants, for which being
assigned a lenient or strict examiner can be the difference between approval and rejection. For
non-marginal applicants, the examiner’s type is unlikely to affect the outcome of the patent
review: obviously good applications will be granted and obviously poor ones will be rejected.33
By the same token, patents likely matter little when deciding whether to invest in a startup of
obviously high or obviously low quality. Thus, a patent grant should alleviate information
frictions between the startup and potential investors (and thereby facilitate access to external
finance) the most for marginal patent applicants.34
At the same time, our 2SLS estimates in Section 2 suggest that the uncertainty and
information asymmetry surrounding innovative startups is so large that even what appear to be
ex ante marginal firms have the potential of turning into successful public companies.
5. Conclusions
We estimate the causal effects of a firm’s first patent on its growth, follow-on innovation,
and eventual success. We use plausibly exogenous variation in patent approvals generated by the
quasi-random allocation of patent applications to examiners with varying propensity to approve
applications at the USPTO. Our analysis shows that patent approvals have a substantial and longlasting impact on startups: firms whose first patent application is approved create more jobs,
enjoy faster sales growth, innovate more, and are more likely to go public or be acquired. These
positive effects of patent rights appear to be due to their role in facilitating startups’ access to
capital, which helps them turn ideas into products and products into revenues. We further show

33

In the case of our review-lag instrument, by contrast, the compliant subpopulation is likely the entire population:
all applicants’ review lag should be affected by exogenous delays in the patent review process.
34
This argument may explain why the 2SLS estimates of the local average treatment effects of patent grants on VC
funding shown in Table 8 tend to be larger than the naïve OLS coefficients shown in Table IA.3.

30

that patents are particularly beneficial to early-stage firms, for startups founded by inexperienced
entrepreneurs, for those located in states with many startups, and for firms in the IT sector.
Collectively, these patterns suggest that patent rights help overcome information frictions
between startups and financiers.
We also estimate the effects of delays in reviewing patent applications that are eventually
approved. Here, we combine exogenous variation arising from two sources: the time it takes to
assign patent applications to examiners and individual examiners’ historical review speeds. We
find that delays adversely affect startups’ employment and sales growth, subsequent innovation,
and probability of going public or being acquired. Together with our evidence showing that
patents facilitate access to VC funding, these findings suggest that the negative effects of review
delays are transmitted via a reduced chance of securing growth capital. When delays are
substantial, their effects on startups can be as adverse as those of patent denials.
Our findings speak to at least two related aspects of patent reform proposals currently before
Congress. First, calls for reforms frequently invoke the negative effects of patents on startups and
small firms. While our results by no means rule out the existence of negative effects of patents,
they do show that patents convey substantial economic benefits on startups by facilitating
contracting between them and their investors. These benefits are particularly important in the IT
sector—an industry in which skepticism towards the beneficial role of patents appears to be
particularly intense (Shapiro 2008).
Second, the adverse effects of review delays for startups should help inform reform proposals
targeted at accelerating the review process at the patent office. The USPTO has historically faced
budgetary constraints that limit its ability to allocate more resources to patent reviews. The
constraints force the agency to make choices among various priorities, including speeding up

31

reviews and improving review quality (Hegde 2012). Our findings suggest that the benefits of
speeding up reviews can be immediate and substantial, particularly for small inventors whom the
patent system is intended to protect.
The modern patent system is complex. In theory, it delivers private benefits and costs to
patentees but also generates positive and negative spillovers through many distinct channels, thus
making it impossible for any single empirical study to definitively establish the overall welfare
consequences of the patent system. Despite the abundance of evidence highlighting the spillover
effects of patent rights (e.g., Grilliches 1984; Jaffe 1986; Heller and Eisenberg 1998; Moser
2005; Williams 2013; Galasso and Schankerman 2015; Sampat and Williams 2015), empirical
evidence of the direct private benefits of patents to their owners remains scarce.
Our study helps fill this gap by providing the first causal evidence of the direct benefits of
patent rights in a large sample of startups. We find that patents offer a substantial bright side to
entrepreneurs and small inventors, especially if processed in a timely manner. In particular,
patents appear to play an important role in reducing uncertainty and alleviating information
asymmetries in the market for entrepreneurial capital. Reforms of the patent system that do not
take this role of patents into account run the risk of negatively impacting the availability of
capital for innovative startups.

32

References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Ufuk Akcigit, “Intellectual Property Rights Policy, Competition and
Innovation,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10 (2012), 1–42.
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
Econometrica, 60 (1992), 323–351.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009).
Anton, James J., and Dennis A. Yao, “Expropriation and Inventions: Appropriable Rents in the
Absence of Property Rights,” American Economic Review, 84 (1994), 190–209.
Arora, Ashish, Andrea Fosfuri, and Alfonso Gambardella, Markets for Technology: The
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001).
Arrow, Kenneth, “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in The
Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, Harold M. Groves,
ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962).
Asay, Clark D., et al., Letter to Congress dated March 02, 2015, available at:
http://www.utdallas.edu/~ugg041000/IPScholarsLettertoCongress_March_2_2015.pdf.
Balasubramanian, Natarajan, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, “What Happens When Firms Patent?
New Evidence from US Economic Census Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93
(2011), 126–146.
Becker, Gary, “On Reforming the Patent System,” post dated July 21, 2013, available at
http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/2013/07/on-reforming-the-patent-system-becker.html.
Bernstein, Shai, Xavier Giroud, and Richard Townsend, “The Impact of Venture Capital
Monitoring,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming, 2015.
Biais, Bruno, and Enrico Perotti, “Entrepreneurs and new ideas,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 39 (2008), 1105–1125.
Black, Bernard S., and Ronald J. Gilson, “Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital Markets:
Banks Versus Stock Markets.” Journal of Financial Economics, 47 (1998), 243–277.
Boldrin, Michele, and David K. Levine, “The Case Against Patents,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 27 (2013), 3–22.
Carley, Michael, Deepak Hegde, and Alan Marco, “What is the Probability of Receiving a U.S.
Patent?,” Yale Journal of Law and Technology, 17 (2015), 204–223.
Cockburn, Iain M., Samuel Kortum, and Scott Stern, “Are All Patent Examiners Equal?
Examiners, Patent Characteristics, and Litigation Outcomes,” in Patents in the KnowledgeBased Economy, Wesley M. Cohen and Stephen A. Merrill, ed. (Washington, D.C.: National
Academies Press, 2003).
Cohen, Lauren, Unit Gurun, and Scott D. Kominers, “Patent Trolls: Evidence from Targeted
Firms,” NBER Working Paper No. w20322, 2014.
Cohen, Wesley M., and Stephen A. Merrill, ed., Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2003).
33

Cohen, Wesley, Richard Nelson, and John Walsh, ‘‘Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not),’’ NBER
Working Paper No. 7552, 2000.
Conti, Annamaria, Marie Thursby, and Frank T. Rothaermel, “Show Me the Right Stuff: Signals
for High–Tech Startups,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 22 (2013), 341–
364.
Conti, Annamaria, Jerry Thursby, and Marie Thursby, “Patents as Signals for Startup
Financing,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 61 (2013), 592–622.
DiMasi, Joseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski, “The Price of Innovation: New
Estimates of Drug Development Costs,” Journal of Health Economics, 22 (2003), 151–185.
Evans, David S., and Boyan Jovanovic, “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice Under
Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, 97 (1989), 808–827.
Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, “Entrepreneurship and the Cost of
Experimentation,” Working Paper, 2015.
Frakes, Michael and Melissa F. Wasserman, “Patent Office Cohorts,” Working Paper, 2015.
Galasso, Alberto, and Mark Schankerman, “Patents and Cumulative Innovation: Causal
Evidence from the Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130 (2015), 317–369.
Gans, Joshua, David Hsu, and Scott Stern, “When Does Start-Up Innovation Spur the Gale of
Creative Destruction?,” Rand Journal of Economics, 33 (2002), 571–586.
Gans, Joshua, David Hsu, and Scott Stern, “The Impact of Uncertain Intellectual Property Rights
on the Market for Ideas: Evidence from Patent Grant Delays?,” Management Science, 54
(2008), 982–997.
Gompers, Paul, “Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital,” Journal
of Finance, 50 (1995), 1461–1489.
Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, “The Venture Capital Revolution,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15 (2001), 145–168.
Gorman, Michael, and William A. Sahlman, “What Do Venture Capitalists Do?,” Journal of
Business Venturing, 4 (1989), 231–248.
Graham, Stuart J.H., and Ted M. Sichelman, “Why Do Start-Ups Patent?” Berkeley Technology
Law Journal, 23 (2008), 1064–1097.
Graham, Stuart J.H., Robert P. Merges, Pamela Samuelson, and Ted M. Sichelman, “High
Technology Entrepreneurs and the Patent System: Results of the 2008 Berkeley Patent
Survey,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 24 (2009), 255–327.
Griliches, Zvi, R&D, Patents and Productivity (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1984).
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An Empirical
Study of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979-1995,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 32 (2001), 101–128.
Hegde, Deepak, “Funding and Performance at the US Patent and Trademark Office,” Nature
Biotechnology, 30 (2012), 148–150.

34

Hegde, Deepak and Hong Luo, “Patent Publication and the Market for Ideas,” Working Paper,
2016.
Heller, Michael A., and Rebecca S. Eisenberg, “Can Patents Deter Innovation? The
Anticommons in Biomedical Research,” Science, 280 (1998), 698–701.
Hellman, Thomas, and Manju Puri, “The Interaction Between Product Market and Financing
Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital,” Review of Financial Studies, 134 (2000), 959–984.
Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, “Whom You Know Matters: Venture
Capital Networks and Investment Performance,” Journal of Finance, 62 (2007), 251–301.
Hochberg, Yael V., Carlos J. Serrano, and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, “Patent Collateral, Investor
Commitment, and the Market for Venture Lending,” NBER Working Paper No. 20587, 2014.
Hsu, David H., and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, “Resources as Dual Sources of Advantage:
Implications for Valuing Entrepreneurial Firm Patents,” Strategic Management Journal 34
(2013): 761–781.
Imbens, Guido W. and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, “Recent Developments in the Econometrics of
Program Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47 (2009), 5–86.
Jaffe, Adam, “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms' Patents,
Profits and Market Value,” American Economic Review, 76 (1986), 984–1001.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Josh Lerner, Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent
System Is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do About It, (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2011).
Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Stromberg, “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World: An
Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies, 70 (2003),
281–315.
Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
Innovation,” RAND Journal of Economics, 31 (2000), 674–692.
Lemley, Mark A., and Bhaven N. Sampat, “Is the Patent Office a Rubber Stamp?,” Emory Law
Journal, 58 (2008), 181–209.
Lemley, Mark A., and Bhaven N. Sampat, “Examiner Characteristics and Patent Office
Outcomes,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94 (2012), 817–827.
Lemley, Mark A., and Carl Shapiro, “Patent Holdup and Royalty Stacking,” Texas Law Review,
85 (2007), 1991–2049.
Lerner, Josh, “Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms,” Journal of Finance, 50
(1995), 301–318.
Lerner, Josh, and Amit Seru, “The Use and Misuse of Patent Data: Issues for Corporate Finance
and Beyond,” Working paper, 2015.
LeRoy, Stephen F., and Larry D. Singell, “Knight on Risk and Uncertainty,” Journal of Political
Economy, 95 (1987), 394–406.
Li, Danielle, and Leila Agha, “Big Names or Big ideas: Do Peer-Review Panels Select the Best
Science Proposals?,” Science, 348 (2015), 434–438.

35

Lichtman, Douglas, “Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel,” University of Chicago Law
Review, 71 (2004), 151–182.
Long, Clarisa, “Patent Signals,” University of Chicago Law Review, 69 (2002), 625–679.
Mann, William, “Creditor Rights and Innovation: Evidence from Patent Collateral,” Working
Paper, 2015.
Moser, Petra, “How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth-Century
World’s Fairs,” American Economic Review, 95 (2005), 1214–1236.
Nordhaus, William D., “An Economic Theory of Technological Change,” American Economic
Review, 59 (1969), 18–28.
National Venture Capital Association, 2015 NVCA Yearbook, (2015), available at
http://nvca.org/research/stats-studies/.
Quillen, Cecil D., and Odgen H. Webster, “Continuing Patent Applications and Performance of
the US Patent and Trademark Office,” Federal Circuit Bar Journal, 11 (2001), 1–21.
Sampat, Bhaven N., and Mark A. Lemley, “Examining Patent Examination,” Stanford
Technology Law Review, 2010 (2010).
Sampat, B., and Heidi L. Williams, “How Do Patents Affect Follow-On Innovation? Evidence
from the Human Genome,” NBER Working Paper No. 21666, 2015.
Shapiro, Carl, “Patent Reform: Aligning Reward and Contribution,” in Innovation Policy and the
Economy, Volume 8, Adam B. Jaffe, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern, eds. (Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2008).
Sørensen, Jesper B, “Bureaucracy and Entrepreneurship: Workplace Effects on Entrepreneurial
Entry,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 52 (2007), 387–412.
Sorenson, Olav, and Toby Stuart, “Syndication Networks and the Spatial Distribution of Venture
Capital Investments,” American Journal of Sociology, 106 (2001), 1546–1588.
Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,”
in Identification and Inference for Econometric Models, Donald W.K. Andrews and James H.
Stock, eds. (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
Sudek, Richard, “Angel Investment Criteria,” Journal of Small Business Strategy, 17 (2006), 89–
103.
Tucker, Catherine, “Patent Trolls and Technology Diffusion: The Case of Medical Imaging,”
Working Paper, 2014.
Williams, Heidi, “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human
Genome,” Journal of Political Economy, 121 (2013), 1–27.

36

Appendix A. Variable Definitions.
Employment growth after the first-action decision on a firm’s first patent application is employmentt+j / employmentt
−1, where t is the first-action year and j =1…5. If a firm dies and thus does not appear in NETS in year t+j, we set
employmentt+j = 0.
Sales growth after the first-action decision on a firm’s first patent application is salest+j / salest −1, where t is the
first-action year and j =1…5. If a firm dies and thus does not appear in NETS in year t+j, we set salest+j = 0.
Pre-patent-filing employment growth is employmentt /employmentt-1 −1, where t is the year that a firm’s first patent
application is filed.
Pre-patent-filing sales growth is salest /salest-1 −1, where t is the year that a firm’s first patent application is filed.
No. subsequent patent applications is the number of applications with a filing date greater than the first-action date
of a firm’s first application.
No. subsequent approved patents is the number of approved applications with a filing date greater than the firstaction date of a firm’s first application.
Approval rate of subsequent patent applications is defined as no. subsequent approved patents / no. subsequent
patent applications. It is only defined for firms with at least one subsequent patent application.
Total citations to all subsequent patent applications is the number of citations received by all subsequent patent
applications combined. (This number is zero for firms with no subsequent applications.) We measure citations over
the five years following each patent application’s public disclosure date, which is typically 18 months after the
application’s filing date.
Average citations-per-patent to subsequent approved patents is the average number of citations received by those
subsequent patent applications that are approved. It is only defined for firms with at least one subsequent approved
patent.
Experienced founder is an indicator set equal to one if at least one of the up to five key executives of the startup
listed in Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ database previously founded a different firm according to the professional
background provided by Capital IQ.
High startup agglomeration state is an indicator set equal to one if the startup is headquartered in a state with above
median startup agglomeration in the year of the startup’s first patent application. We measure startup agglomeration
using the number of first-time patent applicants in the state.
Industry classification. IT startups are those whose first patent application is reviewed by an examiner belonging to
an art unit in one of the following USPTO technology centers: 21 (computer architecture, software, and information
security); 24 (computer networks, multiplex communication, video distribution, and security); 26 (communications);
or 28 (semiconductors, electrical and optical systems and components). Biochemistry startups are those whose first
patent application is reviewed by one of the following technology centers: 16 (biotechnology and organic
chemistry); or 17 (chemical and materials engineering). Startups belonging to other industries are those whose first
patent application is reviewed by one of the following technology centers: 36 (transportation, construction,
electronic commerce, agriculture, national security and license & review); or 37 (mechanical engineering,
manufacturing, products).

37

Figure 1. Distribution of Patent Examiners’ Approval Rates.
Panel A shows the sample distribution of patent examiner approval rates, defined as in equation (2). Panel B shows
the distribution of residual approval rates, obtained from a regression of approval rates on a full set of art-unit-byapplication-year fixed effects.

0

.05

Fraction

.1

.15

Panel A. Raw approval rates.

0

.2

.4
.6
Examiner approval rate (raw)

.8

1

0

.05

Fraction
.1

.15

.2

Panel B. Residual approval rates.

-1

-.5
0
Examiner approval rate (residual)

.5

38

Figure 2. The Effect of Patent Grants on Firm Growth.
The figure plots the estimated patent approval effect on employment growth (Panel A) and sales growth (Panel B)
over the five years following the first-action decision on a startup’s first patent application. Specifically, the solid
line shows the estimated patent approval effect obtained by estimating equation (1) by 2SLS separately over
horizons from one to five years after the first-action date. We use the approval rate of the examiner reviewing each
patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. The dashed lines show 95%
confidence intervals.

Panel A. Employment growth.

Panel B. Sales growth.

39

Figure 3. Distribution of the IV for Patent Review Lags.
Panel A shows the sample distribution of the review-lag instrument, defined as the sum of the years a patent
application takes from the filing date to the date it is assigned to an examiner’s docket and the average number of
years that examiner has taken in the past to process applications from docket to first-action. Panel B shows the
distribution of the residuals obtained after regressing the instrument on a full set of art-unit-by-application-year fixed
effects.

.1
0

.05

Fraction

.15

.2

Panel A. Raw IV.

0

2

4

6

8

Years from application to docket +
average years examiner has taken from docket to first-action
in the past (raw)

0

.1

Fraction

.2

.3

Panel B. Residual IV.

-4

-2

0
2
Years from application to docket +
average years the examiner has taken in the past
from docket to first-action (residual)

4

40

Figure 4. The Effect of Patent Review Delays on Firm Growth.
The figure plots the estimated effect of a year’s delay in reviewing a startup’s first patent application on the startup’s
employment growth (Panel A) and sales growth (Panel B) over the five years following the first-action decision on
the application. Specifically, the solid line shows the estimated review lag effect obtained by estimating equation (4)
by 2SLS separately over horizons from one to five years after the first-action date. We use the sum of the time a
patent application takes from the filing date to the date it is assigned to an examiner’s docket and the average time
that examiner has taken in the past from docket to first-action to instrument the application’s review lag. The dashed
lines show 95% confidence intervals.

Panel A. Employment growth.

Panel B. Sales growth.

41

Table 1. Summary Statistics.
The table reports summary statistics for the firms in our sample of first-time patent applicants (or “startups”) whose
first application is approved or rejected. Data on age, employment, and sales are only available for those startups
that can be matched to the National Establishment Times Series (NETS) database. For variable definitions and
details of their construction see Appendix A.
Startups whose first patent
application is …
approved
rejected
No. startups
% of startups
Panel A. Pre-filing characteristics
Age at first patent filing (years)
Employees at first-action date
Sales at first-action date ($ million)

Pre-filing employment growth
Pre-filing sales growth

30,120
65.7%

15,697
34.3%

median
mean
median
st.dev.
mean
median
st.dev.

2
28.7
8.0
47.8
4.4
1.0
8.0

2
27.7
8.0
47.0
4.3
0.8
8.1

mean
st.dev.
mean
st.dev.

17.1%
74.4%
18.7%
77.6%

15.8%
70.1%
16.7%
73.5%

Panel B. Subsequent growth in employment and sales
Employment growth after first-action decision on the startup’s first application, measured over the following …
… 1 year
mean
5.4%
-1.4%
st.dev.
52.5%
48.3%
… 3 years
mean
15.4%
-0.8%
st.dev.
120.9%
112.2%
… 5 years
mean
20.1%
-4.1%
st.dev.
157.3%
132.6%
Sales growth after first-action decision on the startup’s first application, measured over the following …
… 1 year
mean
7.6%
-0.2%
st.dev.
62.5%
56.8%
… 3 years
mean
22.8%
5.3%
st.dev.
144.1%
135.7%
… 5 years
mean
36.7%
7.8%
st.dev.
208.6%
176.4%
Panel C. Subsequent patenting: Patent applications filed after first-action on startup’s first application
No. subsequent patent applications
mean
3.3
1.2
st.dev.
16.8
5.9
No. subsequent approved patents
mean
1.8
0.5
st.dev.
9.6
2.8
Approval rate of subsequent patent applications
57.1%
36.4%
Total citations to all subsequent patent applications
mean
7.5
1.9
st.dev.
72.4
23.9
Average citations-per-patent to subsequent approved patents
mean
1.9
1.5
st.dev.
3.8
3.0
Panel D. Subsequent VC funding, IPOs, and acquisitions
% of startups that raise VC funding over following 3 years
% of startups that go public
% of startups that go public or are acquired

4.8%
0.68%
2.7%

3.4%
0.43%
2.0%

42

Table 2. Patent Examiner Approval Rate as IV: First-stage Results.
The table reports the results of estimating the first-stage equation (3) of our 2SLS analysis of the real effects of
patent grants. Specifically, we use the approval rate of the patent examiner in charge of reviewing a startup’s first
patent application to predict whether the application will be approved. In column 1, equation (3) is estimated in the
full sample. In columns 2 and 3, we control for firm size using the log number of employees or log sales, which are
only available for startups that can be matched to NETS. All specifications are estimated using OLS and include artunit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art
unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
First patent application approved?
(1)
(2)
(3)
IV: Patent examiner approval rate

0.670***
0.017

Log (number of employees at first-action)

0.658***

0.660***

0.022

0.022

0.001
0.002

Log (sales at first-action)

0.002
0.002

Diagnostics
R2
F test: IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)

23.9%
1,608.4***
45,817

27.3%
928.9***
21,869

27.4%
921.2***
21,829

43

Table 3. How Do Patent Grants Affect Employment and Sales Growth?
The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s subsequent growth
in employment (Panel A) and sales (Panel B). Odd-numbered columns report OLS results while even-numbered columns report 2SLS results using the approval
rate of the examiner reviewing the patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. Employment and sales data come from
NETS; thus, startups that cannot be matched to NETS are excluded. NETS data are available through 2011, resulting in reduced sample sizes when we consider
three-year and five-year outcomes. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications include art-unit-by-year and
headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient
estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Employment or sales growth after first-action decision on the startup’s first patent application,
measured over the following …
1 year
3 years
5 years
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. Employment growth
First patent application approved

0.073***
0.009

Log (employees at first-action)
Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
F test from 1st stage: IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)
Panel B. Sales growth
First patent application approved

-0.021***

Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
F test from 1st stage: IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)

0.035

-0.021***

0.154***
0.022

-0.067***

0.203**
0.087

-0.067***

0.249***
0.037

-0.097***

0.360**
0.152

-0.097***

0.002

0.002

0.006

0.006

0.009

0.009

12.6%
3.1%

n.a.
3.1%
928.9***
21,869

13.2%
10.1%

n.a.
10.1%
794.9***
19,009

14.3%
13.6%

n.a.
13.6%
469.3***
12,798

21,869
0.078***
0.010

Log (sales at first-action)

0.024

-0.019***

0.046
0.042

-0.019***

19,009
0.157***
0.027

-0.064***

0.220**
0.096

-0.064***

12,798
0.291***
0.051

-0.116***

0.514***
0.193

-0.116***

0.002

0.002

0.007

0.006

0.012

0.012

12.7%
5.0%

n.a.
5.0%
921.2***
21,829

13.0%
17.2%

n.a.
17.2%
789.0***
18,978

25.9%
28.9%

n.a.
28.9%
471.9***
12,781

21,829

18,978

12,781

44

Table 4. How Do Patent Grants Affect Subsequent Innovation and Future Exits?
The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s subsequent
innovation (columns 1-5) and the likelihood that the startup lists on a stock market or is acquired by another company after the first-action decision (columns 67). Data on subsequent applications come from the USPTO internal databases and include all applications that receive a final decision through December 31,
2013. Column 3 includes only startups filing at least one patent application after the first-action decision on the startup’s first patent application and for which we
can measure the approval rate of subsequent applications. Column 5 includes only those startups with at least one subsequent patent approval and for which we
can measure the average number of citations-per-patent to subsequently approved patents. We measure citations over the five years following each patent
application’s public disclosure date, which is typically 18 months after the application’s filing date. In untabulated results, we find that the effects in columns 4
and 5 are even stronger when we measure citations over seven or ten years. (Citation information is missing for one startup.) For variable definitions and further
details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated by 2SLS and include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. We use
the approval rate of the examiner reviewing each patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Subsequent innovation

First patent appl. approved
Diagnostics
Mean of non-logged dep. var.
F test from 1st stage:
IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)

Future exits

Log (1 +
subsequent
patent
applications)

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved
patents)

Approval rate
of subsequent
patent
applications

Log (1 + total
citations to all
subsequent
patent
applications)

Log (1 +
average
citations-perpatent to
subsequent
approved
patents)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.512***

0.398***

0.177***

0.524***

0.235***

0.0090***

0.0210***

0.036

0.029

0.036

0.045

0.075

0.0033

0.0062

2.7

1.5

6.1

1.9

1,608.4***
45,817

1,608.4***
45,817

54.3%
735.1***
18,554

1,608.5***
45,816

360.4***
13,710

Startup goes
public?

Startup goes
public or
is acquired?

0.59%
1,608.4***
45,817

2.50%
1,608.4***
45,817

45

Table 5. Instrumenting Patent Review Delays: First-stage Results.
The table reports the results of estimating the first-stage equation (5) of our 2SLS analysis of the real effects of
patent review delays. Specifically, we use the sum of the time a patent application takes from filing to the date it is
assigned to an examiner’s docket and the average time that examiner has taken in the past from docket to first-action
to predict the application’s review lag (i.e., the number of years between the application’s filing date and the date of
the examiner’s first-action decision on the application). Column 1 estimates equation (5) in the full sample. Columns
2 and 3 control for firm size using the log number of employees or log sales, which are only available for those
startups that can be matched to NETS. All specifications are estimated using OLS and include art-unit-by-year and
headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown
in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level (two-sided), respectively.

(1)
IV: Years from filing to docket + average years examiner
has taken from docket to first-action in the past

0.538***
0.014

Log (number of employees at first-action)

First patent review lag
(2)

(3)

0.549***

0.550***

0.016

0.016

-0.012***
0.003

Log (sales at first-action)

-0.009***
0.003

Diagnostics
R2
F test: IV = 0
No. of observations (startups)

61.4%
1,534.5***
29,830

64.2%
1,120.3***
14,230

64.2%
1,120.2***
14,208

46

Table 6. How Do Patent Review Delays Affect Employment and Sales Growth?
The table reports the results of estimating equation (4) in the subsample of successful first-time patent applicants to examine how the review lag of a startup’s
first patent application (i.e., the number of years from filing to first-action) affects the startup’s growth in employment (Panel A) and sales (Panel B). Oddnumbered columns report OLS results. Even-numbered columns report 2SLS results. We instrument review lags using the sum of the time a patent application
takes from the filing date to the date it is assigned to an examiner’s docket and the average time that examiner has taken in the past from docket to first-action.
Employment and sales data come from NETS; thus, startups that cannot be matched to NETS are excluded. NETS data are available through 2011, resulting in
reduced sample sizes when we consider three-year and five-year outcomes. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All
specifications include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in
italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Employment or sales growth after first-action decision on the startup’s first patent application,
measured over the following …
1 year
3 years
5 years
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. Employment growth
First patent review lag

-0.024***

Log (employees at first-action)

-0.026***

0.008

Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
F test from 1st stage: IV = 0
No. of observations (startups)

0.016

-0.026***

-0.128***
0.024

-0.078***

-0.085**
0.039

-0.077***

-0.194***
0.042

-0.120***

-0.212**
0.086

-0.121***

0.003

0.003

0.008

0.007

0.012

0.011

16.2%
5.2%

n.a.
5.2%
1,120.3***
14,230

17.1%
15.5%

n.a.
15.5%
1,053.3***
12,649

17.8%
20.1%

n.a.
20.1%
667.9***
9,183

14,230

Panel B. Sales growth
First patent review lag

-0.021**

Log (sales at first-action)

-0.023***

0.009

Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
F test from 1st stage: IV = 0
No. of observations (startups)

-0.026

-0.036**
0.017

-0.023***

12,649
-0.134***
0.026

-0.072***

-0.128***
0.047

-0.072***

9,183
-0.233***
0.051

-0.139***

-0.284***
0.109

-0.139***

0.003

0.003

0.009

0.008

0.016

0.015

15.7%
7.4%

n.a.
7.4%
1,120.2***
14,208

16.9%
23.0%

n.a.
23.0%
1,049.1***
12,633

17.8%
36.4%

n.a.
36.4%
666.4***
9,174

14,208

12,633

9,174

47

Table 7. How Do Patent Review Delays Affect Subsequent Innovation and Future Exits?
The table reports the results of estimating equation (4) in the subsample of successful first-time patent applicants to examine how the review lag of a startup’s
first patent application (i.e., the number of years from filing to first-action) affects the startup’s subsequent innovation (columns 1-5) and the likelihood that the
startup eventually lists on a stock market or is acquired by another company (columns 6-7). For details on the samples used in each column, see Table 4. For
variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated by 2SLS and include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state
fixed effects. We instrument review lags using the sum of the time a patent application takes from the filing date to the date it is assigned to an examiner’s docket
and the average time that examiner has taken in the past from docket to first-action. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are
shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Subsequent innovation

First patent review lag

Log (1 +
subsequent
patent
applications)
(1)

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved
patents)
(2)

Approval rate
of subsequent
patent
applications
(3)

Log (1 + total
citations to all
subsequent
patent
applications)
(4)

-0.140***

-0.136***

-0.041***

-0.186***

-0.074***

0.019

Diagnostics
Mean of non-logged dep. var.
F test from 1st stage: IV = 0
No. of observations (startups)

Future exits
Log (1 +
average
citations-perpatent to
subsequent
approved
patents)
(5)

3.4
1,534.5***
29,830

0.016

2.0
1,534.5***
29,830

0.011

58.7%
1,301.9***
14,406

0.024

8.1
1,534.5***
29,830

0.024

2.0
860.0***
11,290

Startup goes
public?
(6)

Startup goes
public or
is acquired?
(7)

-0.0039**

-0.0062*

0.0018

0.0034

0.67%
1,534.5***
29,830

2.72%
1,534.5***
29,830

48

Table 8. Do Patents Affect Access to VC Funding?
The table reports the results of estimating equation (6) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s ability to raise VC
funding. The dependent variable in columns 1-5 is an indicator set equal to one if the startup raises VC funding at some point in the 1…5 years following the
first-action decision, respectively. Startups that do not raise VC funding but instead go public in the 1…5 years after first-action are excluded. We also exclude
rare instances of startups that have raised five or more VC rounds by the first-action date. (Results are robust to using alternative cutoffs or to not excluding these
startups.) All specifications are estimated by 2SLS and include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. We use the approval rate of the examiner
reviewing each patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at
the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (twosided), respectively.

… 1 year?
(1)

Following the first-action decision on its first patent application,
does the startup raise VC funding in the next …
… 2 years?
… 3 years?
… 4 years?
… 5 years?
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

First patent application approved

0.012***

Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)

0.272***

0.382***

0.408***

0.418***

0.421***

0.010

0.011

0.011

0.011

0.011

2.6%

3.8%

4.3%

4.6%

4.7%

5.1

8.1

9.3

0.006

Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to VC
round for successful applicants
F test from 1st stage:
IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)

1,566.0***
45,298

0.021***
0.008

1,561.1***
45,285

0.023***
0.008

1,558.5***
45,274

0.027***
0.008

0.028***
0.008

10.0

10.3

1,557.4***
45,255

1,558.1***
45,250

49

Table 9. How Do Patents Affect Access to VC Funding? Subsample Analyses.
The table examines how the effect of a patent grant on facilitating access to VC funding varies across different
subsamples. The dependent variable in all panels is an indicator set equal to one if the startup raises VC funding at
some point in the 3 years following the first-action decision on its first patent application. (Startups that do not raise
VC funding but instead go public in the 3 years following first-action are excluded.) Panel A splits startups by the
number of VC rounds raised before the first-action date as follows: column 1 models startups without prior VC
funding; columns 2 and 3 model startups with one or two prior rounds, respectively; and column 4 models startups
with three or more prior rounds. Panel B splits startups by their founders’ prior entrepreneurial experience as
follows: column 1 models startups whose founding team includes no founder with prior startup experience; column
2 models startups with at least one experienced founder; and column 3 allows the patent approval effect to vary with
experience in a pooled sample of startups with experienced and inexperienced founders. Data on founder experience
come from Capital IQ and are only available for startups that raise VC funding at some point in their lives. As a
result, the sample in Panel B includes only startups that have raised at least one prior VC round. Panel C splits
startups according to whether they are headquartered in a state with above or below median startup agglomeration in
the year of their first patent application. Panel D splits startups by industry. In Panels C and D, column 3 has more
observations than columns 1 and 2 combined because there are fewer art-unit-by-year singletons in column 3 than in
columns 1 and 2. Panels B, C, and D exclude rare instances of startups that have raised five or more VC rounds by
the first-action date. (Results are robust to using alternative cutoffs or to not excluding these startups.) For variable
definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated by 2SLS using the
approval rate of the examiner reviewing each patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the
application is approved. In Panels B and C, column 3 includes the interaction of the examiner approval rate with
inexperienced founder and high startup agglomeration state, respectively, as instrument for the interacted patent
approval indicator. In these two cases, the F test we report is a Cragg-Donald weak identification test. All
specifications in Panels A, B, and D include art-unit-by-year fixed effects and headquarter-state fixed effects. The
specifications in Panel C include art-unit-by-year fixed effects but no headquarter-state fixed effects, as the panel
exploits variation across U.S. states. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are
shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

Panel A. Variation in funding round.
In the 3 years following the first-action decision on its first patent
application, does the startup raise …
its fourth or
its first VC
its second VC
its third VC
higher VC
round?
round?
round?
round?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
First patent application approved

0.010**

0.467***

0.218

0.005

0.155

0.235

Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)

0.165
0.162

-0.168*
0.095

Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
F test from 1st stage:
IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)

1.2%

39.6%

51.1%

53.3%

1,384.4***
42,254

14.5***
500

11.4***
350

13.6***
890

50

Panel B. Variation in entrepreneurial experience.
Does the startup raise VC funding in the 3 years following the firstaction decision on its first patent application?
Inexperienced
Experienced
founder
founder
All founders
(1)
(2)
(3)
First patent application approved

0.445*

-0.042

0.266

0.167

… × inexperienced founder

0.202
0.123

0.321**
0.142

-0.291***

Inexperienced founder

0.096

Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)
Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
F test from 1st stage:
IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)

0.160

0.120

0.157***

0.099

0.079

0.052

47.9%

58.2%

54.2%

15.4***
543

27.9***
1,252

8.7***
363

Panel C. Variation in startup agglomeration across U.S. states.
Does the startup raise VC funding in the 3 years following the firstaction decision on its first patent application?
High startup
Low startup
agglomeration states
agglomeration states
All states
(1)
(2)
(3)
First patent application approved

0.039***

0.008

0.012

0.009

… × high startup agglomeration state

0.007
0.009

0.031***
0.008

-0.014**

High startup agglomeration state
Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)
Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
F test from 1st stage:
IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)

0.006

0.424***

0.388***

0.412***

0.013

0.017

0.011

5.8%

2.7%

4.3%

789.6***
22,652

992.6***
21,875

1,417.1***
45,274

51

Panel D. Variation across industries.
Does the startup raise VC funding in the 3 years following the
first-action decision on its first patent application?
IT
Biochemistry
Other industries
(1)
(2)
(3)
First patent application approved

0.042***

Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)

0.401***

0.483***

0.369***

0.014

0.017

0.022

7.0%

4.9%

2.3%

774.9***
14,638

359.6***
8,485

583.8***
22,151

0.016

Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
F test from 1st stage:
IV (examiner approval rate) = 0
No. of observations (startups)

-0.008
0.020

0.022**
0.010

52

INTERNET APPENDIX

(NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION)

Figure IA.1. Time Lag Between Patent Decisions and VC Investments.

0

.05

Fraction

.1

.15

For successful first-time patent applicants that go on to raise VC funding at some point in the five years following
the first-action decision, the figure shows the distribution of the time lag (in months) between the first-action date
and the VC investment date.

0

20
40
Months from first-action decision to VC investment

60

1

Table IA.1. How Do Patent Grants Affect Subsequent Innovation and Future Exits? OLS Results.
The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s subsequent
innovation (columns 1-5) and the likelihood that the startup lists on a stock market or is acquired by another company after the first-action decision (columns 67). The analysis here is analogous to Table 4, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors
clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
(two-sided), respectively.
Subsequent innovation

First patent appl. approved
Diagnostics
R2
Mean of non-logged dep. var.
No. of observations (startups)

Future exits

Log (1 +
subsequent
patent
applications)
(1)

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved
patents)
(2)

Approval rate
of subsequent
patent
applications
(3)

Log (1 + total
citations to all
subsequent
patent
applications)
(4)

Log (1 +
average
citations-perpatent to
subsequent
approved
patents)
(5)

0.351***

0.290***

0.158***

0.334***

0.012

0.009

0.008

17.1%
2.7
45,817

16.8%
1.5
45,817

19.8%
54.3%
18,554

Startup goes
public?
(6)

Startup goes
public or
is acquired?
(7)

0.059***

0.0031***

0.0097***

0.015

0.016

0.0009

0.0018

17.3%
6.1
45,816

26.1%
1.9
13,710

10.2%
0.59%
45,817

11.7%
2.50%
45,817

2

Table IA.2. How Do Patent Review Delays Affect Subsequent Innovation and Future Exits? OLS Results.
The table reports the results of estimating equation (4) in the subsample of successful first-time patent applicants to examine how the review lag of a startup’s
first patent application (i.e., the number of years from filing to first-action) affects the startup’s subsequent innovation (columns 1-5) and the likelihood that the
startup eventually lists on a stock market or is acquired by another company (columns 6-7). The analysis here is analogous to Table 7, with the only difference
being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient
estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Subsequent innovation

First patent review lag
Diagnostics
R2
Mean of non-logged dep. var.
No. of observations (startups)

Future exits

Log (1 +
subsequent
patent
applications)
(1)

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved
patents)
(2)

Approval rate
of subsequent
patent
applications
(3)

Log (1 + total
citations to all
subsequent
patent
applications)
(4)

Log (1 +
average
citations-perpatent to
subsequent
approved
patents)
(5)

-0.178***

-0.154***

-0.025***

-0.236***

-0.108***

Startup goes
public?
(6)

Startup goes
public or
is acquired?
(7)

-0.0035***

-0.0110***

0.011

0.009

0.006

0.015

0.013

0.0008

0.0019

17.1%
3.4
29,830

16.8%
2.0
29,830

18.6%
58.7%
14,406

19.3%
8.1
29,830

27.9%
2.0
11,290

14.2%
0.67%
29,830

15.9%
2.72%
29,830

3

Table IA.3. Do Patents Affect Access to VC Funding? OLS Results.
The table reports the results of estimating equation (6) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s ability to raise VC
funding. The analysis here is analogous to Table 8, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors
clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
(two-sided), respectively.
Following the first-action decision on its first patent application,
does the startup raise VC funding in the next …
… 1 year?
… 2 years?
… 3 years?
… 4 years?
… 5 years?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
First patent application approved
Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)
Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to VC
round for successful applicants
No. of observations (startups)

0.008***

0.012***

0.014***

0.015***

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.015***
0.002

0.272***

0.382***

0.408***

0.418***

0.421***

0.010

0.011

0.011

0.011

0.011

31.6%
2.6%

39.6%
3.8%

40.7%
4.3%

40.4%
4.6%

40.1%
4.7%

5.1
45,298

8.0
45,285

9.2
45,274

10.0
45,255

10.3
45,250

4

Table IA.4. How Do Patents Affect Access to VC Funding? OLS Subsample Analyses.
The table examines how the effect of patent grants on facilitating access to VC funding varies across different
subsamples. The analysis here is analogous to Table 9, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of
2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the
coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively.

Panel A. Variation in funding round.
In the 3 years following the first-action decision on its first patent
application, does the startup raise …
its fourth or
its first VC
its second VC
its third VC
higher VC
round?
round?
round?
round?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
First patent application approved

0.005***

0.201**

0.203**

0.001

0.078

0.101

Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)

0.157***
0.053

-0.169
0.124

Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (startups)

9.9%
1.2%
42,254

55.9%
39.6%
500

58.4%
51.1%
350

46.1%
53.3%
890

Panel B. Variation in entrepreneurial experience.
Does the startup raise VC funding in the 3 years following the firstaction decision on its first patent application?
Inexperienced
Experienced
founder
founder
All founders
(1)
(2)
(3)
First patent application approved

0.051

0.086

0.120

0.093

… × inexperienced founder

0.121*
0.065

0.064
0.091

-0.129*

Inexperienced founder

0.066

Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)
Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (startups)

0.108

0.126

0.133**

0.144

0.110

0.062

64.4%
47.9%
363

56.6%
58.2 %
543

52.5%
54.2%
1,252

5

Panel C. Variation in startup agglomeration across U.S. states.
Does the startup raise VC funding in the 3 years following the firstaction decision on its first patent application?
High startup
Low startup
agglomeration states
agglomeration states
All states
(1)
(2)
(3)
First patent application approved

0.018***

0.006**

0.003

0.002

… × high startup agglomeration state

0.007***
0.002

0.014***
0.003

High startup agglomeration state
Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)
Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (startups)

-0.003
0.003

0.424***

0.388***

0.412***

0.014

0.018

0.011

45.0%
5.8%
22,652

39.1%
2.7%
21,875

40.5%
4.3%
45,274

Panel D. Variation across industries.
Does the startup raise VC funding in the 3 years following the
first-action decision on its first patent application?
IT
Biochemistry
Other industries
(1)
(2)
(3)
First patent application approved

0.028***

Log(1 + # prior VC rounds)

0.402***

0.484***

0.370***

0.015

0.018

0.023

43.4%
7.0%
14,638

45.3%
4.9%
8,485

30.8%
2.3%
22,151

0.004

Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (startups)

0.006
0.004

0.009***
0.002

6

