NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF TRADE POLICY
Pinelopi K. Goldberg
Nina Pavcnik
Working Paper 21957
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21957

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

Prepared for the Handbook of Commercial Policy, edited by Kyle Bagwell and Robert Staiger. We
thank seminar participants at the Dartmouth-SNU conference and the Handbook Conference at Dartmouth,
especially Bruce Blonigen, Woan Foong Wong, and Peter Schott, for comments. We thank Carla Larin
and Konrad von Moltke for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Pinelopi K. Goldberg and Nina Pavcnik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Trade Policy
Pinelopi K. Goldberg and Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 21957
February 2016
JEL No. F10,F13,F14,F63,F68,L11
ABSTRACT
The last two decades have witnessed a shift in the focus of international trade research from trade policy
to other forms of trade frictions (e.g., transportation, information and communication costs). Implicit
in this development is the widespread view that trade policy no longer matters. We confront this view
by critically examining a large body of evidence on the effects of trade policy on economically important
outcomes. We focus on actual as opposed to hypothetical policy changes. We begin with a discussion
of the methodological challenges one faces in the measurement of trade policy and identification of
its causal effects. We then discuss the evidence on the effects of trade policy on a series of outcomes
that include: (1) aggregate outcomes, such as trade volumes (and their price and quantity subcomponents),
the extensive margin of trade, and static, aggregate gains from trade; (2) firm and industry performance,
i.e., productivity, costs, and markups; (3) labor markets, i.e., wages, employment, and wage inequality;
(4) long-run aggregate growth and poverty, secondary distortions and misallocation, uncertainty. We
conclude that the perception that trade policy is no longer relevant arises to a large extent from the
inability to precisely measure the various forms of non-tariff barriers that have replaced tariffs as the
primary tools of trade policy. Better measurement is thus an essential prerequisite of policy-relevant
research in the future. Despite measurement challenges and scant evidence on the impact of actual
policy changes, existing evidence when properly interpreted points to large effects of trade policy
on economically relevant outcomes, especially when trade policy interacts with other developments,
e.g., technological change. We point to areas and opportunities for further research and draw lessons
from the past to apply to future studies.

Pinelopi K. Goldberg
Yale University
Department of Economics
37 Hillhouse Ave.
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
penny.goldberg@yale.edu
Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction	  
1.1	  Does	  Trade	  Policy	  Matter?	  
In	  an	  influential	  study	  of	  the	  factors	  driving	  the	  growth	  of	  world	  trade,	  Baier	  and	  
Bergstrand	  (2001)	  cite	  an	  equally	  influential	  quote	  by	  Krugman	  (1995):	  
“Most	  journalistic	  discussion	  of	  the	  growth	  of	  world	  trade	  seems	  to	  view	  growing	  
integration	  as	  driven	  by	  a	  technological	  imperative	  –	  to	  believe	  that	  improvements	  in	  
transportation	  and	  communication	  technology	  constitute	  an	  irresistible	  force	  dissolving	  national	  
boundaries.	  International	  economists,	  however,	  tend	  to	  view	  much,	  though	  not	  all,	  of	  the	  
growth	  of	  trade	  as	  having	  essentially	  political	  causes,	  seeing	  its	  great	  expansion	  after	  World	  
War	  II	  largely	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  removal	  of	  the	  protectionist	  measures	  that	  had	  constricted	  
world	  markets	  since	  1913	  (p.	  328)”.	  
Twenty	  years	  later,	  the	  view	  that	  trade	  policy	  plays	  only	  a	  secondary	  role	  in	  the	  growing	  
importance	  of	  international	  trade	  remains	  pervasive,	  with	  one	  difference:	  the	  view	  is	  no	  longer	  
confined	  to	  journalistic	  circles	  but	  has	  now	  become	  dominant	  in	  academic	  research.	  	  Though	  
most	  frequently	  expressed	  informally,	  during	  seminar	  and	  conference	  presentations,	  it	  is	  also	  
reflected	  in	  the	  academic	  trade	  literature.	  
The	  main	  focus	  in	  recent	  academic	  work,	  both	  theoretical	  and	  empirical/quantitative,	  
has	  been	  on	  “trade	  costs”,	  which	  are	  often	  measured	  as	  iceberg	  costs.	  	  Such	  costs	  are	  typically	  
backed	  out	  from	  empirical	  specifications	  that	  are	  informed	  by	  specific	  theoretical	  models	  
without	  any	  attempt	  to	  relate	  them	  to	  actual	  trade	  policy	  measures.	  Of	  course,	  trade	  costs	  
capture	  much	  more	  than	  trade	  policy.	  	  In	  fact	  a	  frequent	  claim	  is	  that	  the	  “backed	  out”	  trade	  
costs	  appear	  to	  be	  much	  larger	  than	  the	  costs	  that	  observable	  trade	  policy	  restrictions	  alone	  
would	  justify.	  	  However,	  without	  actually	  measuring	  the	  restrictiveness	  of	  trade	  policy	  
measures,	  it	  is	  hard	  to	  determine	  what	  exactly	  is	  captured	  in	  trade	  costs.	  	  Part	  of	  the	  problem	  
lies	  with	  the	  difficulties	  in	  the	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  –	  an	  issue	  to	  which	  we	  will	  
repeatedly	  come	  back	  to	  in	  the	  course	  of	  this	  chapter.	  	  These	  measurement	  challenges	  are	  
compounded	  by	  the	  belief	  that	  “other	  trade	  costs”,	  such	  as	  	  transportation,	  search	  and	  
communication	  costs	  that	  are	  not	  unique	  to	  cross-­‐country	  trade,	  as	  well	  as	  productivity	  growth	  
2	  	  
	  

in	  less	  developed	  countries	  (most	  importantly,	  China),	  have	  been	  more	  important	  than	  trade	  
policy	  in	  the	  last	  few	  decades.	  	  If	  this	  belief	  is	  true,	  any	  effort	  to	  carefully	  measure	  and	  study	  
trade	  policy	  barriers	  would	  be	  a	  waste	  of	  time.	  	  The	  field	  is	  slowly	  moving	  towards	  the	  analysis	  
of	  the	  spatial	  allocation	  of	  economic	  activity,	  which	  is	  akin	  more	  to	  economic	  geography	  than	  
international	  trade.	  Even	  in	  studies	  that	  exploit	  specific	  trade	  policy	  changes,	  trade	  policy	  is	  
more	  often	  an	  afterthought	  than	  the	  primary	  focus	  of	  analysis.	  Recent	  work	  on	  trade	  
liberalization	  episodes	  in	  developing	  countries,	  for	  example,	  has	  used	  trade	  policy	  as	  an	  
identification	  device	  –	  the	  interest	  has	  been	  less	  on	  the	  trade	  policy	  per	  se	  and	  more	  on	  the	  
effects	  of	  increased	  trade	  (for	  which	  trade	  policy	  serves	  as	  an	  instrument).	  Similarly,	  in	  
theoretical	  and	  quantitative	  work,	  trade	  policy	  changes	  are	  often	  used	  in	  counterfactual	  
exercises	  in	  order	  to	  demonstrate	  the	  workings	  of	  a	  model,	  but	  there	  is	  little	  interest	  in	  the	  
policy	  itself.	  	  Perhaps	  the	  most	  indicative	  sign	  of	  this	  attitude	  is	  the	  absence	  of	  any	  rigorous	  
academic	  study	  of	  the	  recent	  “Buy	  American”	  clause	  of	  the	  Recovery	  Act.	  	  This	  dearth	  of	  policy-­‐
oriented	  research	  in	  international	  trade	  is	  to	  be	  contrasted	  with	  the	  plethora	  of	  academic	  
papers	  in	  the	  fields	  of	  labor,	  public	  finance,	  health,	  education	  and	  industrial	  organization	  that	  
have	  studied	  specific	  policy	  changes	  (e.g.,	  “No-­‐Child-­‐Left-­‐Behind”	  Act,	  Affordable	  Care	  Act,	  
mergers,	  etc.).	  The	  only	  exception	  to	  this	  pattern	  is	  studies	  of	  trade	  agreements,	  which	  are	  by	  
nature	  closely	  linked	  to	  trade	  policy	  and	  its	  institutions.	  
The	  view	  that	  commercial	  policy	  has	  become	  unimportant	  for	  world	  trade	  seems	  like	  an	  
oxymoron	  in	  a	  field	  that	  would	  not	  exist	  without	  the	  existence	  of	  frictions	  to	  cross-­‐border	  trade	  
induced	  by	  policy	  (tariffs,	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers,	  different	  currencies,	  etc.).	  It	  begs	  the	  question	  of	  
why	  this	  perspective	  has	  gained	  support	  among	  academics	  over	  the	  last	  two	  decades.	  Is	  it	  
indeed	  the	  case	  that	  trade	  policy	  has	  become	  irrelevant,	  or	  is	  the	  shift	  of	  academic	  research	  
away	  from	  trade	  policy	  simply	  the	  result	  of	  the	  difficulties	  and	  complexities	  associated	  with	  its	  
measurement?	  
To	  a	  large	  extent,	  the	  postulated	  irrelevance	  of	  trade	  policy	  arises	  from	  the	  observation	  
that,	  especially	  in	  the	  developed	  world,	  international	  trade	  has	  been	  already	  significantly	  
liberalized.	  Lant	  Pritchett	  succinctly	  summarized	  this	  viewpoint	  in	  a	  recent	  interview	  with	  the	  
magazine	  Reason	  (2008):	  
3	  	  
	  

“Relative	  to	  when	  I	  started	  working	  as	  a	  trade	  economist	  in	  the	  early	  1980s,	  the	  world	  is	  
completely	  liberalized.	  So	  the	  incremental	  gains	  from	  anything	  that	  could	  happen	  as	  a	  result	  of	  
WTO	  negotiations	  are	  just	  infinitesimal”.1	  
Taken	  at	  face	  value,	  Pritchett’s	  claim	  suggests	  that	  commercial	  policy	  has	  in	  fact	  had	  
significant	  effects	  in	  the	  past,	  and	  that	  its	  own	  success	  has	  rendered	  it	  irrelevant.	  	  However,	  
early	  studies	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policies	  and	  agreements	  from	  the	  1970s	  and	  1980s	  tend	  to	  
report	  small	  effects	  of	  these	  policies	  (see	  Deardorff	  and	  Stern	  (1986)	  for	  a	  review	  of	  this	  early	  
evidence).	  	  Several	  later	  studies	  have	  employed	  gravity-­‐equation-­‐based	  approaches	  in	  order	  to	  
identify	  the	  relative	  contributions	  of	  trade	  policies,	  reduction	  in	  transportation	  and	  other	  trade	  
costs,	  and	  income	  growth	  or	  convergence	  of	  trading	  partners	  to	  the	  growth	  of	  trade,	  yielding	  
mixed	  results.	  	  Among	  these	  studies,	  perhaps	  the	  best	  known	  and	  most	  controversial	  is	  a	  study	  
by	  Rose	  (2004)	  that	  claimed	  that	  GATT	  or	  WTO	  membership	  had	  no	  discernable	  effects	  on	  trade	  
volumes.	  Though	  the	  results	  of	  this	  study	  were	  subsequently	  questioned	  and	  challenged	  in	  
several	  follow-­‐up	  papers2,	  the	  debate	  they	  inspired	  pointed	  to	  a	  concern	  that	  is	  distinct	  from	  
the	  standard	  measurement	  problems	  faced	  in	  the	  evaluation	  of	  trade	  policy:	  its	  fundamental	  
endogeneity.	  In	  the	  extreme,	  this	  concern	  implies	  that	  trade	  policy	  is	  the	  result	  rather	  than	  the	  
cause	  of	  changes	  in	  the	  trade	  environment;	  hence,	  it	  may	  not	  be	  surprising	  that	  some	  studies	  
find	  that	  trade	  policy	  has	  no	  bite	  –	  by	  the	  time	  it	  comes	  into	  effect,	  trade	  changes	  may	  already	  
be	  in	  motion.	  	  
Claims	  of	  the	  diminishing	  relevance	  of	  trade	  policy,	  which	  are	  based	  partly	  on	  the	  
undisputed	  observation	  that	  significant	  liberalization	  has	  already	  taken	  place	  and	  partly	  on	  
studies	  of	  the	  aggregate	  effects	  of	  trade	  agreements	  employing	  gravity-­‐equation-­‐type	  
approaches,	  are	  to	  be	  contrasted	  with	  the	  evidence	  from	  occasional	  detailed	  studies	  of	  the	  
effects	  of	  trade	  restrictions	  (or	  their	  removal)	  on	  specific	  industries:	  Voluntary	  Export	  Restraints	  
on	  autos,	  anti-­‐dumping	  suits,	  and	  the	  Multi	  Fibre	  Agreement	  in	  apparel	  and	  textiles.	  	  Although	  
narrower	  in	  scope,	  such	  studies	  have	  the	  benefit	  of	  careful	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  and	  
attention	  to	  institutional	  features	  of	  the	  economic	  environment	  that	  broader	  aggregate	  studies	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
2

	  This	  quote	  was	  originally	  used	  in	  Levy	  (2008).	  
	  See,	  Tomz,	  Goldstein,	  and	  Rivers	  (2007)	  comment	  on	  Rose’s	  paper	  or	  Subramanian	  and	  Wei	  (2007).	  

	  

4	  	  
	  

of	  trade	  policies	  may	  not	  permit.	  Several	  of	  these	  industry	  case	  studies	  have	  documented	  
significant	  adjustments	  to	  trade	  policy	  changes	  along	  several	  margins,	  suggesting	  that	  the	  world	  
may	  not	  be	  as	  liberalized	  as	  it	  seems	  and	  that	  failure	  to	  document	  significant	  effects	  of	  trade	  
policies	  may	  instead	  be	  due	  to	  measurement	  and	  identification	  challenges	  rather	  than	  the	  
absence	  of	  such	  effects.	  
Against	  this	  background,	  the	  question	  that	  this	  chapter	  poses	  and	  seeks	  to	  address	  is:	  
“What	  is	  the	  evidence	  on	  the	  actual	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy,	  as	  opposed	  to	  other	  causes	  of	  
changes	  in	  trade?”	  Does	  trade	  policy	  matter?	  
	  
1.2	  Conceptual	  Issues	  and	  Focus	  of	  this	  Chapter	  
Before	  we	  proceed,	  it	  is	  useful	  to	  delineate	  the	  focus	  of	  this	  chapter	  and	  clarify	  some	  
conceptual	  issues.	  
We	  start	  the	  chapter	  by	  discussing	  the	  main	  methodological	  challenges	  one	  faces	  in	  the	  
evaluation	  of	  trade	  policy	  and	  by	  describing	  the	  ways	  the	  literature	  has	  addressed	  them.	  	  Our	  
discussion	  covers	  general	  methodological	  issues	  that	  arise	  in	  the	  evaluation	  of	  any	  type	  of	  trade	  
policy,	  including	  specific	  policies	  that	  are	  the	  focus	  of	  other	  chapters	  in	  this	  Handbook.	  These	  
methodological	  issues	  are	  addressed	  in	  section	  2.	  The	  most	  significant	  of	  them	  are	  briefly	  
summarized	  below:	  
a)	  Measurement:	  Measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  is	  perhaps	  one	  of	  the	  toughest	  issues	  faced	  in	  
the	  evaluation	  of	  trade	  policy,	  especially	  in	  cases	  where	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  are	  the	  primary	  
trade	  policy	  instrument.	  The	  challenges	  in	  the	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  raise	  the	  question	  
of	  whether	  the	  world	  is	  truly	  liberalized,	  as	  many	  believe,	  or	  if	  this	  impression	  is	  misguided	  and	  
due	  to	  our	  inability	  to	  measure	  the	  restrictions	  that	  really	  matter.	  	  	  
b)	  Aggregation	  and	  Heterogeneity:	  Even	  when	  trade	  restriction	  measures	  are	  available,	  as	  is	  the	  
case	  with	  import	  tariffs,	  the	  available	  information	  comes	  at	  a	  highly	  disaggregate	  level.	  
Economic	  analysis	  of	  these	  restrictions’	  effects	  often	  requires	  the	  researcher	  to	  aggregate	  the	  
information	  to	  a	  higher	  level	  (e.g.,	  industry,	  region,	  or	  country).	  	  Given	  that	  there	  are	  many	  
different	  ways	  to	  aggregate	  the	  information,	  aggregation	  would	  ideally	  be	  guided	  by	  a	  clear	  
theoretical	  or	  conceptual	  framework.	  	  But	  this	  in	  turn	  raises	  the	  question	  of	  whether	  the	  results	  
5	  	  
	  

are	  not	  merely	  consistent	  with,	  but	  also	  dictated	  by	  the	  framework.	  	  In	  addition,	  the	  conceptual	  
framework	  underlying	  the	  analysis	  may	  imply	  homogenous	  or	  heterogeneous	  (across	  types	  of	  
workers,	  firms,	  sectors	  of	  the	  economy,	  etc.)	  effects.	  Any	  analysis	  of	  heterogeneous	  effects	  
needs	  to	  be	  consistent	  with	  the	  underlying	  framework.	  	  
c)	  Endogeneity	  of	  Trade	  Policy:	  	  The	  endogeneity	  of	  policy	  is	  not	  an	  issue	  unique	  to	  trade	  policy.	  	  
However,	  in	  contrast	  to	  the	  case	  of	  domestic	  policies,	  randomized	  experiments,	  the	  gold	  
standard	  for	  identification	  in	  empirical	  work,	  are	  substantially	  harder,	  if	  not	  impossible,	  to	  carry	  
out	  in	  the	  context	  of	  trade	  policy.	  	  Despite	  this	  disadvantage,	  trade	  policy	  has	  at	  times	  the	  
advantage	  of	  plausibly	  economically	  exogenous,	  quasi-­‐experimental	  variation	  induced	  by	  
events	  that	  are	  outside	  the	  control	  of	  specific	  industries	  or	  lobbies	  within	  a	  specific	  country	  
(e.g.,	  IMF	  interventions	  that	  dictated	  the	  pace	  and	  scope	  of	  trade	  liberalization,	  WTO	  accession,	  
etc.).	  Nevertheless,	  even	  when	  trade	  policy	  is	  plausibly	  economically	  exogenous,	  in	  the	  sense	  
that	  it	  was	  not	  set	  deliberately	  in	  response	  to	  certain	  economic	  developments,	  the	  concern	  
about	  econometric	  endogeneity	  (i.e.,	  omitted	  variable	  bias,	  effect	  of	  pre-­‐existing	  trends,	  etc.)	  
remains	  and	  must	  be	  adequately	  addressed.	  	  	  
(d)	  Anticipation	  and	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  policy:	  	  If	  a	  trade	  policy	  change	  is	  unanticipated,	  
firms	  and	  consumers	  cannot	  change	  their	  behavior	  prior	  to	  the	  policy	  implementation.	  	  
However,	  trade	  policy	  changes	  and	  agreements	  are	  often	  preannounced,	  so	  that	  firms	  and	  
consumers	  may	  adjust	  their	  behavior	  in	  anticipation	  of	  the	  announced	  policy	  change.	  	  In	  
addition,	  trade	  reforms	  and	  agreements	  are	  presumed	  to	  reduce	  the	  uncertainty	  about	  the	  
trading	  environment.	  	  An	  agreement	  that	  leads	  to	  small	  changes	  in	  the	  levels	  of	  trade	  
restrictions,	  but	  large	  declines	  in	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  policy,	  could	  in	  principle	  have	  large	  
effects	  on	  trade	  flows	  and	  other	  outcomes.	  Inference	  about	  the	  trade	  policy	  effects	  therefore	  
needs	  to	  take	  into	  account	  behavioral	  responses	  due	  to	  anticipation	  or	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  
policy	  changes.	  	  
The	  second	  issue	  that	  arises	  in	  an	  assessment	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  is:	  effects	  on	  
what?	  	  In	  section	  3,	  we	  begin	  by	  reviewing	  the	  evidence	  regarding	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  
trade	  volumes.	  	  Such	  effects	  can	  be	  further	  decomposed	  to:	  (a)	  effects	  on	  traded	  quantities;	  (b)	  
effects	  on	  prices;	  and	  (c)	  effects	  on	  the	  imports	  of	  new	  goods	  and	  varieties,	  i.e.,	  the	  extensive	  
6	  	  
	  

margin	  of	  trade.	  	  We	  then	  consider	  the	  evidence	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  the	  static,	  
aggregate	  gains	  from	  trade.	  	  The	  aforementioned	  analysis	  refers	  to	  aggregate	  outcomes.	  Next,	  
we	  consider	  the	  impact	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  specific	  parts	  of	  the	  economy.	  We	  discuss	  the	  effects	  
of	  trade	  policy	  on	  firms	  (namely	  their	  productivity,	  costs,	  and	  markups)	  in	  section	  4	  and	  on	  
labor	  markets	  (namely	  wages,	  employment	  and	  wage	  inequality)	  in	  section	  5.	  	  
Much	  of	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  above	  outcomes	  captures	  the	  static	  and	  short-­‐run	  effects	  
of	  trade	  policy.	  	  The	  long-­‐run	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  are	  substantially	  harder	  to	  pin	  down	  
empirically.	  As	  a	  result,	  arguments	  about	  dynamic	  long-­‐run	  effects	  are	  often	  made	  based	  solely	  
on	  principles	  and	  theoretical	  models,	  with	  little	  formal	  empirical	  support.	  In	  section	  6,	  we	  
consider	  the	  (scant)	  evidence	  on	  long-­‐run	  dynamic	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  aggregate	  growth	  
and	  poverty.	  	  Finally,	  in	  section	  7,	  we	  examine	  the	  impact	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  outcomes	  that	  have	  
traditionally	  not	  received	  much	  attention	  in	  the	  literature,	  yet,	  might	  play	  an	  important	  role.	  	  
These	  include	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  secondary	  distortions	  and	  misallocation	  of	  
resources	  as	  well	  as	  its	  effects	  of	  reducing	  uncertainty.	  
One	  of	  the	  main	  challenges	  of	  this	  chapter	  is	  determining	  how	  to	  pick	  and	  organize	  
material	  from	  studies	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policies	  across	  space	  and	  time.	  	  The	  focus	  of	  this	  
chapter	  is	  primarily	  on	  actual	  (as	  opposed	  to	  hypothetical)	  policy	  changes;	  counterfactual	  
analysis	  of	  hypothetical	  policy	  scenarios	  carried	  out	  within	  the	  framework	  of	  quantitative	  
models	  of	  trade	  is	  covered	  in	  another	  chapter	  of	  this	  Handbook	  (see	  Ossa	  (forthcoming)).	  
Second,	  we	  focus	  on	  the	  time	  period	  following	  the	  creation	  of	  GATT	  and	  WTO.	  While	  a	  
historical	  analysis	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  extending	  to	  earlier	  periods	  would	  be	  
fascinating,	  it	  is	  only	  recently	  that	  the	  relevance	  of	  trade	  policy	  has	  been	  questioned.	  Examining	  
the	  current	  relevance	  of	  trade	  policy	  to	  world	  trade	  requires	  a	  focus	  on	  more	  recent	  time	  
periods	  and	  data.	  	  Third,	  we	  provide	  evidence	  on	  both	  developed	  and	  developing	  countries.	  	  
Developing	  countries	  are	  still	  substantially	  less	  liberalized	  than	  developed	  countries,	  and	  the	  
role	  of	  international	  trade	  in	  their	  growth	  and	  development	  remains	  one	  of	  the	  most	  
interesting	  and	  policy-­‐relevant	  questions.	  Finally,	  we	  primarily	  discuss	  evidence	  based	  on	  
studies	  of	  broad,	  large-­‐scale	  trade	  liberalizations.	  We	  focus	  on	  these	  reforms	  because	  we	  aim	  to	  
minimize	  the	  overlap	  with	  other	  chapters	  in	  this	  Handbook,	  which	  concentrate	  on	  specific	  trade	  
7	  	  
	  

policy	  instruments,	  including	  preferential	  trade	  agreements,	  anti-­‐dumping	  duties,	  WTO	  rules	  
and	  clauses,	  and	  other	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  to	  trade.	  We	  occasionally	  draw	  on	  lessons	  from	  
industry	  case	  studies	  of	  trade	  policy	  as	  such	  studies	  offer	  the	  advantages	  of	  deeper	  institutional	  
understanding	  and	  better	  measurement.	  	  	  
Overall,	  the	  main	  message	  of	  our	  chapter	  is	  that	  for	  international	  trade	  to	  remain	  a	  
policy-­‐relevant	  field,	  it	  needs	  to	  focus	  on	  better	  measurement.	  	  If	  the	  main	  message	  of	  the	  
Leamer	  and	  Levinsohn	  (1995)	  in	  the	  1995	  Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics	  Chapter	  was	  
“Estimate,	  don’t	  test!”,	  our	  message	  twenty	  years	  later	  is:	  “Measure	  before	  you	  estimate!”	  
	  
2. Methodology	  	  
2.1	  Overview	  of	  Methodology	  	  
The	  empirical	  literature	  on	  the	  consequences	  of	  trade	  policy	  has	  embraced	  a	  variety	  of	  
research	  methods	  to	  evaluate	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  outcomes	  of	  interest	  to	  
international	  economists	  and	  policy	  makers.	  These	  research	  methods	  provide	  complementary	  
ways	  to	  evaluate	  the	  consequences	  of	  trade	  policy.	  	  The	  ultimate	  choice	  of	  the	  research	  
approach	  depends	  on	  the	  specific	  research	  question	  and	  the	  available	  data.	  	  One	  set	  of	  studies	  
evaluates	  the	  consequences	  of	  trade	  policy	  through	  the	  lens	  of	  a	  structural	  model	  of	  behavior	  
of	  consumers	  and	  producers	  and	  estimates	  key	  economic	  parameters	  that	  influence	  the	  
responsiveness	  of	  consumers	  and	  firms	  to	  trade	  policy	  in	  this	  setting.	  	  Studies	  in	  this	  category	  
include	  industry-­‐specific	  studies	  of	  trade	  policy	  that	  use	  the	  approach	  pioneered	  in	  the	  
industrial	  organization	  literature	  (Nevo	  and	  Whinston	  (2010),	  Feenstra	  (1995))	  and	  economy-­‐
wide	  quantitative	  studies	  of	  trade	  policy	  (Costinot	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  (2014),	  Ossa	  
(forthcoming	  2016)).	  	  This	  approach	  is	  particularly	  useful	  to	  ex-­‐ante	  evaluate	  a	  proposed	  trade	  
policy	  change.	  	  Another	  advantage	  of	  this	  approach	  is	  that	  it	  can	  be	  used	  to	  evaluate	  the	  overall	  
effects	  of	  an	  actual	  (or	  counterfactual)	  trade	  policy-­‐-­‐	  operating	  through	  the	  mechanisms	  
specified	  in	  the	  underlying	  model,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  policy’s	  welfare	  consequences.	  	  The	  estimated	  
effects	  from	  this	  approach	  depend	  on	  the	  assumptions	  of	  the	  underlying	  structural	  model	  and	  
the	  consistency	  of	  the	  estimated	  behavioral	  parameters	  of	  demand,	  supply,	  and	  implied	  trade	  
elasticities.	  	  
8	  	  
	  

Trade	  policy	  could,	  in	  principle,	  also	  be	  evaluated	  through	  randomized	  control	  trials	  
(RCTs),	  which	  are	  increasingly	  used	  to	  study	  the	  consequences	  of	  domestic	  policy.	  	  RCTs	  appear	  
difficult,	  if	  not	  impossible,	  to	  implement	  in	  the	  context	  of	  trade	  policy,	  especially	  in	  the	  context	  
of	  economy-­‐wide	  trade	  policy	  liberalizations.	  	  That	  said,	  recent	  work	  has	  used	  randomized	  
experiments	  to	  evaluate	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  export	  promotion	  programs	  (Atkin,	  Khandelwal,	  
Osman	  (2014))	  and	  this	  approach	  could	  be	  more	  broadly	  applied	  to	  evaluate	  the	  effectiveness	  
of	  export	  promotion	  programs	  of	  the	  World	  Bank	  and	  export	  promotion	  agencies	  or	  aid	  for	  
trade	  schemes	  (Cadot,	  Fernandes,	  Gourdon,	  Mattoo	  (2011)).	  	  We	  do	  not	  focus	  on	  this	  method	  
in	  the	  survey	  given	  its	  nascent	  state	  in	  the	  trade	  literature.	  	  	  
A	  third	  research	  approach	  estimates	  the	  consequences	  of	  actual	  trade	  policies	  by	  
exploiting	  quasi-­‐experimental	  research	  design	  (see	  Angrist	  and	  Kruger	  (1999),	  Angrist	  and	  
Pischke	  (2010)).	  	  The	  exact	  research	  design	  is	  guided	  by	  theory,	  but	  the	  identification	  of	  the	  
causal	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  in	  these	  studies	  depends	  less	  on	  specific	  functional-­‐form	  
assumptions	  about	  the	  underlying	  demand,	  production,	  or	  market	  structure.	  	  Instead,	  the	  
studies	  estimate	  the	  direct	  causal	  effect	  of	  actual	  trade	  policy	  on	  the	  outcomes	  of	  interest.	  	  This	  
flexibility,	  however,	  comes	  at	  a	  cost.	  	  The	  quasi-­‐experimental	  approach	  is	  not	  suited	  to	  evaluate	  
welfare	  implications	  of	  actual	  trade	  policy	  changes	  or	  the	  overall	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  change,	  
both	  of	  which	  require	  fully-­‐specified	  structural	  or	  quantitative	  models	  of	  trade.	  	  	  
Quasi-­‐experimental	  studies	  of	  actual	  policy	  changes	  illuminate	  the	  causal	  effects	  of	  the	  
particular	  policy	  in	  question.	  	  More	  generally,	  these	  studies	  provide	  evidence	  on	  the	  relevance	  
of	  various	  mechanisms	  through	  which	  trade	  policy	  (and	  trade	  more	  broadly)	  affects	  consumer	  
and	  producer	  welfare,	  without	  ex-­‐ante	  imposing	  such	  relationships	  on	  the	  data.	  These	  studies	  
also	  provide	  evidence	  on	  the	  importance	  of	  mechanisms	  that	  are	  difficult	  to	  capture	  in	  
quantitative	  studies	  of	  trade	  policy,	  including	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  firm-­‐level	  
productivity,	  innovation,	  markups,	  and	  elimination	  of	  institutional	  distortions.	  	  The	  evidence	  
can	  in	  turn	  influence	  development	  of	  theoretical	  models	  that	  embed	  these	  features,	  which	  
subsequently	  yield	  more	  informative	  counterfactual	  evaluations	  of	  future	  trade	  policy	  changes.	  
Importantly,	  the	  empirical	  studies	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  firms	  and	  workers	  has	  
provided	  an	  important	  input	  for	  the	  development	  of	  trade	  models	  that	  examine	  the	  
9	  	  
	  

consequences	  of	  trade	  with	  firm	  heterogeneity	  (Melitz	  (2003),	  Bernard,	  Eaton,	  Jensen,	  Kortum	  
(2003),	  Yeaple	  (2005))	  as	  well	  as	  models	  of	  labor	  market	  adjustment	  to	  trade	  costs	  that	  feature	  
labor	  market	  frictions	  and/or	  heterogeneous	  firms	  (Kambourov	  (2009),	  Harrison,	  McMillan,	  and	  
McLaren	  (2011),	  Helpman	  et	  al	  (2010),	  Artuc,	  Chaudhuri	  and	  McLaren	  (2010),	  Cosar	  (2013),	  Dix-­‐
Carneiro	  (2014),	  and	  Goldberg	  (2015)).	  	  
We	  now	  briefly	  illustrate	  key	  ingredients	  of	  this	  research	  approach.	  	  These	  studies	  
estimate	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  using	  information	  from	  repeated	  cross-­‐sectional	  or	  panel	  
data	  on	  outcomes	  of	  interest	  (e.g.	  firm-­‐level	  performance	  measures,	  wages	  of	  individuals,	  firm-­‐
employee	  match,	  etc.)	  that	  spans	  the	  period	  before,	  during,	  and	  after	  a	  policy	  implementation.3	  
The	  outcomes	  of	  interest	  are	  related	  to	  cross-­‐sectional	  and	  time-­‐series	  variation	  in	  trade	  policy	  
because	  of	  the	  exposure	  of	  the	  relevant	  economic	  agents	  to	  policy	  through	  industry	  affiliation,	  
produced	  or	  consumed	  products,	  or	  spatial	  location.	  	  The	  causal	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  is	  hence	  
identified	  based	  on	  differential	  exposure	  of	  economic	  agents	  to	  implemented	  trade	  policy.	  	  
The	  variation	  in	  trade	  policy	  across	  cross-­‐sectional	  units	  and	  time	  is	  only	  helpful	  for	  
identifying	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  in	  the	  presence	  of	  some	  type	  of	  friction	  and/or	  
heterogeneity	  in	  exposure	  to	  policy	  change.	  Consider	  empirical	  studies	  that	  aim	  to	  identify	  the	  
effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  labor	  markets	  in	  a	  frictionless	  world,	  as	  in	  a	  Heckscher-­‐Ohlin	  model	  of	  
trade.	  	  With	  a	  perfectly	  integrated	  national	  labor	  market,	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  workers	  
operate	  at	  the	  country	  level,	  yielding	  one	  observation	  per	  trade	  liberalization	  episode	  (see	  
Goldberg	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2007)).	  	  In	  this	  setting,	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  can	  only	  be	  evaluated	  
in	  a	  fully-­‐specified	  structural	  model	  of	  trade	  via	  counterfactual	  simulations	  (see	  Porto	  (2006)	  as	  
an	  example).	  	  Alternatively,	  if	  the	  mobility	  of	  workers	  is	  restricted	  across	  industries	  (as	  in	  
Ricardo-­‐Viner	  model)	  or	  across	  regions	  of	  a	  country	  (see	  Topalova	  (2010)	  or	  Kovak	  (2013)),	  
some	  workers	  will	  be	  more	  exposed	  to	  trade	  policy	  changes	  than	  others	  due	  to	  their	  industry	  
affiliation	  or	  location.	  	  This	  is	  akin	  to	  assuming	  industry	  or	  region-­‐specific	  labor	  markets,	  with	  
the	  degrees	  of	  freedom	  in	  the	  estimation	  corresponding	  to	  the	  number	  of	  industries	  or	  local	  
markets	  per	  trade	  liberalization	  episode.	  	  In	  this	  setting,	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  can	  be	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

	  To	  this	  end,	  studies	  have	  taken	  advantage	  of	  increased	  availability	  of	  data	  sets	  with	  detailed	  information	  about	  
the	  outcomes	  and	  characteristics	  of	  firms,	  individuals,	  households,	  and,	  most	  recently,	  administrative	  employer-­‐
employee	  matches.	  	  	  

10	  
	  
	  

identified	  through	  differential	  exposure	  of	  workers	  in	  different	  industries	  (or	  regions)	  to	  trade	  
policy	  changes.	  
Frictions	  and	  heterogeneity	  in	  responses	  to	  policy	  are	  not	  simply	  a	  convenient	  modeling	  
assumption,	  but	  realistic	  (see	  the	  evidence	  surveyed	  in	  Goldberg	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2007),	  and	  
Topalova	  (2010),	  Kovak	  (2013),	  Autor,	  Dorn	  and	  Hanson	  (2013),	  Pierce	  and	  Schott	  (2015)	  for	  
different	  labor	  market	  frictions).	  	  The	  exact	  specification	  of	  how	  the	  variation	  in	  trade	  policy	  is	  
related	  to	  outcomes	  of	  interest	  across	  industries,	  products,	  and	  space	  depends	  on	  the	  question	  
at	  hand	  and	  the	  underlying	  theoretical	  model	  (see	  Goldberg	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2005),	  Topalova	  
(2010),	  and	  Kovak	  (2013)	  for	  three	  alternative	  approaches	  in	  the	  literature	  on	  trade	  policy	  and	  
labor	  markets).	  	  	  Furthermore,	  there	  is	  no	  harm	  in	  relying	  on	  assumptions	  about	  frictions	  for	  
identification.	  	  If	  the	  assumptions	  about	  the	  frictions	  or	  heterogeneity	  are	  not	  valid	  (meaning	  
workers	  can	  easily	  move	  across	  industries	  and	  locations	  or	  that	  firms’	  industry	  affiliation	  or	  
underlying	  heterogeneity	  in	  productivity	  is	  irrelevant),	  the	  estimates	  based	  on	  this	  approach	  
will	  show	  no	  systematic	  relationship	  between	  trade	  policy	  changes	  and	  the	  outcomes	  of	  
interest.	  	  	  Thus,	  the	  main	  limitation	  of	  relying	  on	  differential	  exposure	  of	  economic	  agents	  to	  
trade	  policy	  to	  identify	  its	  causal	  effects	  is	  not	  that	  the	  approach	  is	  not	  valid	  if	  the	  assumptions	  
regarding	  the	  differential	  exposure	  are	  not	  valid,	  but	  that	  this	  approach	  by	  its	  nature	  will	  
generally	  reveal	  only	  the	  relative	  and	  not	  absolute	  effects	  of	  a	  policy	  change.	  	  The	  latter	  require	  
a	  theoretical	  framework	  within	  which	  the	  relative	  effects	  can	  be	  interpreted.	  
Irrespective	  of	  the	  particular	  approach	  used,	  the	  evaluation	  of	  the	  causal	  effects	  of	  trade	  
policy	  faces	  several	  methodological	  challenges,	  including	  the	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy,	  
aggregation	  issues,	  endogeneity	  of	  trade	  policy,	  and	  other	  identification	  concerns.	  These	  are	  
discussed	  in	  the	  next	  subsection.	  
	  
2.2.	  Methodological	  challenges	  
	  
2.2.1.	  Measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  
Measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  is	  one	  of	  the	  toughest	  issues	  in	  the	  evaluation	  of	  trade	  
policy,	  especially	  in	  cases	  where	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  are	  the	  primary	  trade	  policy	  instrument.	  
11	  
	  
	  

Domestic	  regulations	  and	  standards,	  which	  act	  as	  barriers	  to	  international	  trade,	  also	  affect	  our	  
ability	  to	  assess	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  international	  trade	  is	  free.	  	  Consider	  the	  automobile	  
market	  within	  the	  European	  Union.	  	  Imports	  of	  automobiles	  within	  the	  European	  Union	  are	  not	  
subject	  to	  import	  tariffs.	  	  However,	  until	  very	  recently,	  country-­‐specific	  requirements	  on	  car	  
specifications,	  national	  car	  registration	  rules,	  and	  a	  selective	  and	  exclusive	  distribution	  system	  
restricted	  international	  trade	  in	  automobiles	  within	  the	  single	  market.	  	  The	  challenges	  in	  the	  
measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  raise	  the	  question	  of	  whether	  the	  world	  is	  truly	  liberalized,	  or	  
whether	  this	  impression	  is	  misguided	  and	  due	  to	  our	  inability	  to	  measure	  restrictions	  to	  trade	  
that	  really	  matter.	  Multi-­‐country,	  multi-­‐industry	  studies	  are	  particularly	  prone	  to	  measurement	  
issues.	  	  Because	  of	  the	  scope	  of	  their	  analyses,	  these	  studies	  are	  more	  affected	  by	  data	  
limitations	  regarding	  the	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  as	  measures	  of	  trade	  policy	  
restrictiveness	  are	  often	  not	  comparable	  across	  industries,	  countries,	  and	  time.	  
The	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  is	  challenging	  even	  when	  the	  definition	  of	  trade	  policy	  
is	  confined	  to	  traditional	  tariff	  and	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  to	  international	  trade.	  In	  part,	  the	  
measurement	  is	  affected	  by	  the	  lack	  of	  detailed	  comprehensive	  information	  on	  trade	  barriers	  
for	  a	  large	  set	  of	  countries	  prior	  to	  1980s	  (Anderson	  and	  van	  Wincoop	  (2004)).	  	  The	  United	  
Nations’	  TRAINS	  database	  or	  the	  World	  Bank’s	  WITS	  database	  are	  systematically	  available	  only	  
from	  1989	  onwards.	  	  In	  general,	  measures	  of	  tariffs	  are	  more	  readily	  available	  than	  measures	  of	  
non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  to	  trade.	  	  In	  addition,	  for	  many	  countries,	  these	  databases	  do	  not	  provide	  
comprehensive	  information	  on	  trade	  policy	  measures.	  For	  example,	  fewer	  than	  20%	  of	  
countries	  report	  tariffs,	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  to	  trade,	  and	  trade	  flows	  in	  any	  given	  year	  (Anderson	  
and	  van	  Wincoop	  (2004)).	  	  
	  

In	  situations	  in	  which	  trade	  policy	  measures	  exist,	  systematic	  measurement	  of	  their	  

restrictiveness	  across	  products,	  industries,	  countries,	  and	  time	  is	  difficult,	  especially	  when	  
policies	  curtail	  international	  trade	  through	  non-­‐price	  based	  instruments.	  As	  price-­‐based	  
measures,	  ad-­‐valorem	  tariffs	  are	  easiest	  to	  measure	  and	  most	  comparable	  across	  industries	  and	  
time	  because	  they	  restrict	  international	  trade	  by	  imposing	  a	  tax	  on	  imported	  products	  that	  
varies	  proportionally	  to	  the	  product’s	  price.	  	  On	  the	  other	  hand,	  policy	  instruments	  such	  as	  
specific	  tariffs,	  which	  are	  imposed	  as	  a	  per-­‐unit	  surcharge	  on	  an	  import,	  or	  quantitative	  
12	  
	  
	  

restrictions	  on	  imports,	  vary	  with	  underlying	  market	  conditions.4	  The	  comparability	  of	  
measured	  trade	  policy	  across	  countries,	  industries	  and	  time	  can	  therefore	  affect	  inference	  
about	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  in	  cross-­‐country	  and	  multi-­‐industry	  studies.	  This	  is	  less	  of	  an	  
issue	  in	  studies	  that	  examine	  the	  effects	  of	  a	  particular	  non-­‐tariff	  barrier	  in	  an	  industry,	  for	  
example	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  the	  Multi-­‐Fibre	  Agreement	  (Harrigan	  and	  Barrows	  
(2009),	  Brambilla,	  Khandelwal,	  Schott	  (2010),	  Khandelwal,	  Schott,	  Wei	  (2013)),	  studies	  of	  anti-­‐
dumping	  (Blonigen	  and	  Prusa	  (2003,	  forthcoming)),	  and	  studies	  of	  VERs	  in	  the	  automobile	  
industry	  (Goldberg	  (1995),	  Verboven	  (1996),	  Berry,	  Levinsohn	  and	  Pakes	  (1999)).	  These	  studies	  
incorporate	  the	  relevant	  industry-­‐specific	  institutional	  and	  regulatory	  details	  and	  can	  
appropriately	  capture	  variations	  in	  industry-­‐specific	  market	  conditions	  that	  affect	  the	  
restrictiveness	  of	  implemented	  policy.	  
	  

Data	  availability	  and	  measurement	  issues,	  combined	  with	  the	  timing	  and	  nature	  of	  

large-­‐scale	  trade	  liberalizations,	  help	  explain	  why	  most	  of	  the	  recent	  empirical	  studies	  that	  
examine	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  changes	  from	  large-­‐scale,	  economy-­‐wide	  trade	  
liberalizations	  focus	  on	  trade	  liberalization	  episodes	  in	  less	  developed	  countries	  rather	  than	  in	  
developed	  economies.	  	  Import	  tariffs	  in	  many	  developed	  countries,	  which	  the	  WTO	  estimates	  
averaged	  between	  20	  to	  30%	  in	  ad-­‐valorem	  terms	  prior	  to	  the	  first	  WTO	  negotiation	  round,	  
were	  reduced	  in	  early	  rounds	  of	  the	  GATT/WTO	  negotiations.	  	  The	  bound	  tariffs	  averaged	  8.9%	  
by	  the	  end	  of	  the	  Dylan	  negotiation	  round	  in	  1962,	  and	  4.1%	  by	  the	  conclusion	  of	  the	  Tokyo	  
Round	  in	  1978	  (WTO	  (2007)).5	  These	  liberalizations	  preceded	  the	  collection	  of	  readily	  available	  
data	  on	  detailed	  trade	  flows	  and	  surveys	  of	  firms	  and	  workers,	  both	  of	  which	  are	  needed	  for	  
the	  analysis	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy.6	  	  In	  addition,	  tariffs	  were	  often	  replaced	  by	  NTBs,	  
including	  import	  quotas	  (such	  as	  the	  multi-­‐fibre	  agreement	  in	  the	  apparel	  and	  textiles	  and	  the	  
VERs	  in	  the	  U.S.	  automobile	  industry	  in	  the	  1980s),	  and	  anti-­‐dumping	  duties.	  	  Many	  studies	  
have	  found	  that	  these	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  to	  trade	  have	  severely	  restricted	  trade,	  sometimes	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4

	  For	  example,	  industry-­‐level	  coverage	  ratios,	  a	  commonly	  used	  measure	  of	  prevalence	  of	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers,	  may	  
overstate	  restrictiveness	  of	  these	  measures	  in	  industries	  in	  which	  import	  quotas	  might	  not	  be	  binding.	  
5
	  See	  Table	  6	  and	  7	  in	  WTO	  (2007).	  The	  countries	  include	  the	  U.S.,	  Japan,	  the	  United	  Kingdom,	  and	  the	  members	  of	  
the	  European	  Economic	  Community	  at	  the	  time.	  
6
	  For	  example,	  the	  analysis	  in	  Rose	  (2004)	  is	  based	  on	  a	  data	  set	  that	  does	  not	  contain	  information	  on	  periods	  prior	  
to	  the	  initial	  1947	  WTO	  round	  and	  that	  covers	  very	  few	  countries	  in	  the	  1950s	  and	  1960s.	  

13	  
	  
	  

even	  prior	  to	  the	  imposition	  of	  the	  barriers.7	  To	  the	  extent	  that	  one	  cannot	  comprehensively	  
control	  for	  these	  NTBs,	  the	  identification	  of	  trade	  policy	  effects,	  especially	  in	  multi-­‐sector	  and	  
multi-­‐country	  studies	  that	  include	  developed	  countries,	  is	  challenging.	  With	  a	  few	  notable	  
exceptions,	  most	  empirical	  studies	  on	  developed	  countries	  have	  focused	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  
import	  competition	  or	  exporting	  rather	  than	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  outcomes	  of	  interest.	  
A	  handful	  of	  studies	  have	  examined	  the	  effects	  of	  recent	  trade	  agreements,	  such	  as	  NAFTA	  and	  
CUFTA,	  in	  developed	  countries.8	  	  
In	  studies	  that	  focus	  on	  developing	  countries,	  which	  encompass	  most	  of	  the	  recent	  
studies	  on	  consequences	  of	  trade	  policy,	  these	  measurement	  issues	  present	  less	  of	  a	  problem.	  	  
Most	  developing	  countries	  did	  not	  actively	  participate	  in	  earlier	  GATT/WTO	  negotiation	  rounds.	  	  
As	  a	  result,	  import	  tariffs	  remained	  high	  in	  many	  of	  these	  countries	  at	  the	  onset	  of	  their	  large-­‐
scale	  trade	  liberalizations	  since	  the	  1980s.	  For	  example,	  ad-­‐valorem	  tariffs	  averaged	  over	  50%	  
in	  Colombia	  and	  over	  80%	  in	  India	  prior	  to	  their	  trade	  liberalizations.	  	  Trade	  liberalizations	  in	  
these	  countries,	  therefore,	  are	  characterized	  by	  large	  declines	  in	  import	  tariffs.	  In	  many	  cases,	  
non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  were	  also	  reduced,	  and	  declines	  in	  tariffs	  were	  highly	  correlated	  with	  
declines	  in	  NTBs	  (see	  Goldberg	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2005)	  for	  Colombia’s	  trade	  liberalization).	  	  These	  
characteristics	  of	  the	  trade	  liberalization	  episodes	  in	  less	  developed	  countries	  facilitate	  the	  
measurement	  and	  identification	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy.	  	  
	  
2.2.2.	  Aggregation	  and	  heterogeneity	  
A	  related	  issue	  is	  the	  issue	  of	  aggregation	  and	  heterogeneity.	  National	  governments	  apply	  trade	  
policy	  to	  products	  at	  a	  disaggregated	  level,	  dictated	  by	  national	  or	  international	  trade	  product	  
classification	  schemes	  (such	  as	  the	  now	  commonly	  used	  Harmonized	  System	  (HS)).	  	  However,	  
economic	  analysis	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  these	  restrictions	  often	  requires	  the	  researcher	  to	  aggregate	  
the	  information	  to	  a	  higher	  level	  (e.g.	  industry,	  region,	  bilateral	  trade	  flow,	  or	  country)	  to	  map	  it	  
to	  the	  level	  at	  which	  economic	  outcomes	  of	  interest	  are	  measured.	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7

	  See	  Staiger	  and	  Wolak	  (1994)	  for	  such	  effects	  of	  anti-­‐dumping	  duties,	  Blonigen	  and	  Prusa	  (2003)	  and	  Blonigen	  
and	  Prusa	  (forthcoming)	  for	  surveys	  on	  antidumping	  and	  antidumping	  duties.	  See	  Harrigan	  and	  Barrows	  (2009),	  
Brambilla,	  Khandelwal,	  Schott	  (2010)	  on	  Multi-­‐Fibre	  Agreement;	  Goldberg	  (1995)	  and	  Berry,	  Levinsohn	  and	  Pakes	  
(1999)	  for	  VERs.	  Feenstra	  (1995)	  reviews	  several	  of	  these	  earlier	  studies.	  
8
	  See	  Trefler	  (2004),	  Lileeva	  and	  Trefler	  (2010),	  Bernard,	  Jensen,	  Schott	  (2006).	  

14	  
	  
	  

Given	  that	  there	  are	  many	  different	  ways	  to	  aggregate	  the	  information,	  aggregation	  
would	  ideally	  be	  guided	  by	  a	  clear	  theoretical	  or	  conceptual	  framework.	  But	  this	  in	  turn	  raises	  
the	  question	  of	  whether	  the	  results	  are	  not	  merely	  consistent	  with,	  but	  also	  dictated	  by,	  the	  
framework.	  	  In	  addition,	  the	  conceptual	  framework	  underlying	  the	  analysis	  of	  trade	  policy	  may	  
imply	  homogenous	  or	  heterogeneous	  (across	  types	  of	  workers,	  firms,	  sectors	  of	  the	  economy,	  
etc.)	  effects.	  Any	  analysis	  of	  heterogeneous	  effects	  needs	  to	  be	  consistent	  with	  the	  underlying	  
framework	  (see	  Kovak	  (2013)	  and	  Dix-­‐Carneiro	  and	  Kovak	  (2015a)).	  	  
In	  practice,	  aggregation	  choices	  are	  often	  dictated	  by	  available	  industry	  or	  product	  
concordances	  and	  the	  level	  of	  aggregation	  at	  which	  variables	  of	  interest	  are	  collected.	  
Imperfect	  concordance	  mappings	  across	  classifications	  introduce	  measurement	  error	  in	  the	  
variables	  of	  interest.	  	  This	  is	  particularly	  problematic	  in	  studies	  covering	  many	  countries	  from	  
different	  data	  sources.	  	  In	  addition,	  product	  and	  industry-­‐level	  classifications	  in	  firm-­‐level,	  
worker-­‐level,	  or	  household-­‐level	  data	  sets	  tend	  to	  be	  substantially	  more	  aggregated	  than	  the	  
categories	  to	  which	  trade	  policy	  is	  applied.	  	  Even	  with	  a	  perfect	  mapping	  across	  categories,	  
aggregation	  of	  the	  relevant	  data	  to	  the	  industry	  level	  will	  lead	  one	  to	  ignore	  variation	  in	  trade	  
policy	  within	  an	  industry.	  	  Both	  of	  these	  measurement	  issues	  may	  attenuate	  the	  estimated	  
effects	  of	  trade	  policy.	  
	  
2.2.3	  Endogeneity	  of	  Trade	  Policy	  	  	  
A	  key	  challenge	  in	  examining	  the	  causal	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  is	  that	  trade	  policy	  may	  
itself	  be	  the	  outcome	  of	  economic	  conditions.	  	  Economic	  theory	  suggests	  that	  economic	  
conditions	  affect	  the	  timing	  of	  trade	  liberalizations	  and	  their	  reversals	  (Bagwell	  and	  Staiger	  
(2003))	  as	  well	  as	  cross-­‐sectional	  patterns	  of	  protection	  across	  industries	  (Grossman	  and	  
Helpman	  (1994)).	  	  These	  predictions	  are	  supported	  by	  abundant	  empirical	  evidence	  (Rodrik	  
(1995)).	  	  More	  recent	  studies	  also	  suggest	  that	  global	  fragmentation	  of	  production	  provides	  
additional	  incentives	  for	  firms	  and	  industries	  to	  influence	  trade	  policy	  (Blanchard	  (2007,	  2010),	  
Blanchard	  and	  Matschke	  (2015),	  Blanchard,	  Bown,	  Johnson	  (2015)).	  
The	  economic	  endogeneity	  of	  trade	  policy	  provides	  one	  potential	  explanation	  for	  the	  
profession’s	  perception	  that	  trade	  policy	  does	  not	  matter,	  particularly	  in	  cases	  where	  trade	  
15	  
	  
	  

reforms	  are	  enacted	  ex-­‐post,	  in	  order	  to	  ratify	  developments	  in	  trade	  that	  were	  already	  in	  
motion.	  To	  illustrate	  the	  problem,	  consider	  first	  a	  case	  where	  trade	  barriers	  are	  imposed	  in	  
order	  to	  halt	  a	  rise	  in	  imports.	  As	  a	  result,	  imports	  drop.	  	  In	  this	  case,	  trade	  policy	  has	  a	  clear	  
effect	  on	  imports,	  though	  the	  enactment	  of	  the	  policy	  was	  endogenous	  to	  the	  increase	  in	  
imports.	  	  The	  policy	  endogeneity	  in	  this	  instance	  would	  not	  lead	  one	  to	  conclude	  that	  the	  policy	  
was	  ineffective.	  But	  now	  consider	  an	  alternative	  scenario,	  in	  which	  the	  domestic	  industry	  is	  
doing	  well	  and	  does	  not	  feel	  threatened	  by	  imports.	  As	  a	  result,	  no	  one	  objects	  to	  trade	  
liberalization	  and	  trade	  barriers	  fall.	  	  Suppose	  that	  imports	  were	  unaffected	  by	  this	  
liberalization.	  The	  economic	  endogeneity	  of	  trade	  policy	  would	  pose	  a	  big	  problem	  for	  
inference	  in	  this	  case.	  	  The	  lack	  of	  relationship	  between	  trade	  policy	  and	  imports	  would	  be	  due	  
to	  the	  endogeneity	  of	  trade	  policy:	  the	  policy	  was	  only	  enacted	  because	  it	  was	  expected	  to	  have	  
no	  effects.	  	  Trade	  policy	  in	  this	  case	  ratifies	  changes	  in	  trade	  that	  were	  already	  happening	  for	  
other	  reasons.	  	  
The	  above	  example	  does	  not	  imply	  that	  a	  truly	  random	  decrease	  in	  trade	  barriers	  would	  
have	  no	  effect	  on	  imports.	  But	  it	  does	  suggest	  that	  in	  practice,	  the	  enacted	  trade	  policies	  may	  
have	  no	  observable	  impact	  because	  of	  their	  economic	  endogeneity.	  	  In	  a	  systematic	  study	  of	  
the	  effects	  of	  endogeneity	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  import	  penetration	  for	  the	  United	  States,	  Trefler	  
(1993)	  finds	  that	  the	  absolute	  magnitude	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  to	  trade	  on	  import	  
penetration	  substantially	  increases	  once	  the	  empirical	  framework	  accounts	  for	  the	  endogeneity	  
of	  trade	  policy.	  	  Of	  course,	  the	  effect	  could	  also	  go	  the	  other	  way:	  the	  economic	  endogeneity	  of	  
trade	  policy	  could	  bias	  estimates	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  upwards,	  overstating	  the	  true	  
effects	  of	  trade	  policy.	  	  Consider	  countries	  that	  foresee	  future	  increases	  in	  mutual	  trade	  and	  as	  
a	  result	  form	  a	  preferential	  regional	  trade	  agreement.	  In	  this	  instance,	  empirical	  estimates	  of	  
the	  effect	  of	  policy	  that	  do	  not	  account	  for	  endogeneity	  of	  agreement’s	  formation,	  overstate	  
the	  effects	  of	  trade	  agreements	  on	  trade	  flows.	  	  	  	  
	  This	  discussion	  suggests	  that	  it	  is	  informative	  to	  study	  both	  types	  of	  effects	  of	  trade	  
policy:	  	  the	  effects	  of	  observed	  trade	  policy	  (without	  corrections	  for	  endogeneity)	  and	  the	  
effects	  of	  exogenous	  variation	  in	  trade	  policy.	  	  The	  former	  tells	  us	  what	  actually	  happened.	  Did	  
trade	  policy	  matter,	  or	  did	  it	  come	  too	  late	  to	  have	  effects?	  	  The	  latter	  is	  useful	  for	  normative	  
16	  
	  
	  

implications	  and	  for	  assessing	  the	  effects	  of	  counterfactual	  scenarios,	  including	  potential	  
further	  liberalization	  and	  liberalization	  in	  other	  settings.	  	  
With	  this	  latter	  goal	  in	  mind,	  studies	  of	  the	  causal	  effects	  of	  actual	  trade	  policies	  rely	  on	  
institutional	  details	  of	  trade	  policy	  changes	  to	  determine	  whether	  such	  changes	  were	  plausibly	  
economically	  exogenous.	  	  The	  arguments	  for	  economic	  exogeneity	  are	  carefully	  established	  on	  
a	  case-­‐by-­‐case	  basis.	  	  	  In	  many	  instances,	  researchers	  have	  taken	  advantage	  of	  plausibly	  
economically	  exogenous,	  quasi-­‐experimental	  variation	  in	  trade	  policy	  induced	  by	  events	  that	  
are	  outside	  the	  control	  of	  specific	  industries	  or	  lobbies	  within	  a	  specific	  country.	  	  Because	  less	  
developed	  countries	  did	  not	  actively	  participate	  in	  early	  GATT/WTO	  negotiation	  rounds,	  many	  
of	  these	  liberalizations	  have	  been	  implemented	  in	  less	  developed	  countries.	  	  They	  include	  
unilateral	  liberalizations	  that	  occurred	  as	  a	  result	  of	  IMF	  interventions	  that	  dictated	  the	  pace	  
and	  scope	  of	  the	  reforms	  (India’s	  trade	  liberalization	  in	  1991),	  WTO	  accessions	  (Mexico	  in	  
1985),	  unilateral	  liberalizations	  where	  the	  government’s	  goal	  was	  to	  reduce	  dispersion	  of	  tariffs	  
across	  industries	  to	  a	  more	  uniform	  level	  (Colombia	  in	  late	  1980s	  and	  early	  1990s),	  and	  the	  
signing	  of	  a	  broad	  trade	  agreement	  that	  did	  not	  involve	  negotiations	  over	  a	  particular	  tariff	  
lines	  (the	  U.S.-­‐Vietnam	  Bilateral	  Trade	  agreement	  in	  2001).	  	  	  
Importantly,	  these	  liberalizations	  not	  only	  lowered	  the	  levels	  of	  tariffs,	  but	  also	  led	  to	  
plausibly	  economically	  exogenous	  differential	  changes	  in	  trade	  policy	  changes	  across	  industries.	  	  
It	  is	  this	  variation	  in	  trade	  policy	  across	  industries	  that	  empirical	  studies	  exploit	  to	  identify	  the	  
causal	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  outcomes	  of	  interest.	  	  Take	  for	  example,	  the	  case	  of	  India’s	  
trade	  liberalization.	  	  Declines	  in	  India’s	  tariffs	  varied	  widely	  across	  industries	  and	  were	  largely	  
set	  as	  part	  of	  the	  IMF	  conditions	  in	  1991,	  rather	  than	  set	  to	  reflect	  the	  underlying	  industry-­‐
specific	  conditions	  across	  India’s	  industries	  (see	  Topalova	  and	  Khandelwal	  (2011)).	  	  So,	  while	  
the	  timing	  of	  India’s	  trade	  liberalization	  was	  clearly	  a	  function	  of	  existing	  economic	  conditions	  
(after	  all,	  it	  was	  induced	  by	  India’s	  balance	  of	  payments	  crisis	  in	  the	  aftermath	  of	  the	  U.S.-­‐Iraq	  
war),	  the	  magnitudes	  of	  the	  industry-­‐specific	  tariff	  changes	  were	  not	  influenced	  by	  economic	  
conditions	  in	  India’s	  industries	  at	  the	  time	  of	  trade	  reform.9	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9

Topalova	  and	  Khandelwal	  (2011)	  formally	  show	  lack	  of	  correlation	  between	  industry-­‐specific	  tariff	  changes	  and	  
pre-­‐reform	  industry	  characteristics	  and	  conditions.	  This	  lack	  of	  correlation	  is	  also	  consistent	  with	  the	  institutional	  
details	  of	  India’s	  trade	  policy.	  	  Gang	  and	  Pandey	  (1996)	  suggest	  that	  India’s	  trade	  policy	  prior	  to	  liberalization	  was	  

17	  
	  
	  

So	  far	  we	  have	  discussed	  the	  economic	  endogeneity	  of	  trade	  policy	  arising	  from	  the	  
political	  economy	  of	  trade	  protection	  (i.e.,	  trade	  policy	  is	  enacted	  in	  response	  to	  economic	  
conditions	  and	  lobbying).	  	  Equally	  important	  is	  the	  issue	  of	  econometric	  endogeneity.	  	  Even	  
when	  trade	  policy	  is	  plausibly	  economically	  exogenous	  in	  the	  sense	  that	  it	  was	  not	  set	  
deliberately	  in	  response	  to	  certain	  economic	  developments,	  the	  concern	  about	  econometric	  
endogeneity	  remains	  and	  needs	  to	  be	  adequately	  addressed.	  	  Econometric	  endogeneity	  may	  
arise	  from	  omitted	  variable	  bias	  when	  there	  are	  other	  concurrent	  policy	  reforms	  or	  demand	  
and	  supply	  shocks	  on	  the	  world	  markets.	  	  Another	  concern	  is	  pre-­‐existing	  trends	  in	  the	  
outcomes	  of	  interest	  that	  might	  be	  spuriously	  correlated	  with	  trade	  policy	  changes.	  	  To	  this	  
end,	  studies	  of	  trade	  policy	  have	  used	  a	  wide	  range	  of	  falsification	  or	  placebo	  tests	  to	  check	  the	  
validity	  of	  assumptions	  needed	  to	  identify	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy.	  For	  example,	  if	  data	  on	  
outcomes	  of	  interest	  is	  available	  prior	  to	  the	  implementation	  of	  trade	  policy,	  one	  can	  rule	  out	  
spurious	  pre-­‐existing	  trends	  by	  showing	  that	  trade	  policy	  does	  not	  have	  a	  significant	  impact	  on	  
outcomes	  of	  interest	  prior	  to	  its	  implementation	  (see	  Topalova	  (2010),	  Edmonds,	  Pavcnik,	  and	  
Topalova	  (2010)).	  Likewise,	  one	  can	  show	  that	  the	  implemented	  trade	  policy	  had	  effects	  only	  
on	  economic	  agents	  who	  were	  affected	  by	  the	  policy,	  but	  not	  on	  unaffected	  agents	  (for	  
examples,	  see	  Edmonds,	  Pavcnik,	  and	  Topalova	  (2010),	  McCaig	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2014),	  Pierce	  and	  
Schott	  (2015)).	  
The	  above	  discussion	  emphasizes	  the	  causality	  of	  trade	  policy	  in	  studies	  that	  evaluate	  
the	  effects	  of	  actual	  trade	  policy	  changes.	  The	  issues	  of	  causality	  and	  endogeneity	  are	  just	  as	  
important	  in	  the	  studies	  that	  evaluate	  counterfactual	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  within	  a	  structural	  
or	  quantitative	  model	  of	  trade.	  	  The	  estimated	  counterfactual	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  depend	  
crucially	  on	  the	  consistent	  estimates	  of	  key	  parameters	  of	  the	  model	  (such	  as	  the	  trade	  
elasticity)	  and	  the	  plausibility	  of	  the	  underlying	  assumptions	  of	  the	  structural	  model.	  	  	  
Industry-­‐specific	  studies	  of	  trade	  policy	  directly	  model	  trade	  policy	  within	  the	  context	  of	  
the	  particular	  industry	  under	  study	  and	  evaluate	  the	  effects	  of	  actual	  and	  counterfactual	  trade	  
policies	  through	  simulations.	  	  In	  recent	  quantitative	  models	  of	  trade	  however,	  the	  effects	  of	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
largely	  set	  as	  part	  of	  India’s	  Second	  Economic	  Plan	  after	  the	  Independence.	  	  Subsequently,	  trade	  policy	  levels	  were	  
not	  adjusted	  to	  reflect	  particular	  economic	  conditions	  across	  industries.	  It	  is	  therefore	  not	  surprising	  that	  industry-­‐
specific	  changes	  are	  not	  correlated	  with	  industry’s	  conditions	  in	  1991.	  

18	  
	  
	  

trade	  policy,	  especially	  on	  welfare,	  are	  typically	  evaluated	  by	  considering	  a	  counterfactual	  in	  
which	  the	  economy	  moves	  from	  autarky	  to	  a	  frictionless	  world.	  	  The	  question	  then	  is	  whether	  
such	  a	  counterfactual	  is	  informative	  about	  the	  consequences	  of	  declines	  in	  trade	  costs	  
associated	  with	  actual	  policies.	  	  Would	  a	  counterfactual	  in	  which	  trade	  costs	  decline	  from	  a	  
more	  to	  less	  restrictive	  trade	  regime	  yield	  similar	  conclusions	  about	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  on	  
welfare	  or	  income	  distribution?	  	  In	  addition,	  counterfactual	  simulations	  in	  the	  above	  models	  of	  
abstract	  from	  political	  economy	  concerns	  that	  may	  be	  key	  in	  understanding	  the	  patterns	  of	  
trade	  protection	  and	  the	  effects	  of	  reducing	  it.	  	  Consider	  for	  example	  the	  following	  scenario.	  	  A	  
counterfactual	  simulation	  of	  the	  move	  from	  autarky	  to	  free	  trade	  in	  a	  simple	  2x2x2	  Heckscher-­‐
Ohlin	  model	  would	  predict	  a	  decline	  in	  income	  inequality	  between	  educated	  and	  less	  educated	  
workers	  in	  unskilled	  labor-­‐abundant	  countries.	  	  This	  is	  based	  on	  the	  premise	  that	  the	  protected	  
sectors	  in	  an	  unskilled	  labor-­‐abundant	  country	  would	  be	  those	  that	  use	  unskilled	  labor	  
relatively	  more	  intensively.	  However,	  the	  actual	  structure	  of	  protection	  in	  several	  less	  
developed	  countries,	  such	  as	  Colombia	  and	  Mexico,	  was	  such	  that	  tariffs	  were	  higher	  in	  more	  
unskilled-­‐labor	  intensive	  industries.	  	  The	  actual	  trade	  liberalizations	  implemented	  in	  these	  
countries	  in	  the	  past	  three	  decades	  led	  to	  bigger	  declines	  in	  tariffs	  in	  more	  unskilled-­‐labor	  
intensive	  industries	  (see	  Harrison	  and	  Hanson	  (1999),	  Goldberg	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2007)).	  	  In	  this	  
setting,	  the	  simple	  counterfactual	  considered	  above	  that	  relies	  on	  a	  comparison	  of	  autarky	  to	  
the	  free	  trade	  equilibrium,	  without	  taking	  into	  account	  the	  political	  economy	  of	  protection,	  
would	  fail	  to	  capture	  the	  effects	  of	  the	  actual	  trade	  policy	  that	  was	  implemented.	  	  
	  
2.2.4.	  Anticipation	  of	  Trade	  Reform	  and	  Reduction	  in	  Uncertainty	  about	  Trading	  Environment	  
	  

The	  estimates	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  implemented	  trade	  policies	  are	  also	  affected	  by	  the	  

anticipation	  of	  trade	  policy.	  The	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  are	  estimated	  by	  examining	  how	  
outcomes	  of	  interest	  change	  after	  the	  policy	  is	  implemented	  relative	  to	  the	  period	  before	  policy	  
implementation.	  The	  implicit	  assumption	  in	  this	  research	  design	  is	  that	  trade	  policy	  only	  has	  an	  
effect	  on	  the	  outcome	  of	  interest	  after	  its	  implementation.	  
If	  a	  trade	  policy	  is	  unanticipated	  (as	  it	  was	  the	  case	  in	  India’s	  1991	  trade	  liberalization),	  
the	  quasi-­‐experimental	  research	  design	  will	  fully	  capture	  its	  effects	  because	  firms	  and	  
19	  
	  
	  

consumers	  cannot	  change	  their	  behavior	  prior	  to	  implementation.	  	  If	  a	  trade	  policy	  is	  
anticipated	  (and	  its	  implementation	  credible),	  firms	  and	  consumers	  might	  react	  to	  it	  before	  its	  
implementation.	  	  For	  example,	  in	  anticipation	  of	  trade	  liberalization,	  firms	  might	  change	  their	  
investment	  decisions,	  either	  delaying	  them	  or	  expediting	  them.	  	  Likewise,	  consumers	  might	  
delay	  purchases	  of	  durable	  products	  until	  after	  the	  trade	  liberalization	  is	  implemented.	  	  
Anticipation	  is	  a	  greater	  concern	  in	  studies	  that	  use	  higher	  frequency	  data.	  Depending	  on	  the	  
situation	  in	  question,	  it	  could	  lead	  to	  either	  overestimates	  or	  underestimates	  of	  the	  policy	  
effects.	  However,	  as	  long	  as	  the	  data	  includes	  observations	  that	  cover	  a	  long	  enough	  period	  
prior	  to	  the	  announcement	  and	  implementation	  of	  a	  particular	  policy,	  one	  can	  directly	  examine	  
whether	  the	  policy	  affected	  behavior	  prior	  to	  its	  implementation,	  and	  accordingly	  adjust	  the	  
estimated	  effects.	  
A	  related	  issue	  is	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  (see	  Handley	  (2014),	  Handley	  and	  Limao	  
(2015),	  Pierce	  and	  Schott	  (2015)).	  Trade	  agreements	  can	  reduce	  the	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  
policy	  by	  committing	  countries	  to	  a	  specific	  trade	  policy	  regime	  more	  permanently.	  	  To	  the	  
extent	  that	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  policy	  affects	  firms’	  and	  consumers’	  decisions	  on	  market	  
entry,	  investment	  and	  purchases	  of	  durable	  products,	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  changes	  on	  
trade	  flows	  and	  other	  outcomes	  of	  interest	  may	  be	  larger	  than	  suggested	  by	  the	  magnitudes	  of	  
the	  trade	  barrier	  reductions.	  	  Consider	  for	  example	  recent	  trade	  agreements	  such	  as	  NAFTA,	  
CUFTA,	  and	  the	  Chinese	  entry	  into	  the	  WTO.	  	  The	  associated	  trade	  reforms	  did	  not	  lead	  to	  large	  
declines	  in	  tariff	  levels.	  But	  despite	  the	  small	  tariff	  changes,	  these	  trade	  agreements	  may	  have	  
had	  significant	  effects	  through	  the	  elimination	  (or	  reduction)	  of	  uncertainty.	  	  	  
These	  methodological	  challenges	  notwithstanding,	  recent	  research	  has	  found	  creative	  
ways	  to	  address	  them	  and	  make	  significant	  progress	  towards	  assessing	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  
policies.	  	  This	  evidence	  is	  discussed	  in	  the	  next	  sections.	  
	  
3.

The	  Effects	  of	  Trade	  Policy:	  Trade	  Volume,	  Prices,	  Extensive	  Margin,	  Gains	  from	  Trade	  

	  
3.1

Effects	  on	  Trade	  Volume	  

3.1.1 Evidence	  on	  Effects	  on	  Trade	  Volume	  
20	  
	  
	  

	  	  

We	  start	  by	  revisiting	  an	  old	  question	  on	  the	  topic	  of	  trade	  policy:	  To	  what	  extent	  can	  

the	  growth	  of	  world	  trade	  since	  World	  War	  II	  be	  attributed	  to	  trade	  liberalization?	  	  Baier	  and	  
Bergstrand	  (2001)	  used	  a	  gravity-­‐equation-­‐framework	  to	  run	  a	  horserace	  between	  several	  
factors	  contributing	  to	  world	  trade	  growth:	  income,	  tariff	  reductions,	  transport	  costs,	  and	  
income	  convergence.	  Baier	  and	  Bergstrand	  examined	  data	  for	  16	  OECD	  countries	  between	  the	  
late	  1950s	  and	  late	  1980s	  and	  concluded	  that	  trade	  policy	  played	  a	  critical	  role	  in	  the	  growth	  of	  
trade.	  	  According	  to	  their	  results,	  real	  GDP	  growth	  explains	  approximately	  67-­‐69%	  of	  the	  trade	  
growth,	  tariff	  reductions	  and	  preferential	  trade	  agreements	  explain	  23-­‐26%,	  transport	  cost	  
reductions	  explain	  8-­‐9%,	  and	  real	  GDP	  convergence	  is	  found	  to	  have	  no	  effect	  at	  all.	  Baier	  and	  
Bergstrand	  highlight	  in	  their	  discussion	  the	  fact	  that	  tariff	  reductions	  are	  found	  to	  have	  
approximately	  three	  times	  the	  effect	  of	  transport	  costs,	  hence	  lending	  support	  to	  the	  view	  that	  
trade	  policy	  is	  more	  important	  than	  transport	  costs.	  However,	  they	  acknowledge	  that	  the	  
explanatory	  factors	  they	  include	  in	  the	  gravity	  equation	  explain	  only	  40%	  of	  the	  variation	  in	  
trade	  flow	  growth,	  which	  leaves	  the	  possibility	  open	  that	  other	  factors,	  including	  technological	  
advances	  (which	  may	  have	  reduced	  communication	  and	  search	  costs	  in	  international	  markets),	  
played	  an	  important	  role	  in	  trade	  growth.	  Finally,	  due	  to	  data	  constraints,	  their	  results	  cover	  
only	  16	  highly	  developed	  OECD	  countries	  that	  experienced	  dramatic	  tariff	  reductions	  post-­‐
World	  War	  II.	  In	  addition,	  the	  study	  has	  little	  to	  say	  about	  the	  role	  of	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  or	  the	  
impact	  of	  trade	  policy	  in	  less	  developed	  countries	  that	  did	  not	  experience	  the	  same	  degree	  of	  
tariff	  liberalization.	  	  Despite	  these	  limitations	  of	  sample	  coverage,	  the	  main	  message	  of	  Baier	  
and	  Bergstrand’s	  work	  is	  that	  trade	  policy	  (i.e.	  tariff	  reductions)	  matters.	  
Yi’s	  (2003)	  study	  of	  the	  determinants	  of	  world	  trade	  growth	  reached	  a	  very	  different	  
conclusion.	  Yi	  considers	  a	  more	  extended	  sample	  than	  Baier	  and	  Bergstrand,	  but	  more	  
importantly,	  he	  extends	  his	  empirical	  analysis	  to	  more	  recent	  years	  that	  cover	  the	  period	  
between	  the	  mid-­‐1980s	  to	  2000.	  	  He	  points	  out	  two	  facts	  that	  are	  hard	  to	  reconcile	  with	  the	  
view	  that	  tariff	  reductions	  were	  instrumental	  in	  the	  growth	  of	  world	  trade:	  	  (1)	  First,	  tariff	  rates	  
declined	  by	  only	  11	  percent	  after	  the	  mid-­‐1960s,	  yet	  trade	  grew	  rapidly	  in	  subsequent	  decades.	  
In	  order	  to	  explain	  this	  rapid	  trade	  growth,	  one	  would	  have	  to	  appeal	  to	  implausibly	  large	  trade	  
elasticities.	  (2)	  Second,	  and	  perhaps	  more	  importantly,	  the	  tariff	  reductions	  were	  larger	  before	  
21	  
	  
	  

than	  after	  the	  mid-­‐1980s;	  yet,	  trade	  growth	  was	  much	  smaller	  in	  the	  earlier	  than	  in	  the	  later	  
period.	  In	  order	  to	  explain	  these	  trade	  patterns,	  one	  would	  have	  to	  assume	  a	  trade	  elasticity	  
(elasticity	  of	  exports	  with	  respect	  to	  tariffs)	  of	  7	  for	  the	  1962-­‐1985	  period	  and	  an	  elasticity	  of	  50	  
for	  the	  1986-­‐1999	  period.	  	  Traditional	  trade	  models	  have	  a	  hard	  time	  generating	  such	  non-­‐
linearity	  in	  trade	  elasticities,	  and	  in	  general,	  it	  is	  hard	  to	  come	  up	  with	  an	  explanation	  that	  
would	  justify	  such	  non-­‐linear	  effects.	  	  The	  main	  takeaway	  from	  this	  evidence	  is	  that	  there	  must	  
have	  been	  something	  else	  than	  tariff	  reductions	  alone	  driving	  the	  growth	  in	  trade.	  
Yi	  proceeds	  to	  show,	  both	  theoretically	  and	  quantitatively	  (through	  calibration),	  that	  
these	  patterns	  can	  be	  explained	  through	  vertical	  specialization:	  vertical	  trading	  chains	  spanning	  
many	  countries	  where	  each	  country	  specializes	  in	  a	  particular	  stage	  of	  a	  good’s	  production	  
sequence.	  	  Importantly,	  he	  shows	  that	  vertical	  specialization	  and	  multiple	  border	  crossing	  can	  
generate	  a	  magnified	  and	  non-­‐linear	  response	  to	  tariff	  reductions.	  	  Consider,	  for	  example,	  a	  
product	  that	  has	  five	  stages	  of	  production,	  each	  produced	  in	  a	  different	  country.	  	  When	  tariffs	  
fall	  by	  1%,	  the	  cost	  of	  producing	  this	  good	  will	  fall	  by	  5%,	  in	  contrast	  to	  the	  1%	  decrease	  of	  a	  
standard	  traded	  good	  produced	  in	  a	  single	  country.	  	  This	  magnified	  cost	  decline	  will	  lead	  to	  a	  
magnified	  response	  of	  trade.	  	  This	  magnification	  is	  solely	  related	  to	  the	  intensive	  margin.	  In	  
addition,	  there	  is	  an	  extensive	  margin:	  	  as	  tariffs	  fall,	  vertical	  specialization	  will	  start	  occurring	  in	  
cases	  where	  it	  was	  previously	  not	  profitable	  due	  to	  high	  trade	  costs.	  This	  will	  lead	  to	  an	  
additional	  magnification	  effect	  and	  generate	  a	  non-­‐linear	  response	  of	  trade	  flows	  to	  tariffs.	  
Yi’s	  argument	  is	  not	  that	  trade	  policy	  does	  not	  matter,	  but	  rather	  that	  it	  matters	  most	  in	  
interaction	  with	  vertical	  specialization.	  Vertical	  specialization	  may	  be	  to	  a	  large	  extent	  
technologically	  driven,	  but	  as	  Yi	  shows,	  it	  responds	  to	  trade	  liberalization.	  	  Hence,	  the	  main	  
takeaway	  from	  Yi’s	  work	  is	  twofold.	  First,	  empirical	  work	  that	  tries	  to	  assess	  the	  importance	  of	  
trade	  policy	  by	  relating	  trade	  growth	  to	  tariff	  reductions	  may	  seriously	  understate	  the	  true	  
effect	  of	  trade	  policy,	  as	  trade	  policy	  may	  affect	  trade	  flows	  in	  interaction	  with	  other	  factors,	  
including	  vertical	  specialization.	  	  The	  significance	  of	  these	  interactions	  has	  likely	  increased	  over	  
time.	  	  Second,	  the	  increasing	  importance	  of	  vertical	  specialization	  in	  world	  trade	  suggests	  that	  
the	  focus	  on	  export	  or	  import	  flows	  as	  measures	  of	  trade	  may	  be	  misguided	  and	  understate	  the	  

22	  
	  
	  

true	  extent	  of	  trade.	  	  Measures	  based	  on	  value-­‐added	  are	  thus	  more	  appropriate	  and	  realistic	  
as	  they	  do	  justice	  to	  the	  sequential	  and	  fragmented	  nature	  of	  the	  production	  process.	  
The	  latter	  point	  is	  made	  most	  explicitly	  in	  a	  recent	  paper	  by	  Johnson	  and	  Noguera	  
(2014),	  which	  examines	  both	  value-­‐added	  and	  gross	  exports	  over	  the	  last	  four	  decades	  (1970-­‐
2009)	  and	  seeks	  to	  identify	  the	  driving	  forces	  behind	  the	  changing	  patterns	  in	  cross-­‐border	  
trade.	  The	  authors	  use	  the	  ratio	  of	  value-­‐added	  to	  gross	  exports	  as	  a	  measure	  of	  international	  
vertical	  specialization	  and	  document	  that	  this	  ratio	  has	  fallen	  significantly	  (in	  the	  range	  of	  10%)	  
over	  the	  last	  four	  decades.	  	  This	  aggregate	  number	  masks	  significant	  heterogeneity	  across	  
countries	  and	  sectors.	  	  The	  decline	  in	  the	  valued-­‐added	  ratio	  implies	  that	  double-­‐counting	  in	  
gross	  trade	  data	  (due	  to	  multiple	  border	  crossing	  of	  traded	  goods)	  is	  more	  pervasive	  in	  recent	  
years	  than	  in	  the	  past.	  When	  the	  authors	  relate	  the	  value-­‐added	  to	  gross	  export	  ratio	  to	  
regional	  trade	  agreements,	  they	  find	  that	  trade	  agreements	  have	  a	  substantial	  impact	  on	  the	  
decline	  of	  this	  ratio.	  	  By	  simulating	  a	  gravity	  model	  with	  input-­‐output	  linkages,	  the	  authors	  
further	  show	  that	  changes	  in	  trade	  frictions	  following	  trade	  agreements	  do	  not	  only	  explain	  
changes	  in	  the	  bilateral	  trade	  patterns,	  but	  also	  account	  for	  approximately	  20%	  of	  the	  global	  
decline.	  They	  conclude	  that	  trade	  frictions	  and	  regional	  trade	  agreements	  play	  a	  first-­‐order	  role	  
in	  explaining	  changes	  in	  bilateral	  and	  global	  trade	  patterns	  and	  suggest	  revisiting	  many	  classic	  
questions	  regarding	  the	  role	  of	  trade	  frictions	  and	  policy	  from	  a	  value-­‐added	  perspective.	  
To	  conclude,	  the	  message	  of	  recent	  work	  that	  has	  taken	  the	  international	  fragmentation	  
of	  production	  seriously	  is	  not	  that	  trade	  policy	  is	  second-­‐order	  in	  explaining	  the	  explosion	  of	  
global	  trade	  in	  recent	  decades.	  On	  the	  contrary,	  the	  message	  of	  this	  work	  is	  that	  trade	  policy	  
has	  played	  a	  critical	  role,	  but	  only	  in	  interaction	  with	  other	  (possibly	  technologically	  driven)	  
developments	  that	  have	  contributed	  to	  the	  rise	  of	  vertical	  specialization	  in	  the	  production	  
process.	  	  The	  implication	  for	  empirical	  work	  is	  that	  trade	  policy	  measures	  should	  enter	  
empirical	  specifications	  in	  interaction	  with	  other	  measures	  capturing	  vertical	  specialization,	  and	  
that	  –	  depending	  on	  the	  particular	  research	  question	  –	  it	  might	  be	  more	  appropriate	  to	  
measure	  trade	  flows	  in	  valued-­‐added	  rather	  than	  gross	  terms.	  	  
	  
3.1.2 Trade	  Growth	  versus	  Trade	  Elasticity	  and	  Gains	  from	  Trade	  
23	  
	  
	  

Independent	  of	  the	  question	  of	  how	  large	  the	  effects	  of	  tariffs	  or	  other	  trade	  policy	  
frictions	  on	  trade	  flows	  are,	  Yi’s	  analysis	  raises	  another	  interesting	  question:	  	  Even	  if	  trade	  
policy	  matters	  for	  trade	  volume,	  does	  it	  matter	  for	  the	  gains	  from	  trade?	  	  In	  addition,	  are	  “trade	  
flows”	  what	  we	  should	  be	  focusing	  on	  if	  we	  want	  to	  demonstrate	  the	  relevance	  of	  trade	  policy?	  
The	  reason	  Yi’s	  work	  brings	  up	  this	  question	  is	  that	  his	  analysis	  was	  motivated	  by	  the	  
observation	  that	  the	  growth	  of	  trade	  in	  the	  last	  three	  decades	  implied	  implausibly	  large	  trade	  
elasticities	  if	  one	  were	  to	  explain	  the	  trade	  growth	  by	  tariff	  reductions	  alone.	  	  But	  large	  
elasticities	  imply	  (conditional	  on	  trade	  volume)	  small	  gains	  from	  trade.	  One	  cannot	  have	  it	  both	  
ways:	  if	  trade	  policy	  generates	  large	  increases	  in	  trade,	  then	  it	  also	  generates	  small	  (static)	  gains	  
from	  trade.	  	  We	  will	  revisit	  this	  issue	  when	  we	  examine	  the	  evidence	  on	  the	  impact	  of	  trade	  
policy	  on	  the	  aggregate	  gains	  from	  trade.	  	  For	  now,	  we	  simply	  point	  out	  that	  showing	  that	  trade	  
policy	  played	  an	  important	  role	  in	  the	  increase	  of	  world	  trade	  does	  not	  imply	  that	  trade	  policy	  
matters	  from	  a	  welfare	  point	  of	  view.	  And	  vice	  versa,	  a	  finding	  of	  small	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  
changes	  on	  trade	  volume	  does	  not	  imply	  that	  the	  gains	  associated	  with	  these	  trade	  policy	  
changes	  are	  small.	  
	  
3.1.3 Trade	  Elasticity	  and	  Trade	  Policy	  
As	  we	  conclude	  the	  topic	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  trade	  flows	  and	  gradually	  
move	  towards	  an	  analysis	  of	  its	  effects	  on	  the	  gains	  from	  trade,	  one	  more	  observation	  is	  
necessary.	  	  Recent	  work	  on	  the	  gains	  from	  trade	  (Arkolakis,	  Costinot,	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  (2010))	  
has	  highlighted	  the	  importance	  of	  the	  reduced-­‐form	  trade	  elasticity	  in	  computing	  the	  aggregate	  
gains	  from	  trade.	  	  Given	  that	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  relates	  -­‐-­‐	  by	  its	  very	  definition	  -­‐-­‐	  changes	  in	  
trade	  flows	  to	  changes	  in	  trade	  costs,	  exploiting	  observable	  changes	  in	  trade	  policy	  (i.e.	  tariff	  
reductions)	  seems	  an	  obvious	  way	  to	  credibly	  estimate	  it.	  	  What	  trade	  elasticity	  estimates	  do	  
changes	  in	  trade	  policy	  imply?	  
Perhaps	  surprisingly,	  estimates	  of	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  based	  on	  actual	  trade	  policy	  
changes	  are	  scarce,	  and	  the	  few	  that	  exist	  are	  all	  over	  the	  place.	  	  As	  discussed	  in	  Hillberry	  and	  
Hummels	  (2013)	  in	  their	  review	  of	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  parameters	  used	  in	  the	  literature,	  the	  
“trade	  elasticity”	  is	  usually	  estimated	  either	  based	  on	  cross-­‐sectional	  (cross-­‐country	  and	  cross-­‐
24	  
	  
	  

industry)	  variation	  of	  trade	  costs	  other	  than	  trade	  policy	  barriers	  or	  based	  on	  time	  series	  
variation	  stemming	  from	  exchange	  rate	  fluctuations.	  Studies	  that	  rely	  on	  cross-­‐sectional	  
variation	  are	  often	  labeled	  “micro”	  studies	  and	  yield	  high	  values	  for	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  (around	  
five	  or	  higher).	  	  Studies	  that	  rely	  on	  time-­‐series	  variation	  are	  often	  identified	  as	  “macro”	  studies	  
and	  yield	  low	  estimates	  for	  the	  trade	  elasticity,	  around	  one	  or	  lower.	  	  	  A	  standard	  explanation	  
for	  these	  divergent	  results	  is	  that	  cross-­‐sectional	  studies	  identify	  long-­‐run	  effects	  corresponding	  
to	  different	  steady	  states	  associated	  with	  different	  trade	  costs,	  while	  studies	  based	  on	  time-­‐
series	  variation	  capture	  only	  the	  short-­‐run	  effects	  of	  changing	  trade	  costs.	  Economic	  agents	  
have	  time	  to	  adjust	  in	  the	  long-­‐run	  so	  the	  long-­‐run	  trade	  elasticity	  is	  larger	  than	  the	  short-­‐run	  
elasticity.	  	  While	  this	  explanation	  is	  appealing,	  it	  abstracts	  from	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  two	  types	  of	  
studies	  rely	  on	  very	  different	  sources	  of	  variation,	  so	  that	  the	  different	  estimates	  could	  instead	  
be	  due	  to	  these	  different	  sources	  of	  variation.	  	  Indicatively,	  Shapiro	  (2014)	  relies	  on	  panel	  data	  
in	  order	  to	  estimate	  the	  trade	  elasticity.	  The	  use	  of	  panel	  data	  implies	  that	  his	  elasticity	  
estimate	  should	  be	  best	  thought	  of	  as	  a	  short-­‐run	  one;	  yet	  his	  results	  are	  closer	  to	  the	  ones	  
obtained	  by	  cross-­‐sectional	  studies	  because	  he	  relies	  on	  similar	  sources	  of	  variation.	  	  
This	  review	  does	  not	  examine	  work	  on	  estimation	  of	  the	  trade	  elasticity,	  but	  given	  the	  
central	  role	  that	  trade	  elasticity	  plays	  in	  a	  number	  of	  trade	  models	  and	  in	  welfare	  analysis,	  it	  is	  
surprising	  that	  trade	  policy	  has	  not	  been	  exploited	  to	  a	  larger	  extent	  to	  identify	  this	  crucial	  
parameter.	  To	  our	  knowledge,	  the	  only	  exceptions	  to	  this	  pattern	  are	  the	  work	  by	  Yi	  (2003)	  –	  
who	  however	  calculated	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  implied	  by	  tariff	  reductions	  only	  to	  subsequently	  
denounce	  it	  as	  implausible	  –	  and	  the	  estimates	  provided	  in	  recent	  work	  by	  Caliendo	  and	  Parro	  
(2015).	  	  	  Caliendo	  and	  Parro	  estimate	  sectoral	  trade	  elasticities	  based	  on	  the	  import	  tariff	  
reductions	  associated	  with	  NAFTA.	  The	  estimates	  displayed	  in	  Table	  1	  of	  their	  paper	  display	  
substantial	  heterogeneity,	  with	  trade	  elasticities	  ranging	  from	  0.37	  to	  51.8!	  	  The	  authors	  reject	  
the	  null	  hypothesis	  of	  a	  common	  elasticity	  across	  sectors.	  The	  heterogeneity	  of	  the	  estimates	  
suggests	  that	  trade	  elasticity	  estimates	  may	  vary	  by	  sector,	  time	  and	  country.	  	  This	  makes	  
careful	  empirical	  work	  that	  exploits	  trade	  policy	  variation	  in	  order	  to	  identify	  the	  trade	  
elasticity/ies	  more	  important.	  	  The	  fact	  that	  a	  key	  parameter	  in	  the	  trade	  literature	  is	  so	  rarely	  
estimated	  based	  on	  trade	  policy	  variation	  speaks	  to	  the	  secondary	  role	  assigned	  to	  trade	  policy.	  
25	  
	  
	  

	  
3.2

Effects	  on	  Prices	  
While	  studies	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  trade	  flows	  abound,	  evidence	  on	  its	  

effects	  on	  prices	  is	  rare.	  	  Traditional	  trade	  models	  feature	  either	  perfect	  competition	  or	  
monopolistic	  competition	  with	  CES	  demand	  implying	  perfect	  pass-­‐through	  of	  tariffs	  or	  other	  
trade	  barrier	  changes	  to	  prices.	  Accordingly,	  there	  has	  been	  relatively	  little	  interest	  in	  
examining	  the	  response	  of	  prices	  to	  trade	  reforms	  in	  the	  past.	  The	  standard	  premise	  has	  been	  
that	  tariff	  or	  NTB	  reductions	  led	  to	  a	  proportional	  decrease	  in	  the	  prices	  of	  imported	  products.	  
This	  premise	  has	  been	  called	  into	  question	  in	  more	  recent	  work	  that	  has	  highlighted	  the	  
relevance	  of	  variable	  markups.	  	  Before	  we	  examine	  the	  implications	  of	  variable	  markups	  for	  
price	  adjustment,	  it	  is	  important	  to	  note	  that	  independent	  of	  the	  particular	  theoretical	  model	  
underlying	  the	  analysis,	  a	  reduction	  of	  trade	  policy	  barriers	  would	  be	  expected	  to	  lead	  to	  lower	  
prices	  in	  the	  importing	  country.	  	  This	  price	  reduction	  seems	  unambiguous	  in	  qualitative	  terms	  
and	  is	  realized	  through	  several	  channels.	  

	  

First,	  trade	  policy	  changes	  will	  directly	  impact	  the	  prices	  of	  imported	  goods.	  	  A	  reduction	  
of	  tariffs,	  for	  example,	  will	  lead	  to	  a	  decline	  in	  the	  price	  of	  imports,	  though	  the	  exact	  magnitude	  
of	  the	  decline	  will	  depend	  on	  market	  conditions.	  Second,	  a	  reduction	  of	  trade	  barriers	  exerts	  
competitive	  pressure	  on	  the	  domestic	  producers	  of	  final	  products.	  Producers	  face	  a	  downward	  
shift	  in	  the	  residual	  demand	  for	  their	  products	  accompanied	  by	  an	  increase	  in	  the	  price	  
elasticity	  of	  the	  residual	  demand	  curve	  given	  the	  intensified	  import	  competition.	  	  With	  variable	  
markups,	  these	  changes	  in	  the	  residual	  demand	  facing	  domestic	  producers	  imply	  lower	  
markups	  and	  lower	  prices.	  	  This	  is	  the	  pro-­‐competitive	  effect	  of	  trade	  liberalization.	  In	  addition,	  
one	  would	  expect	  a	  trade	  liberalization	  to	  also	  have	  a	  cost	  reduction	  effect.	  	  To	  the	  extent	  that	  
the	  reduction	  of	  trade	  barriers	  affects	  products	  that	  are	  used	  as	  intermediate	  inputs	  in	  
domestic	  production,	  one	  would	  expect	  a	  decline	  in	  the	  prices	  of	  these	  intermediate	  inputs.	  
Further,	  trade	  liberalization	  may	  lead	  to	  improved	  firm	  efficiency	  (for	  example,	  through	  the	  
elimination	  of	  X-­‐inefficiencies,	  or	  the	  introduction	  of	  new	  products	  that	  contribute	  to	  lower	  
costs),	  which	  will	  further	  lower	  costs.	  	  These	  cost	  reductions	  should	  also	  contribute	  to	  lower	  
prices.	  	  In	  sum,	  the	  above	  considerations	  lead	  to	  the	  qualitatively	  unambiguous	  conclusion	  that	  
26	  
	  
	  

a	  reduction	  of	  trade	  barriers	  should	  lead	  to	  lower	  prices	  in	  the	  importing	  country.	  	  The	  
quantitative	  effect	  however	  is	  less	  clear	  and	  will	  depend	  on	  many	  factors	  regarding	  the	  
demand,	  market	  structure	  and	  competitive	  conditions.	  
A	  recent	  quantitative	  study	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  liberalization	  (Edmond,	  Midrigan,	  and	  
Xu(2015))	  uses	  counterfactual	  simulations	  to	  quantify	  the	  pro-­‐competitive	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  
and	  concludes	  that	  trade	  liberalization	  leads	  to	  lower	  markups	  and	  lower	  prices.	  	  But	  evidence	  
on	  actual,	  as	  opposed	  to	  counterfactual,	  trade	  policy	  changes	  is	  scant.	  This	  is	  partly	  due	  to	  the	  
fact	  that	  reliable	  data	  on	  prices	  are	  difficult	  to	  find	  and	  partly	  due	  to	  the	  aforementioned	  
assumption	  that	  prices	  move	  one-­‐to-­‐one	  with	  trade	  policy	  changes,	  so	  that	  an	  examination	  of	  
the	  price	  response	  is	  not	  necessary	  or	  particularly	  interesting.	  	  To	  our	  knowledge,	  only	  two	  
recent	  studies	  have	  directly	  examined	  the	  price	  response	  to	  trade	  liberalization:	  Topalova	  
(2010)	  and	  De	  Locker,	  Goldberg,	  Khandelwal,	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2015),	  henceforth	  DLGKP,	  both	  on	  
India.	  Both	  studies	  found	  that	  domestic	  prices	  decline	  approximately	  10%	  as	  a	  result	  of	  India’s	  
trade	  liberalization.	  However,	  this	  reduction	  is	  small	  relative	  to	  the	  cost	  reductions	  implied	  by	  
the	  trade	  liberalization,	  which	  are	  substantial.	  	  The	  reason	  for	  the	  attenuated	  response	  of	  prices	  
is	  that	  the	  pass-­‐through	  of	  cost	  reductions	  to	  final	  goods	  prices	  is	  incomplete.	  	  This	  incomplete	  
pass-­‐through	  in	  turn	  implies	  rising	  markups.	  This	  result	  may	  seem	  counterintuitive	  at	  first,	  but	  it	  
can	  be	  easily	  generated	  in	  many	  models	  featuring	  imperfect	  competition	  and	  demand	  with	  
variable	  markups.	  	  The	  authors	  also	  report	  that	  once	  they	  condition	  on	  changes	  in	  marginal	  
costs	  arising	  from	  trade	  liberalization,	  they	  can	  identify	  the	  pro-­‐competitive	  effect	  of	  trade	  
liberalization:	  a	  decline	  in	  markups	  arising	  from	  the	  exposure	  of	  domestic	  producers	  to	  
intensified	  competition.	  Hence,	  the	  results	  do	  not	  imply	  that	  this	  pro-­‐competitive	  effect	  does	  
not	  exist,	  but	  rather	  that	  in	  their	  setting,	  the	  pro-­‐competitive	  effect	  is	  dominated	  by	  the	  
incomplete	  pass-­‐through	  effect	  associated	  with	  variable	  markups.	  	  
The	  possibility	  that	  prices	  respond	  only	  partially	  to	  trade	  policy	  changes	  is	  important	  for	  
trade	  policy	  evaluation.	  	  Many	  key	  results	  in	  the	  literature	  have	  been	  derived	  under	  the	  
assumption	  of	  complete	  price	  adjustment	  and	  need	  to	  be	  revisited	  once	  the	  possibility	  of	  
incomplete	  adjustment	  is	  considered.	  	  As	  micro	  data	  on	  prices	  are	  becoming	  more	  widely	  
available,	  this	  is	  an	  important	  question	  for	  future	  research.	  While	  it	  is	  too	  early	  to	  say	  whether	  
27	  
	  
	  

the	  results	  of	  DLGKP	  generalize	  to	  other	  settings,	  it	  is	  instructive	  to	  draw	  a	  parallel	  to	  the	  macro	  
literature	  on	  price	  rigidities	  and	  incomplete	  exchange	  rate	  pass-­‐through.	  This	  literature	  has	  
repeatedly	  documented	  incomplete	  pass-­‐through	  of	  exchange	  rate	  changes	  to	  prices,	  not	  only	  
in	  the	  short,	  but	  also	  in	  the	  long-­‐run,	  resulting	  in	  persistent	  deviations	  from	  the	  Law	  of	  One	  
Price.	  	  	  Despite	  this	  evidence,	  the	  micro-­‐oriented	  trade	  literature	  has	  for	  years	  proceeded	  under	  
the	  assumption	  that	  price	  rigidities	  do	  not	  exist	  and	  that	  prices	  fully	  respond	  to	  trade	  policy	  
changes.10	  The	  insights	  from	  these	  two	  literatures	  should	  be	  merged	  in	  order	  to	  assess	  the	  
actual	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  changes.	  	  Examining	  the	  actual	  response	  of	  prices	  to	  trade	  policy	  
changes	  is	  a	  first	  step	  in	  this	  direction.	  
3.3

Effects	  on	  the	  Extensive	  Margin	  
If	  trade	  policy	  has	  attenuated	  effects	  on	  prices,	  how	  can	  it	  have	  large	  effects	  on	  trade	  

quantities	  and	  volumes?	  One	  possibility	  is	  that	  trade	  policy	  changes	  lead	  to	  the	  trade	  of	  new	  
products	  and	  varieties.	  Following	  the	  convention	  in	  the	  trade	  literature,	  we	  will	  use	  the	  term	  
“product”	  to	  describe	  genuinely	  new	  products,	  and	  the	  term	  “variety”	  to	  refer	  to	  a	  
product/source	  country	  pair.	  	  For	  example,	  if	  a	  policy	  change	  leads	  to	  the	  import	  of	  bananas,	  
and	  bananas	  were	  previously	  not	  imported,	  bananas	  will	  be	  considered	  a	  new	  product.	  If	  
bananas	  were	  already	  imported,	  but	  a	  trade	  policy	  change	  leads	  to	  imports	  from	  a	  new	  country,	  
such	  as	  Ecuador,	  Ecuadorian	  bananas	  will	  be	  referred	  to	  as	  a	  new	  variety.	  	  In	  addition	  to	  the	  
introduction	  of	  new	  imported	  products	  and	  varieties,	  trade	  policy	  may	  also	  indirectly	  lead	  to	  
the	  introduction	  of	  new	  domestic	  products.	  	  This	  could	  occur	  if	  the	  technology	  and	  imported	  
inputs	  for	  producing	  certain	  products	  domestically	  were	  unavailable	  or	  too	  expensive	  prior	  to	  
trade	  liberalization	  and	  the	  reduction	  of	  trade	  barriers	  made	  their	  production	  economically	  
viable.	  
The	  empirical	  trade	  literature	  has	  extensively	  investigated	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  on	  the	  
extensive	  margin	  (see	  Feenstra	  (1994)	  and	  Broda	  and	  Weinstein	  (2006)).	  	  However,	  the	  majority	  
of	  the	  work	  has	  focused	  on	  the	  impact	  of	  trade,	  not	  trade	  policy.	  	  Both	  Feenstra	  and	  Broda	  and	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10

	  An	  important	  exception	  to	  this	  pattern	  is	  a	  recent	  paper	  by	  Atkin	  and	  Donaldson	  (2013)	  that	  examines	  the	  
implications	  of	  incomplete	  pass-­‐through	  for	  intra-­‐national	  prices	  in	  Ethiopia	  and	  Nigeria.	  	  We	  do	  not	  discuss	  this	  
paper	  here	  	  since	  it	  does	  not	  consider	  any	  actual	  trade	  policy	  changes,	  but	  it	  should	  be	  noted	  that	  its	  results	  do	  
have	  implications	  for	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy,	  and	  in	  particular	  for	  how	  trade	  barrier	  reductions	  would	  affect	  
prices	  in	  ports	  versus	  inland	  locations,	  especially	  in	  developing	  countries.	  	  

28	  
	  
	  

Weinstein	  rely	  on	  an	  identification	  strategy	  that	  does	  not	  use	  any	  information	  on	  trade	  policy.	  	  
They	  find	  very	  large	  effects	  of	  trade	  on	  the	  extensive	  margin,	  but	  given	  that	  trade	  policy	  is	  
completely	  absent	  from	  their	  work,	  it	  is	  not	  clear	  that	  these	  effects	  can	  be	  interpreted	  as	  the	  
outcome	  of	  trade	  policy.	  
In	  contrast	  to	  these	  two	  studies	  that	  explicitly	  focus	  on	  trade	  policy,	  Klenow	  and	  
Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  (1997)	  and	  Arkolakis,	  Demidova,	  Kalenow	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  (2008),	  find	  
miniscule	  effects.	  	  Both	  studies	  focus	  on	  the	  tariff	  reductions	  associated	  with	  the	  Costa	  Rican	  
trade	  liberalization.	  The	  authors’	  interpretation	  for	  the	  small	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  the	  
extensive	  margin	  is	  that	  the	  liberalization	  led	  to	  the	  import	  of	  marginal,	  or	  relatively	  
unimportant,	  products	  and	  varieties,	  as	  reflected	  in	  the	  relative	  low	  shares	  of	  these	  
products/varieties	  in	  total	  expenditure.	  The	  products/varieties	  that	  were	  important	  for	  Costa	  
Rica	  were	  already	  being	  imported	  prior	  to	  the	  liberalization.	  	  Along	  the	  same	  lines,	  it	  seems	  that	  
the	  reason	  that	  Feenstra	  and	  Broda	  and	  Weinstein	  find	  an	  important	  role	  of	  trade	  for	  the	  
extensive	  margin	  in	  the	  U.S.	  is	  that	  in	  the	  U.S.	  the	  new	  imported	  products/varieties	  were	  
important	  for	  the	  economy.	  	  In	  this	  setting,	  however,	  these	  new	  imports	  were	  not	  necessarily	  
the	  result	  of	  trade	  policy	  changes.	  Though	  never	  explicitly	  stated,	  the	  sentiment	  underlying	  the	  
Costa	  Rican	  papers	  is	  that	  trade	  policy	  may	  again	  not	  “matter”.	  	  By	  the	  time	  a	  trade	  
liberalization	  comes	  into	  effect,	  the	  products	  that	  were	  important	  for	  the	  economy	  were	  
already	  imported.	  
In	  a	  different	  study	  on	  India,	  that	  also	  examines	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  changes	  on	  
the	  extensive	  margin,	  Goldberg,	  Khandelwal,	  Pavcnik	  and	  Topalova	  (2010)	  find	  results	  that	  are	  
strongly	  at	  odds	  with	  those	  reported	  in	  the	  previous	  two	  papers	  on	  Costa	  Rica.	  In	  the	  case	  of	  
India,	  the	  effects	  of	  the	  tariff	  reductions	  on	  the	  introduction	  of	  new	  imported	  products	  and	  
varieties	  are	  large	  and	  result	  in	  significant	  welfare	  gains	  for	  the	  economy,	  as	  measured	  by	  the	  
decline	  in	  the	  exact	  price	  index.	  Moreover,	  the	  authors	  document	  that	  the	  tariff	  reductions	  also	  
led	  to	  the	  introduction	  of	  new	  domestic	  products.	  	  The	  intuition	  behind	  these	  results	  is	  
straightforward:	  Indian	  businesses	  and	  policy	  makers	  had	  complained	  for	  years	  that	  restrictions	  
on	  the	  imports	  of	  important	  inputs	  held	  back	  domestic	  production	  and	  lowered	  the	  quality	  of	  
the	  domestically	  produced	  products.	  	  The	  trade	  liberalization	  relaxed	  these	  constraints.	  	  Hence,	  
29	  
	  
	  

in	  contrast	  to	  the	  case	  of	  Costa	  Rica,	  the	  Indian	  trade	  liberalization	  resulted	  in	  the	  import	  of	  
new	  products	  and	  varieties	  that	  were	  important.	  
The	  contrast	  between	  the	  two	  studies	  on	  Costa	  Rica	  and	  India	  makes	  clear	  that	  there	  is	  
nothing	  inherent	  in	  the	  nature	  of	  trade	  policy	  that	  implies	  it	  would	  have	  small	  effects	  on	  the	  
extensive	  margin.	  Rather,	  the	  results	  depend	  on	  the	  setting,	  pre-­‐existing	  conditions,	  and	  in	  
particular	  the	  severity	  of	  the	  trade	  restrictions	  facing	  the	  economy	  prior	  to	  the	  onset	  of	  the	  
trade	  liberalization.	  	  As	  with	  prices,	  much	  more	  work	  in	  this	  area	  is	  needed	  before	  a	  general	  
assessment	  of	  the	  extensive	  margin	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  is	  possible.	  
A	  recent	  working	  paper	  by	  Caliendo	  et	  al	  (2015)	  examines	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  
(i.e.,	  tariff	  reductions)	  on	  a	  different	  type	  of	  extensive	  margin:	  the	  decisions	  of	  firms	  to	  enter	  
new	  markets.	  	  The	  evidence	  presented	  in	  the	  paper	  suggests	  that	  tariff	  reductions	  over	  the	  
period	  1990-­‐2010	  had	  a	  large	  impact	  on	  firm	  entry	  and	  selection	  into	  markets,	  and	  that	  this	  
effect	  was	  more	  pronounced	  in	  developed	  than	  in	  developing	  countries.	  Interpreting	  their	  
estimates	  within	  a	  quantitative	  model	  of	  trade,	  the	  authors	  attribute	  more	  than	  90%	  of	  the	  
gains	  from	  trade	  to	  the	  reductions	  in	  MFN	  tariffs.	  
	  
3.4

Effects	  on	  Aggregate	  (Static)	  Gains	  from	  Trade	  
Ultimately,	  what	  is	  most	  relevant	  is	  not	  how	  trade	  flows	  or	  prices	  or	  the	  extensive	  

margin	  respond	  to	  commercial	  policy,	  but	  how	  the	  economy	  as	  a	  whole	  is	  affected	  by	  policy.	  	  
What	  gains	  are	  associated	  with	  trade	  liberalization	  and	  what	  losses	  are	  associated	  with	  trade	  
protection?	  
In	  principle,	  this	  seems	  like	  a	  question	  that	  should	  have	  been	  addressed	  in	  the	  literature.	  
Although	  estimates	  of	  the	  gains	  from	  “trade”	  abound,	  there	  is	  relatively	  little	  work	  on	  
estimating	  the	  gains	  associated	  with	  particular	  trade	  liberalization	  episodes.	  	  There	  are	  few	  
exceptions,	  and	  these	  consist	  of	  either	  older	  studies	  that	  employed	  CGE	  models	  or	  case	  studies	  
of	  particular	  industries	  (e.g.	  welfare	  effects	  of	  VERs	  on	  autos	  (Berry,	  Levinsohn	  and	  Pakes	  
1999)).	  A	  general	  challenge	  for	  these	  studies	  is	  that	  they	  need	  to	  assume	  a	  particular	  
theoretical	  structure	  in	  order	  to	  derive	  the	  welfare	  implications	  of	  trade	  policy.	  	  Thus,	  the	  
conclusions	  are	  as	  credible	  as	  the	  underlying	  model.	  
30	  
	  
	  

Arkolakis,	  Costinot	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  (2010),	  ACR	  henceforth,	  in	  an	  influential	  paper,	  
provide	  a	  simple	  formula	  that	  can	  be	  easily	  applied	  ex-­‐post	  to	  trade	  liberalization	  episodes	  to	  
assess	  the	  gains	  associated	  with	  the	  policy	  changes:	  the	  welfare	  gains	  are	  related	  to	  the	  
reduced	  form	  “trade	  elasticity”	  and	  to	  the	  change	  in	  the	  share	  of	  domestic	  expenditure.	  The	  
advantage	  of	  this	  approach	  is	  that	  it	  is	  consistent	  with	  a	  large	  class	  of	  models,	  in	  fact	  with	  all	  
workhorse	  models	  of	  trade.	  Hence,	  while	  the	  formula	  is	  theoretically	  informed,	  it	  does	  not	  
depend	  on	  the	  validity	  of	  one	  specific	  model.	  	  Moreover,	  at	  first	  sight,	  it	  seems	  easy	  to	  
implement:	  one	  needs	  information	  on	  the	  change	  in	  domestic	  expenditure	  attributable	  to	  the	  
trade	  policy	  change	  (which,	  subject	  to	  identification	  challenges,	  can	  be	  obtained	  from	  widely	  
available	  data)	  and	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  (which,	  again	  subject	  to	  the	  same	  identification	  
challenges,	  should	  be	  estimable	  from	  publicly	  available	  data).	  	  	  To	  our	  knowledge,	  the	  ACR	  
formula	  has	  been	  applied	  only	  to	  assess	  the	  gains	  from	  trade	  relative	  to	  autarky,	  not	  the	  gains	  
or	  losses	  associated	  with	  particular	  policies.	  
This	  observation	  is	  surprising	  because	  trade	  policy	  is	  not	  only	  interesting	  by	  itself,	  but	  it	  
also	  provides	  a	  natural	  way	  for	  identifying	  the	  change	  in	  the	  domestic	  expenditure	  that	  arises	  
from	  changes	  in	  trade	  costs.	  	  In	  the	  process	  of	  assigning	  changes	  in	  the	  domestic	  expenditure	  to	  
changes	  in	  trade	  policy,	  one	  also	  identifies	  the	  “trade	  elasticity”	  which	  plays	  a	  key	  role	  in	  
welfare	  analysis.	  	  In	  short,	  implementation	  of	  an	  ex-­‐post	  welfare	  analysis	  as	  suggested	  by	  the	  
ACR	  formula	  is	  tantamount	  to	  estimating	  the	  “trade	  elasticity.”	  This	  brings	  us	  back	  to	  the	  topic	  
discussed	  earlier,	  of	  why	  variation	  induced	  by	  trade	  policy	  has	  not	  been	  used	  more	  extensively	  
in	  order	  to	  identify	  the	  “trade	  elasticity.”	  	  This	  is	  a	  hole	  in	  the	  literature	  that	  future	  research	  will	  
hopefully	  address.	  
The	  more	  challenging	  question	  is	  whether	  estimates	  of	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  and	  the	  ACR	  
formula	  can	  also	  be	  applied	  ex-­‐ante,	  in	  lieu	  of	  counterfactual	  simulations	  conducted	  within	  the	  
framework	  of	  a	  specific	  theoretical	  model,	  to	  predict	  the	  gains	  or	  losses	  from	  a	  trade	  policy	  
intervention	  that	  has	  not	  yet	  occurred.	  	  From	  a	  theoretical	  point	  of	  view,	  such	  ex-­‐ante	  
application	  is	  justified	  within	  models	  that	  predict	  that	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  should	  be	  invariant	  to	  
the	  policy	  change.	  	  From	  an	  empirical	  point	  of	  view,	  we	  would	  like	  to	  have	  substantially	  richer	  
evidence	  on	  the	  magnitude	  of	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  based	  on	  trade	  policy	  variation,	  and	  most	  
31	  
	  
	  

importantly,	  on	  the	  question	  of	  whether	  the	  trade	  elasticity	  appears	  to	  be	  invariant	  across	  time	  
and	  space,	  or	  is	  dependent	  on	  the	  particular	  setting.	  The	  divergent	  results	  regarding	  Costa	  Rica	  
and	  India	  mentioned	  earlier,	  suggest	  that	  the	  latter	  may	  be	  the	  case.	  
	  
4. The	  Effects	  of	  Trade	  Policy	  on	  Firms:	  Productivity,	  Costs,	  and	  Markups	  
A	  repeated	  observation	  we	  have	  made	  up	  to	  this	  point	  is	  that	  while	  there	  is	  a	  large	  
literature	  that	  has	  focused	  on	  various	  forms	  of	  trade	  costs	  other	  than	  trade	  policy	  barriers,	  
empirical	  work	  on	  trade	  policy	  is	  surprisingly	  scarce.	  	  The	  one	  exception	  to	  this	  pattern	  is	  the	  
literature	  focusing	  on	  firms,	  specifically	  relating	  to	  how	  productivity,	  costs	  and	  markups	  are	  
affected	  by	  trade	  liberalization.	  This	  is	  the	  one	  part	  of	  the	  trade	  literature	  that	  has	  been	  policy-­‐
oriented	  from	  the	  outset.	  
Because	  this	  literature	  is	  mature	  and	  voluminous,	  it	  has	  been	  reviewed	  extensively	  in	  
previous	  surveys	  (Harrison	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  (2010),	  De	  Loecker	  and	  Goldberg	  (2014),	  Melitz	  
and	  Redding	  (2014)).	  	  Therefore,	  we	  will	  abstain	  from	  providing	  another	  detailed	  review	  of	  
existing	  findings.	  Instead,	  we	  will	  highlight	  the	  main	  messages	  from	  this	  literature.	  
The	  main	  and	  robust	  finding	  of	  research	  in	  this	  area	  is	  that	  a	  reduction	  of	  trade	  policy	  
barriers	  leads	  to	  an	  unambiguous	  increase	  in	  industry	  revenue	  productivity.	  The	  evidence	  on	  
the	  exact	  channels	  through	  which	  the	  productivity	  improvements	  are	  realized	  is,	  however,	  
more	  mixed	  and	  depends	  on	  the	  particular	  setting	  and	  trade	  liberalization	  episode.	  In	  general,	  
the	  literature	  has	  found	  support	  for	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  industry	  productivity	  increases	  through	  
reallocation	  of	  market	  shares	  towards	  more	  productive	  firms	  and	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  within-­‐
firm	  revenue	  productivity	  increases	  in	  response	  to	  trade	  liberalization.	  	  Within-­‐firm	  revenue	  
improvements	  can	  in	  turn	  be	  attributed	  either	  to	  the	  increase	  of	  productive	  efficiency	  (i.e.,	  
physical	  productivity)	  or	  the	  increase	  of	  markups.	  
A	  main	  challenge	  for	  the	  interpretation	  of	  the	  results	  of	  this	  literature	  is	  that	  until	  
recently,	  most	  studies	  had	  access	  to	  revenue	  data	  only,	  so	  that	  a	  distinction	  between	  revenue	  
and	  physical	  productivity	  was	  not	  possible.	  	  While	  in	  both	  cases	  firms	  benefit	  as	  a	  result	  of	  trade	  
liberalization,	  increases	  in	  revenue	  versus	  physical	  productivity	  may	  have	  different	  welfare	  
implications	  and	  distributional	  consequences.	  It	  is	  only	  recently	  that	  the	  literature	  has	  started	  
32	  
	  
	  

taking	  this	  distinction	  seriously	  by	  examining	  separately	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  liberalization	  on	  
physical	  productivity,	  costs,	  and	  markups.	  	  
Changes	  in	  within-­‐firm	  physical	  efficiency	  and	  costs	  can	  be	  attributed	  either	  to	  the	  
reduction	  of	  X-­‐inefficiencies	  and	  adoption	  of	  better	  management	  practices,	  or	  to	  the	  import	  of	  
new	  and	  higher	  quality	  inputs	  that	  generate	  an	  increase	  in	  measured	  productivity.	  	  In	  addition,	  
declines	  in	  the	  prices	  of	  existing	  imported	  inputs	  will	  show	  up	  as	  a	  direct	  cost	  decrease	  for	  
importing	  firms.	  	  	  In	  general,	  one	  would	  expect	  reductions	  of	  tariffs	  on	  imported	  final	  products	  
(“output	  tariffs”)	  that	  compete	  with	  those	  offered	  by	  domestic	  firms	  to	  affect	  management	  and	  
X-­‐inefficiencies	  through	  the	  additional	  competitive	  pressure	  they	  exert	  on	  domestic	  firms.	  	  On	  
the	  other	  hand,	  declines	  in	  the	  tariffs	  of	  imported	  intermediate	  products	  that	  are	  used	  as	  inputs	  
(“input	  tariffs”)	  in	  the	  production	  of	  domestic	  firms	  should	  have	  a	  direct	  cost	  reduction	  effect	  
and	  an	  indirect	  effect	  on	  measured	  productivity	  through	  the	  introduction	  of	  new	  imported	  
products	  (see	  Halpern,	  Koren	  and	  Szeidl	  (2015))	  .	  	  A	  second	  robust	  finding	  of	  the	  literature	  on	  
firm	  productivity	  is	  that	  input	  tariffs	  have	  large	  effects	  on	  firm	  productivity,	  often	  much	  larger	  
than	  the	  ones	  found	  for	  output	  tariffs	  (Amiti	  and	  Konings	  (2007),	  Khandelwal	  and	  Topalova	  
(2011),	  DLGKPT	  (2015)).	  
An	  additional	  channel	  through	  which	  trade	  barrier	  reductions	  may	  contribute	  to	  within-­‐
firm	  productivity	  enhancements	  is	  by	  encouraging	  investment	  in	  new	  technology	  and	  R&D,	  
which	  will	  also	  lead	  to	  productivity	  improvements.	  	  	  This	  point	  is	  exemplified	  in	  Bustos	  (2011)	  
who	  is	  among	  the	  few	  who	  have	  studied	  actual	  trade	  liberalization	  episodes.	  	  Bustos	  shows	  that	  
firms	  in	  Argentina	  increased	  their	  innovative	  activity	  as	  a	  result	  of	  Mercosur,	  though	  the	  effects	  
were	  heterogeneous	  across	  firms	  of	  different	  size.	  
We	  already	  referred	  to	  some	  recent	  results	  regarding	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  liberalization	  
on	  markups,	  when	  we	  reviewed	  the	  evidence	  on	  prices.	  	  In	  addition	  to	  DLGKP	  (2015),	  two	  
earlier	  papers	  examined	  the	  effects	  of	  actual	  trade	  liberalization	  episodes	  on	  markups,	  though	  
in	  these	  cases	  without	  exploiting	  information	  on	  prices:	  	  Levinsohn	  (1993)	  in	  his	  study	  of	  the	  
trade	  reforms	  of	  Turkey,	  and	  Harrison	  (1994)	  in	  her	  study	  of	  the	  trade	  liberalization	  in	  the	  Cote	  
d'Ivoire.	  	  Even	  though	  the	  authors	  did	  not	  have	  firm	  or	  product-­‐specific	  data	  on	  prices,	  they	  
managed	  to	  estimate	  price-­‐cost	  margins	  for	  the	  pre	  and	  post-­‐reform	  periods	  by	  using	  a	  method	  
33	  
	  
	  

proposed	  by	  Hall	  (1986).	  	  Both	  studies	  found	  that	  markups	  decreased	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  
respective	  trade	  liberalization	  episodes,	  lending	  support	  to	  the	  view	  that	  trade	  policy	  has	  pro-­‐
competitive	  effects.	  At	  first,	  these	  results	  may	  seem	  at	  odds	  with	  DLGKP’s	  recent	  findings	  on	  
India,	  which	  indicate	  an	  increase	  in	  markups.	  However,	  both	  Levinsohn	  and	  Harrison	  focus	  on	  
trade	  liberalizations	  that	  affected	  final	  goods,	  and	  hence	  their	  work	  captures	  only	  the	  pro-­‐
competitive	  effect	  of	  tariff	  reductions.	  They	  do	  not	  consider	  the	  potential	  cost	  reduction	  effect	  
of	  trade	  reforms	  on	  intermediate	  inputs	  which	  drive	  –	  via	  the	  incomplete	  pass-­‐through	  
mechanism	  –	  the	  increase	  in	  markups	  in	  DLGKP.	  	  	  Ideally,	  we	  would	  like	  to	  have	  more	  evidence	  
from	  many	  different	  settings	  in	  order	  to	  assess	  whether	  and	  how	  trade	  policy	  affects	  firms’	  
market	  power.	  Moreover,	  all	  studies	  mentioned	  above	  focus	  on	  unilateral	  trade	  liberalizations.	  	  
Arkolakis,	  Costinot,	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  and	  Donaldson	  (2015)	  point	  out	  that	  in	  the	  case	  of	  a	  
bilateral	  trade	  liberalization	  the	  general	  equilibrium	  effects	  on	  prices	  and	  markups	  would	  be	  
more	  complicated	  as	  exporters,	  in	  addition	  to	  importers,	  adjust	  their	  prices.	  	  	  This	  is	  an	  
interesting	  possibility	  that	  future	  work	  could	  investigate.	  	  Price	  data	  are	  becoming	  more	  widely	  
available,	  and	  by	  combining	  them	  with	  information	  on	  actual	  trade	  liberalization	  episodes,	  one	  
can	  shed	  light	  on	  how	  actual	  markups	  respond	  to	  trade	  policy	  and	  examine	  whether	  the	  
mechanisms	  postulated	  in	  theoretical	  papers	  and	  counterfactual	  simulations	  are	  indeed	  borne	  
out	  in	  the	  data.	  
The	  message	  from	  the	  existing	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  firm	  
performance	  (i.e.	  firm	  productivity	  and	  markups)	  is	  very	  different	  from	  the	  one	  that	  is	  implicit	  
in	  examinations	  of	  aggregate	  outcomes.	  Trade	  policy	  seems	  to	  truly	  matter	  here	  for	  firm	  
performance	  and	  deliver	  large,	  economically	  significant	  effects.11	  It	  seems	  clear	  that	  firms	  
(especially	  the	  initially	  better	  performing	  ones)	  and	  industries	  benefit	  from	  trade	  liberalization.	  	  
What	  is	  less	  clear	  is	  whether	  this	  improvement	  in	  performance	  is	  due	  to	  higher	  efficiency	  or	  
increased	  market	  power.	  	  The	  trade	  literature	  to	  date	  seems	  to	  have	  operated	  predominantly	  
under	  the	  premise	  that	  exposure	  to	  more	  international	  competition	  inevitably	  leads	  to	  a	  
containment	  of	  firms’	  market	  power	  and	  benefits	  consumers.	  Recent	  findings	  on	  firms’	  
markups	  post	  trade	  policy	  changes	  challenge	  this	  conventional	  wisdom.	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11

Industry-­‐specific	  studies	  of	  trade	  policy	  reviewed	  by	  Feenstra	  (1995)	  also	  conclude	  that	  trade	  policy	  matters	  for	  
firm	  performance.	  	  

34	  
	  
	  

One	  notable	  exception	  to	  the	  policy-­‐oriented	  focus	  of	  the	  empirical	  studies	  of	  firms	  and	  
trade	  is	  the	  literature	  on	  multinational	  firms.	  Multinational	  firms	  account	  for	  a	  large	  share	  of	  
international	  trade	  transactions	  and	  a	  vast	  literature	  in	  international	  economics	  examines	  the	  
impact	  of	  such	  firms	  on	  the	  structure	  of	  international	  trade,	  host-­‐country	  firm	  performance,	  
and	  labor	  markets	  (see	  Antras	  and	  Yeaple	  (2014),	  Harrison	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  (2010)	  for	  
recent	  surveys).12	  However,	  very	  few	  studies	  provide	  a	  detailed	  examination	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  
trade	  policy	  on	  the	  performance	  of	  multinationals	  and	  their	  organization	  and	  expansion	  across	  
space.13	  An	  exception	  is	  the	  literature	  that	  examines	  the	  tariff-­‐jumping	  argument	  for	  foreign	  
direct	  investment	  in	  the	  context	  of	  U.S.	  anti-­‐dumping	  duties	  (see,	  for	  example,	  Blonigen	  
(2002)).	  The	  lack	  of	  studies	  is	  in	  part	  data	  driven:	  data	  sets	  on	  multinationals	  rarely	  include	  
detailed	  information	  about	  their	  activities	  in	  multiple	  countries.	  	  Given	  the	  growing	  interest	  in	  
understanding	  the	  global	  production	  chains	  and	  improvements	  in	  data	  availability,	  this	  remains	  
a	  promising	  area	  for	  future	  research.	  	  
	  
5. The	  Effects	  of	  Trade	  Policy	  on	  Labor	  Markets	  
As	  is	  the	  case	  with	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  firm	  performance,	  the	  
literature	  on	  trade	  and	  labor	  markets	  is	  extensive	  and	  has	  been	  reviewed	  in	  several	  previous	  
surveys	  (Wood	  (1999),	  Goldberg	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2007),	  Harrison,	  McLaren,	  and	  McMillan	  (2011),	  
Pavcnik	  (2012),	  Goldberg	  (2015)).	  With	  a	  few	  notable	  exceptions,	  studies	  on	  trade	  and	  labor	  
markets	  in	  developed	  countries	  focus	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  import	  competition	  or	  exporting	  on	  
labor	  market	  outcomes.	  This	  is	  in	  stark	  contrast	  to	  the	  literature	  in	  developing	  countries,	  which	  
has,	  from	  the	  onset,	  focused	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy.	  The	  difference	  in	  the	  emphasis	  of	  
trade	  policy	  in	  the	  two	  settings	  in	  part	  stems	  from	  the	  methodological	  issues	  discussed	  in	  
section	  2.	  In	  this	  section,	  we	  highlight	  the	  main	  messages	  from	  the	  studies	  that	  focus	  explicitly	  
on	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy,	  with	  emphasis	  on	  the	  more	  recent	  literature.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12

	  Harrison	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare	  (2010)	  also	  discuss	  the	  implications	  for	  industrial	  and	  trade	  policy.	  
	  Blonigen	  and	  Figlio	  (1998)	  and	  Blanchard	  and	  Matschke	  (2015)	  show	  that	  the	  presence	  of	  multinational	  firms	  
influences	  trade	  policy.	  
13

35	  
	  
	  

One	  of	  the	  main	  findings	  is	  that	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  labor	  market	  outcomes	  
depend	  on	  relevant	  labor	  market	  frictions	  within	  a	  country.	  	  Because	  of	  these	  frictions,	  
observationally	  equivalent	  workers	  earn	  different	  wages,	  depending	  on	  the	  workers’	  industry	  
affiliation	  and	  local	  labor	  market	  conditions.	  Correspondingly,	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  
workers’	  earnings	  and	  employment	  vary	  with	  industry	  affiliation	  and	  local	  labor	  market	  
conditions.	  	  However,	  the	  importance	  of	  the	  extent	  of	  these	  frictions	  appears	  to	  differ	  across	  
settings.	  
The	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  industry	  employment	  and	  earnings	  in	  
developing	  countries	  finds	  small	  industry	  employment	  responses	  to	  trade	  policy	  changes,	  with	  
wage	  adjustment	  playing	  a	  more	  important	  role.	  However,	  trade	  liberalization	  decreases	  the	  
industry	  wage	  premiums	  of	  workers	  in	  industries	  that	  experienced	  the	  largest	  tariff	  reductions,	  
relative	  to	  workers	  in	  industries	  with	  lower	  tariff	  declines.	  When	  wage	  responses	  to	  trade	  
liberalization	  are	  more	  pronounced	  than	  quantity	  (i.e.,	  employment)	  responses,	  labor	  market	  
rigidities	  are	  plausible.	  That	  said,	  the	  evidence	  so	  far	  suggests	  that	  changes	  in	  industry	  wage	  
premia	  induced	  by	  trade	  policy	  can	  explain	  only	  a	  small	  share	  of	  the	  observed	  increase	  in	  wage	  
inequality	  in	  developing	  countries.14	  
In	  contrast,	  studies	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  in	  developed	  countries	  find	  larger	  
employment	  responses	  than	  industry	  wage	  responses	  to	  declines	  in	  industry	  tariff	  protection	  
(Grossman	  (1986)).15	  More	  recently,	  Trefler	  (2004)	  documents	  contractions	  in	  employment	  in	  
Canadian	  industries	  subject	  to	  larger	  declines	  in	  tariffs	  induced	  by	  the	  CUFTA,	  and	  notes	  that	  
earlier	  studies	  failed	  to	  find	  adjustments	  in	  industry	  wages.	  	  Pierce	  and	  Schott	  (2015)	  examine	  
the	  effects	  of	  the	  elimination	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  vis-­‐à-­‐vis	  China	  with	  the	  China’s	  WTO	  
entry	  on	  the	  employment	  in	  the	  U.S.	  manufacturing	  industries.	  Instead	  of	  examining	  the	  direct	  
effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  industry	  employment	  through	  lower	  levels	  of	  protection,	  as	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14

For	  example,	  while	  trade	  liberalization	  in	  Colombia	  lead	  to	  large	  and	  statistically	  significant	  declines	  on	  industry	  
wage	  premia	  in	  Colombian	  apparel,	  industry	  wage	  premia	  account	  for	  less	  than	  5	  percent	  of	  the	  variation	  in	  
worker	  earnings,	  so	  that	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  worker	  earnings	  through	  this	  channel	  do	  not	  make	  an	  
economically	  significant	  contribution	  to	  the	  observed	  increase	  in	  wage	  inequality	  (or	  skill	  premium).	  See	  Attanasio,	  
Goldberg	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2004)	  and	  Goldberg	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2005).	  
15
A	  negative	  cross-­‐sectional	  relationship	  between	  industry	  tariffs	  and	  industry	  wage	  premia	  of	  U.S.	  workers	  in	  
Trefler	  and	  Gaston	  (1994,	  1995)	  are	  also	  consistent	  with	  this	  view.	  Trefler	  and	  Gaston	  (1994,	  1995)	  argue	  that	  
lower	  industry	  wages	  in	  industries	  with	  higher	  trade	  protection	  might	  reflect	  that	  unions	  trade	  off	  employment	  
security	  for	  lower	  wages.	  

36	  
	  
	  

emphasized	  in	  earlier	  studies,	  Pierce	  and	  Schott	  (2015)	  focus	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  the	  elimination	  
of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty.16	  They	  measure	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  prior	  to	  China’s	  WTO	  entry	  
with	  the	  gap	  between	  the	  non-­‐MFN	  tariff	  and	  the	  MNF	  tariff	  imposed	  on	  the	  Chinese	  exporters.	  	  
The	  results	  suggest	  that	  the	  U.S.	  manufacturing	  industries	  that	  experience	  the	  largest	  decline	  in	  
tariff	  uncertainty	  experienced	  the	  biggest	  employment	  contraction.	  This	  interpretation	  of	  
results	  is	  further	  supported	  by	  the	  lack	  of	  corresponding	  losses	  in	  employment	  in	  the	  
manufacturing	  industries	  in	  the	  European	  Union	  after	  China’s	  entry	  into	  the	  WTO.	  	  Unlike	  the	  
United	  States,	  the	  European	  Union	  granted	  China	  permanent	  MFN	  status	  prior	  to	  China	  joining	  
the	  WTO,	  so	  that	  China’s	  entry	  into	  the	  WTO	  did	  not	  change	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  vis-­‐à-­‐vis	  
the	  EU.	  	  
Other	  studies	  have	  emphasized	  the	  importance	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  worker	  
earnings	  that	  operate	  through	  local	  labor	  markets	  and	  thus	  location-­‐specific	  component	  of	  
wages.	  The	  definition	  of	  a	  geographic	  unit	  that	  corresponds	  to	  a	  local	  labor	  market	  is	  country-­‐
specific,	  depending	  on	  the	  commuting	  and	  mobility	  patters	  of	  workers	  within	  and	  across	  
geographic	  areas	  in	  a	  country.	  To	  the	  extent	  that	  workers	  are	  not	  mobile	  across	  local	  labor	  
markets,	  trade	  policy	  implemented	  at	  the	  national	  level	  can	  have	  differential	  effects	  on	  worker	  
earnings	  across	  these	  geographic	  regions.	  Local	  labor	  markets	  differ	  in	  composition	  of	  industry	  
employment	  prior	  to	  trade	  policy	  reforms:	  	  areas	  that	  have	  higher	  concentration	  of	  industries	  
affected	  by	  large	  trade	  policy	  changes	  are	  more	  exposed	  to	  trade	  policy	  reform	  than	  others.17	  
Consistent	  with	  the	  frictions	  in	  labor	  mobility	  across	  these	  geographic	  regions,	  the	  literature	  
finds	  no	  or	  weak	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  regional	  population	  or	  migration	  patterns	  in	  less	  
developed	  countries	  (Topalova	  (2007,	  2010),	  McCaig	  (2011),	  Kovak	  (2013)).	  Workers	  mobility	  is	  
also	  constrained	  across	  geographic	  areas	  within	  developed	  countries	  such	  as	  the	  U.S.	  (Autor	  et.	  
al.	  (2013)).	  However,	  to	  our	  knowledge	  only	  McLaren	  and	  Hakobyan	  (2012)	  have	  examined	  the	  
effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  local	  labor	  markets	  in	  a	  developed	  country	  setting.	  	  
A	  second	  finding	  of	  these	  studies	  is	  that	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  worker	  earnings	  
vary	  systematically	  across	  geographic	  regions,	  depending	  on	  the	  region’s	  exposure	  to	  a	  
particular	  trade	  policy	  reform,	  and	  their	  magnitudes	  are	  also	  economically	  significant.	  The	  sign	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16

Section	  7.2	  discusses	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  more	  generally.	  
See	  Kovak	  (2013)	  for	  theory	  on	  how	  to	  measure	  exposure	  of	  local	  labor	  markets	  to	  trade	  policy.	  

17

37	  
	  
	  

of	  the	  effect	  depends	  on	  the	  nature	  of	  trade	  policy	  change.	  	  Studies	  that	  examine	  the	  effects	  of	  
large-­‐scale	  unilateral	  tariff	  liberalizations	  in	  developing	  countries	  find	  that	  relative	  poverty	  
declined	  by	  less	  in	  areas	  that	  had	  higher	  concentration	  of	  industries	  that	  lost	  protection	  as	  a	  
result	  of	  import	  tariff	  declines	  (Topalova	  (2010),	  Kovak	  (2013)).	  	  Topalova	  (2010),	  for	  example,	  
ties	  her	  results	  to	  lower	  industry	  and	  agricultural	  wages	  in	  more	  affected	  areas	  after	  trade	  
reform,	  which	  disproportionally	  harmed	  living	  standards	  of	  the	  poor	  households.	  Along	  the	  
same	  lines,	  McLaren	  and	  Hakobyan	  (2012)	  find	  declines	  in	  location-­‐specific	  wages	  of	  U.S.	  
workers	  due	  to	  tariff	  reductions	  implemented	  as	  part	  of	  NAFTA.	  
McCaig	  (2011),	  on	  the	  other	  hand,	  focuses	  on	  the	  local	  labor	  market	  effects	  of	  a	  trade	  
liberalization,	  which	  mainly	  lowered	  import	  tariffs	  by	  a	  major	  trade	  partner	  on	  exports	  from	  a	  
low-­‐wage	  country.	  He	  focuses	  on	  the	  consequences	  of	  the	  U.S.-­‐Vietnam	  Bilateral	  Trade	  
Agreement	  on	  Vietnamese	  households.	  McCaig	  finds	  that	  declines	  in	  U.S.	  import	  tariffs	  on	  
Vietnamese	  exports	  led	  to	  bigger	  poverty	  reductions	  in	  provinces	  in	  Vietnam	  that	  had	  a	  higher	  
pre-­‐reform	  concentration	  of	  industries	  that	  ultimately	  experienced	  larger	  tariff	  cuts.	  Lower	  
poverty	  rates	  reflect	  increased	  wages	  of	  workers	  in	  provinces	  better	  positioned	  to	  gain	  from	  
the	  trade	  agreement,	  especially	  the	  less	  educated	  workers.18	  	  
The	  above	  studies	  highlight	  the	  importance	  geographic	  frictions	  to	  mobility	  of	  workers	  
in	  assessing	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  labor	  market	  outcomes	  through	  the	  location-­‐specific	  
earnings	  of	  workers	  and	  increased	  wage	  inequality	  across	  regions.	  	  	  Trade	  policy	  exhibits	  
persistent	  longer-­‐term	  effects	  in	  this	  setting	  as	  well.	  For	  example,	  by	  affecting	  the	  living	  
standards	  of	  families,	  local	  labor	  market	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  influences	  household	  decisions	  
on	  schooling	  of	  children	  (Edmonds,	  Topalova,	  Pavcnik	  (2009,	  2010)).	  	  In	  addition,	  regional	  wage	  
gaps	  that	  emerge	  after	  trade	  policy	  reforms	  appear	  to	  widen,	  rather	  than	  decrease,	  over	  time,	  
pointing	  to	  persistence	  of	  frictions	  in	  geographic	  mobility	  over	  longer	  time	  horizons	  (Dix-­‐
Carneiro	  and	  Kovak	  (2015b)).	  
Overall,	  as	  is	  the	  case	  for	  the	  literature	  on	  trade	  policy	  and	  firm	  performance,	  the	  
message	  from	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  labor	  markets	  is	  very	  different	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18

McCaig	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2014)	  show	  that	  the	  agreement	  induced	  reallocation	  of	  workers	  from	  the	  informal	  sector	  to	  
employers	  in	  the	  formal	  sector,	  which	  was	  most	  pronounced	  in	  internationally	  integrated	  provinces.	  
	  

38	  
	  
	  

from	  the	  one	  that	  is	  implicit	  in	  examinations	  of	  aggregate	  outcomes.	  Trade	  policy	  seems	  to	  
matter	  for	  worker	  outcomes,	  although	  the	  magnitude	  of	  the	  contribution	  of	  trade	  policy	  to	  
changes	  in	  aggregate	  income	  distribution	  varies	  across	  settings.	  	  Another	  message	  that	  emerges	  
from	  this	  literature	  is	  that	  labor	  frictions	  across	  geographic	  regions	  (and	  across	  industries	  in	  
developing	  country	  settings)	  are	  important	  channels	  through	  which	  trade	  policy	  plays	  a	  role.	  	  	  
The	  literature	  is	  lacking	  in	  analysis	  of	  how	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  worker	  
outcomes	  are	  related	  and	  interact	  with	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  firm	  performance.	  With	  a	  
few	  exceptions	  (Amiti	  and	  Davis	  (2012),	  Pierce	  and	  Schott	  (2015),	  Menesez-­‐Filho	  and	  Muendler	  
(2011),	  Dix-­‐Carneiro	  and	  Kovak	  (2015b)),	  the	  studies	  of	  labor	  market	  adjustment	  to	  actual	  
external	  policy	  and	  shocks	  at	  the	  firm	  level	  are	  confined	  to	  exchange	  rate	  shocks	  (Verhoogen	  
(2008)	  and	  Brambilla,	  Lederman,	  and	  Porto	  (2012)).19	  The	  increased	  availability	  of	  detailed	  
employee-­‐employer	  data	  in	  developed	  and	  developing	  countries,	  which	  can	  be	  linked	  to	  data	  
on	  a	  firms’	  domestic	  activities	  and	  a	  firms’	  exposure	  to	  trade	  through	  exporting	  and	  importing,	  
provides	  a	  fruitful	  setting	  to	  continue	  to	  explore	  the	  channels	  through	  which	  trade	  policy	  
affects	  labor	  market	  outcomes.	  	  	  
	  
	  
6. The	  Effects	  of	  Trade	  Policy	  on	  Aggregate	  Growth	  and	  Poverty	  
Much	  of	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  the	  outcomes	  discussed	  in	  
sections	  3	  and	  4	  focuses	  on	  its	  short-­‐run	  and	  static	  effects.	  The	  distinction	  between	  short-­‐	  and	  
long-­‐run	  effects	  is	  not	  unique	  to	  trade	  policy.	  But	  in	  the	  case	  of	  trade	  policy,	  there	  are	  good	  
reasons	  to	  believe	  that	  the	  long-­‐run	  effects	  are	  orders	  of	  magnitude	  larger	  than	  the	  short-­‐run	  
effects.	  	  While	  the	  latter	  can	  be	  potentially	  identified	  through	  careful	  empirical	  work,	  the	  long-­‐
run	  effects	  are	  substantially	  harder	  to	  pin	  down	  empirically.	  As	  a	  result,	  arguments	  about	  
dynamic	  long-­‐run	  effects	  are	  often	  made	  based	  solely	  on	  principles	  and	  theoretical	  models,	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19

For	  example,	  Pierce	  and	  Schott	  (2015)	  suggest	  that	  the	  reduced	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  lead	  to	  employment	  
losses	  in	  the	  U.S.	  manufacturing	  through	  several	  channels.	  These	  include	  increased	  sourcing	  of	  inputs	  by	  U.S.	  firms	  
from	  China,	  expansion	  of	  Chinese	  export	  to	  the	  U.S.	  (which	  includes	  foreign	  owned	  firms	  located	  China),	  the	  shift	  
in	  structure	  within	  U.S.	  industries	  away	  from	  labor-­‐intensive	  plants,	  increased	  capital-­‐deepening	  among	  the	  
surviving	  U.S.	  plants,	  and	  increased	  offshoring	  by	  U.S.	  firms.	  

39	  
	  
	  

with	  little	  formal	  empirical	  support.	  In	  this	  section,	  we	  consider	  the	  (scant)	  evidence	  on	  long-­‐
run	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  aggregate	  growth	  and	  poverty.	  	  	  
The	  relationship	  between	  a	  country’s	  trade	  policy	  and	  aggregate	  economic	  growth	  is	  of	  
key	  policy	  interest,	  and	  the	  empirical	  literature	  on	  the	  topic	  is	  one	  of	  the	  oldest	  areas	  of	  
empirical	  inquiry	  in	  international	  economics.	  	  Although	  many	  economists	  believe,	  based	  on	  
economic	  theory,	  that	  reductions	  in	  trade	  barriers	  promote	  economic	  growth,	  robust	  evidence	  
on	  this	  relationship	  at	  the	  aggregate	  level	  has	  been	  elusive.	  	  Rodriguez	  and	  Rodrik	  (2001)	  and	  
Hanson	  and	  Harrison	  (1999)	  review	  the	  issues	  that	  affect	  the	  estimation	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  
policy	  on	  aggregate	  growth	  and	  conclude	  that	  the	  estimates	  of	  the	  effect	  are	  not	  robust.	  Most	  
of	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  topic	  has	  examined	  the	  relationship	  between	  trade	  policy	  and	  growth	  in	  
a	  cross	  section	  of	  countries.	  	  The	  issues	  that	  influence	  the	  inference	  include	  weak	  links	  between	  
the	  empirical	  work	  to	  the	  underlying	  predictions	  from	  the	  theoretical	  literature,	  selective	  
samples	  of	  countries	  with	  available	  data,	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  at	  the	  aggregate	  level,	  
consistency	  of	  measurement	  of	  key	  variables	  across	  countries	  and	  time,	  and	  endogeneity	  of	  
trade	  liberalizations.	  To	  the	  extent	  that	  there	  is	  a	  positive	  relationship	  between	  trade	  policy	  and	  
economic	  growth,	  it	  is	  not	  clear	  whether	  trade	  policy	  leads	  or	  lags.	  	  Does	  trade	  policy	  lead	  to	  
higher	  economic	  growth	  or	  do	  countries	  at	  a	  certain	  level	  of	  development	  choose	  to	  implement	  
more	  liberalized	  trade	  policy?	  Alternatively,	  do	  countries	  with	  less	  restrictive	  trade	  policy	  in	  
general	  have	  economic	  institutions	  in	  these	  economies	  that	  are	  associated	  with	  higher	  growth?	  	  
While	  the	  robustness	  of	  findings	  in	  this	  area	  of	  research	  continues	  to	  be	  debated,	  
researchers	  have	  recently	  used	  micro-­‐level	  data	  on	  trade	  policy	  from	  trade	  liberalizations	  
during	  the	  1980s	  and	  1990s	  and	  empirical	  frameworks	  guided	  by	  economic	  theory	  to	  make	  
progress	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  aggregate	  growth.	  Estevadeordal	  and	  Taylor	  (2013)	  
find	  that	  countries	  that	  liberalized	  trade	  policy	  during	  the	  1980s	  and	  1990s	  (in	  part	  driven	  by	  
the	  Uruguay	  round	  of	  the	  WTO	  negotiations)	  observed	  higher	  growth	  rates	  in	  GDP	  per	  capita	  
over	  this	  period	  relative	  to	  countries	  that	  did	  not	  liberalize.	  	  According	  to	  a	  version	  of	  Solow	  
model	  they	  develop,	  decline	  in	  import	  tariffs	  on	  capital	  goods	  increases	  incentives	  for	  firms	  to	  
invest,	  which	  in	  turn	  increases	  steady	  state	  growth.	  	  Lower	  tariffs	  on	  intermediate	  inputs	  
increase	  productivity,	  and	  subsequently	  steady	  state	  growth.	  Further	  analysis,	  which	  
40	  
	  
	  

distinguishes	  between	  liberalized	  trade	  in	  production	  inputs	  and	  final	  consumption	  goods,	  finds	  
that	  the	  positive	  relationship	  between	  trade	  liberalization	  and	  economic	  growth	  is	  driven	  by	  
declines	  in	  tariffs	  on	  intermediate	  inputs	  and	  capital	  goods.	  Consistent	  with	  these	  channels,	  
they	  show	  that	  countries	  that	  lowered	  tariffs	  on	  intermediate	  inputs	  and	  capital	  goods	  
observed	  increased	  imports	  of	  intermediate	  and	  capital	  goods.	  On	  the	  other	  hand,	  there	  is	  no	  
relationship	  between	  lower	  tariffs	  on	  consumer	  goods	  and	  economic	  growth.	  These	  findings	  
provide	  country-­‐level	  support	  for	  the	  effects	  of	  liberalized	  trade	  on	  improved	  efficiency	  of	  
production	  through	  imported	  inputs	  and	  technology,	  channels	  that	  have	  been	  emphasized	  in	  
studies	  of	  firm	  performance	  (Amiti	  and	  Konings	  (2007),	  Topalova	  and	  Khandelwal	  (2011),	  
Goldberg,	  Khandelwal,	  Pavcnik,	  and	  Topalova	  (2009,	  2010)).	  	  
The	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  (via	  economic	  growth)	  on	  poverty	  are	  even	  more	  difficult	  to	  
quantify	  empirically	  than	  the	  relationship	  between	  trade	  policy	  and	  growth.	  	  In	  addition	  to	  
establishing	  that	  trade	  policy	  affects	  growth,	  one	  needs	  to	  determine	  both	  whether	  and	  how	  
trade	  policy-­‐induced	  growth	  affects	  the	  poor.	  	  This	  is	  a	  challenging	  task	  to	  accomplish	  with	  
aggregate	  data.	  Lack	  of	  availability	  of	  household	  survey	  data	  with	  information	  on	  consumption	  
and	  income	  from	  many	  low-­‐income	  countries	  affects	  measurement	  of	  poverty	  and	  average	  
incomes	  of	  the	  poor	  (Deaton	  (2005),	  Ravallion	  (2001)).	  In	  the	  absence	  of	  reliable	  survey	  data,	  
average	  incomes	  of	  the	  poor,	  which	  are	  often	  measured	  by	  the	  average	  income	  of	  the	  
households	  in	  the	  bottom	  fifth	  of	  income	  distribution,	  are	  imputed	  from	  very	  noisy	  measures	  of	  
income	  distribution	  within	  a	  country.	  With	  noisy	  measures	  of	  income	  inequality,	  this	  
imputation	  makes	  is	  likely	  that	  measures	  of	  income	  of	  the	  poor	  simply	  follow	  changes	  in	  
average	  incomes	  (Banerjee,	  Deaton,	  Lustig,	  Rogoff,	  and	  Hsu	  (2006)).	  	  This	  biases	  the	  results	  in	  
favor	  of	  pro-­‐poor	  effects	  of	  growth.20	  In	  recent	  years,	  household	  surveys	  are	  increasingly	  
available	  and	  the	  World	  Bank	  Research	  Department	  has	  made	  substantial	  progress	  on	  
measurement	  of	  poverty	  across	  time	  and	  space.	  	  Nonetheless,	  the	  poverty	  measures	  do	  not	  
span	  periods	  of	  trade	  liberalization	  for	  a	  large	  share	  of	  countries,	  so	  the	  relationship	  between	  
trade	  policy	  and	  poverty	  across	  countries	  remains	  empirically	  elusive.	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20

	  Banerjee,	  Deaton,	  Lustig,	  Rogoff,	  and	  Hsu	  (2006)	  discuss	  how	  measurement	  of	  average	  incomes	  of	  the	  poor	  
affected	  several	  key	  policy	  debates	  within	  the	  World	  Bank,	  including	  the	  relationship	  between	  trade	  policy	  and	  
poverty.	  

41	  
	  
	  

In	  summary,	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  aggregate	  growth	  does	  not	  
provide	  much	  robust	  evidence	  that	  trade	  policy	  affects	  growth.	  	  This	  is	  a	  very	  different	  
conclusion	  from	  the	  message	  in	  the	  studies	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  on	  firm	  performance.	  This	  
leaves	  one	  wondering	  whether	  the	  lack	  of	  robust	  aggregate	  evidence	  in	  part	  reflects	  the	  
methodological	  challenges	  highlighted	  in	  section	  2,	  which	  are	  amplified	  in	  aggregate	  studies.	  
Recent	  work	  by	  Estevadeordal	  and	  Taylor	  (2013)	  makes	  headway	  on	  overcoming	  some	  of	  these	  
issues,	  while	  focusing	  on	  one	  particular	  channel	  of	  the	  link	  between	  trade	  policy	  and	  growth.	  Its	  
findings	  are	  consistent	  with	  the	  evidence	  from	  firm-­‐level	  studies	  that	  emphasize	  the	  role	  of	  
trade	  policy	  in	  promoting	  efficiency	  and	  innovation	  through	  access	  to	  imported	  inputs	  and	  
capital	  goods	  in	  less	  developed	  countries.	  	  However,	  more	  work	  is	  needed	  is	  this	  area.	  
	  
7. The	  Effects	  of	  Trade	  Policy:	  Secondary	  Distortions,	  Misallocation,	  the	  Role	  of	  Policy	  
Uncertainty,	  Dynamics	  
	  
7.1	  Effects	  of	  Secondary	  Distortions	  and	  Misallocation	  
Most	  studies	  evaluate	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  under	  the	  assumption	  that	  the	  resources	  
are	  optimally	  allocated	  given	  the	  level	  of	  trade	  policy	  and	  market	  structure,	  without	  considering	  
the	  role	  of	  secondary	  distortions.	  If	  resources	  are	  misallocated,	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  that	  
operate	  through	  secondary	  distortions	  might	  be	  just	  as	  important	  as	  the	  primary	  effects.	  In	  an	  
early	  study,	  Leibenstein	  (1966)	  argues	  that	  welfare	  gains	  from	  trade	  through	  reduction	  of	  
secondary	  distortions	  might	  be	  an	  order	  of	  magnitude	  more	  important	  than	  the	  welfare	  gains	  
from	  primary	  effects	  of	  trade	  on	  allocative	  efficiency	  that	  are	  emphasized	  in	  traditional	  trade	  
models.21	  	  
With	  a	  few	  exceptions,	  secondary	  distortions	  have	  not	  received	  much	  attention	  in	  the	  
studies	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy.22	  	  An	  important	  exception	  is	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  rent-­‐
seeking	  activities	  associated	  with	  import	  quotas	  (Krueger	  (1974)).	  More	  recently,	  Khandelwal,	  
Schott,	  and	  Wei	  (2013)	  argue	  that	  distortions	  in	  institutions	  that	  manage	  trade	  policy	  impose	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21

Leibenstein	  (1966)	  focuses	  on	  X-­‐inefficiencies	  and	  managerial	  performance	  within	  a	  firm.	  	  	  
	  Krueger	  (1984)	  provides	  an	  early	  discussion	  of	  this	  issue.	  

22

42	  
	  
	  

welfare	  costs	  of	  trade	  restrictions	  in	  addition	  to	  those	  emphasized	  in	  standard	  trade	  models	  
and	  rent-­‐seeking	  literature.	  If	  the	  institutions	  that	  allocate	  trading	  rights	  award	  them	  to	  
politically	  connected	  rather	  than	  the	  most	  productive	  firms,	  the	  misallocation	  of	  trading	  rights	  
generates	  productivity	  losses	  in	  addition	  to	  the	  productivity	  losses	  due	  to	  the	  actual	  trade	  
restriction.	  	  
Khandelwal,	  Schott,	  and	  Wei	  (2013)	  examine	  distortions	  in	  trade	  institutions	  in	  China	  in	  the	  
context	  of	  the	  elimination	  of	  the	  Multi	  Fibre	  Agreement	  in	  2005.	  If	  the	  Chinese	  government	  
would	  allocate	  quota	  licenses	  efficiently	  across	  firms	  through	  a	  competitive	  auction,	  these	  
licenses	  would	  be	  allocated	  to	  the	  most	  productive	  firms	  because	  they	  are	  sufficiently	  
profitable	  to	  pay	  the	  per-­‐unit	  license	  fee.23	  	  Under	  this	  scenario,	  the	  theory	  predicts	  that	  the	  
removal	  of	  quotas	  would	  expand	  exports	  of	  the	  most	  productive	  incumbent	  exporters	  and	  
encourage	  export	  market	  entry	  of	  less	  productive	  firms.	  In	  addition,	  the	  prices	  of	  products	  
exported	  by	  the	  most	  efficient	  incumbents	  would	  be	  expected	  to	  fall,	  while	  new	  entrants	  into	  
exporting	  would	  be	  expected	  to	  increase	  the	  prices	  of	  exported	  goods.	  	  These	  predictions	  are	  
not	  borne	  out	  in	  the	  data.	  After	  the	  quotas	  are	  eliminated,	  firms	  that	  newly	  enter	  the	  export	  
markets,	  rather	  than	  the	  incumbent	  exporters,	  account	  for	  most	  of	  the	  expansion	  of	  export	  
volumes	  and	  decline	  in	  export	  prices.	  	  This	  implies	  that	  quota	  licenses	  were	  misallocated.	  The	  
new	  entrants	  are	  mostly	  comprised	  of	  foreign-­‐owned	  firms	  and	  domestic	  privately-­‐owned	  
firms,	  both	  of	  which	  tend	  to	  be	  more	  productive	  than	  the	  incumbent	  state-­‐owned	  enterprises.	  
In	  this	  study,	  liberalized	  trade	  policy	  generates	  bigger	  productivity	  gains	  through	  the	  
elimination	  of	  secondary	  distortions	  than	  the	  primary	  ones.	  The	  elimination	  of	  the	  MFA	  leads	  to	  
a	  21%	  increase	  in	  revenue	  productivity,	  with	  counterfactual	  analysis	  attributing	  two	  thirds	  of	  
the	  productivity	  gains	  to	  the	  elimination	  of	  misallocated	  quota	  licenses.	  	  
Overall,	  Khandelwal,	  Schott,	  and	  Wei	  (2013)	  illustrate	  that	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  is	  
potentially	  substantially	  underestimated	  if	  one	  does	  not	  consider	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  
secondary	  distortions.	  The	  relative	  magnitude	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  through	  primary	  
versus	  secondary	  effects	  is	  consistent	  with	  the	  predictions	  made	  previously	  by	  Leibenstein	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23

See	  KSW	  (2013)	  for	  detailed	  discussion	  of	  the	  underlying	  model	  of	  quota	  license	  allocation	  across	  heterogeneous	  
firms,	  where	  quotas	  licenses	  are	  auctioned	  in	  a	  competitive	  process	  for	  a	  per-­‐unit	  license	  fee.	  

43	  
	  
	  

(1966).	  An	  interesting	  question	  for	  future	  work	  is	  whether	  the	  relatively	  greater	  magnitudes	  of	  
the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  through	  secondary	  distortions	  hold	  more	  generally.	  	  
Another	  setting	  where	  trade	  policy	  could	  have	  effects	  through	  secondary	  distortions	  is	  the	  
allocation	  of	  resources	  between	  informal	  and	  formal	  sector	  in	  low-­‐income	  countries.	  One	  
unique	  feature	  of	  firm	  distribution	  in	  low-­‐income	  countries	  is	  prevalence	  of	  small,	  
unproductive,	  informal	  firms,	  which	  account	  for	  a	  large	  portion	  of	  aggregate	  employment,	  and	  
scarcity	  of	  productive	  establishments	  (see	  Hsieh	  and	  Olken	  (2014),	  La	  Porta	  and	  Shleifer	  
(2014)).	  To	  the	  extent	  that	  secondary	  distortions	  generate	  a	  wedge	  in	  the	  marginal	  productivity	  
of	  workers	  between	  the	  informal	  and	  formal	  sector,	  the	  reallocation	  of	  workers	  from	  household	  
businesses	  to	  firms	  in	  the	  enterprise	  sector	  could	  be	  associated	  with	  improved	  aggregate	  labor	  
productivity.	  	  McCaig	  and	  Pavcnik	  (2014)	  show	  that	  reductions	  in	  trade	  barriers	  to	  exporting—a	  
product	  market	  distortion	  that	  disproportionately	  lowers	  the	  profitability	  of	  more	  productive	  
establishments	  leads	  to	  reallocation	  of	  workers	  from	  informal	  to	  formal	  sector.	  The	  estimated	  
effects	  of	  the	  associated	  aggregate	  productivity	  gains	  due	  to	  elimination	  of	  the	  wedge	  in	  
marginal	  productivity	  of	  workers	  between	  the	  two	  sectors	  depends	  on	  the	  size	  of	  the	  marginal	  
productivity	  wedge.	  
The	  focus	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  through	  the	  secondary	  distortions	  might	  be	  a	  fruitful	  
area	  of	  future	  research	  given	  that	  the	  distortions	  due	  to	  misallocation	  of	  resources	  appear	  to	  
matter	  in	  other	  settings.	  Recent	  literature	  has	  emphasized	  that	  misallocation	  of	  resources	  
across	  firms	  has	  large	  implications	  for	  aggregate	  income	  differences	  across	  countries	  (Banerjee	  
and	  Duflo	  (2005),	  Restuccia	  and	  Rogerson	  (2008),	  Hsieh	  and	  Klenow	  (2009)).	  Hsieh	  and	  Klenow	  
(2009)	  show	  that	  the	  elimination	  of	  such	  distortions	  would	  raise	  the	  aggregate	  productivity	  in	  
China	  and	  India	  by	  30	  to	  60%.	  In	  addition,	  distortions	  in	  sectors	  that	  are	  key	  inputs	  in	  the	  
production	  process	  of	  other	  sectors	  have	  multiplier-­‐like	  effects,	  amplifying	  aggregate	  income	  
differences	  across	  countries	  (Jones	  (2011,	  2013)).	  	  Surprisingly,	  most	  of	  this	  literature	  has	  not	  
linked	  the	  degree	  of	  misallocation	  (as	  measured	  by	  dispersion	  in	  revenue	  TFP)	  to	  a	  particular	  
policy.	  	  Taking	  the	  Hsieh	  and	  Klenow	  (2009)	  framework	  as	  a	  starting	  point,	  it	  would	  be	  natural	  
for	  the	  future	  work	  to	  examine	  whether	  trade	  reforms	  affect	  misallocation	  as	  measured	  by	  the	  
metric	  in	  their	  framework,	  namely	  the	  dispersion	  in	  revenue	  TFP.	  
44	  
	  
	  

	  
7.2	  The	  Role	  of	  Trade	  Policy	  Uncertainty	  
The	  literature	  usually	  examines	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  that	  operate	  through	  changes	  
in	  the	  levels	  of	  trade	  barriers	  rather	  than	  through	  changes	  in	  the	  uncertainty	  regarding	  future	  
policies.	  Trade	  agreements	  can	  reduce	  the	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  policy	  by	  more	  permanently	  
committing	  countries	  to	  a	  specific	  trade	  policy	  regime.	  To	  the	  extent	  that	  uncertainty	  about	  
trade	  policy	  affects	  firms’	  decisions	  on	  investment,	  reduced	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  policy	  
could	  have	  large	  effects	  on	  trade	  flows	  and	  other	  outcomes.	  	  Handley	  (2014)	  and	  Handley	  and	  
Limao	  (2015)	  formally	  model	  this	  channel	  in	  a	  framework	  that	  incorporates	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  
policy	  uncertainty	  on	  a	  firm’s	  exporting	  and	  technology	  upgrading	  decisions.	  Their	  framework	  
further	  suggests	  that	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  provides	  an	  explanation	  as	  to	  why	  trade	  
agreements	  that	  yield	  relatively	  small	  changes	  in	  trade	  policy	  levels,	  but	  large	  declines	  in	  
uncertainty,	  could	  have	  large	  effects	  on	  trade	  flows	  and	  other	  outcomes.	  Consider	  trade	  
liberalizations	  such	  as	  NAFTA,	  CUFTA,	  and	  China’s	  entry	  into	  the	  WTO	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  U.S.	  
import	  tariffs	  on	  Chinese	  exports.	  	  These	  liberalization	  episodes	  are	  all	  characterized	  by	  small	  
changes	  in	  tariff	  levels.	  	  Even	  though	  the	  actual	  tariff	  changes	  were	  small,	  these	  trade	  
agreements	  might	  have	  eliminated	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  policy,	  and	  could	  potentially	  have	  
large	  effects	  through	  this	  channel.	  	  This	  is	  especially	  the	  case	  for	  China’s	  entry	  into	  the	  WTO	  
given	  that	  the	  loss	  of	  China’s	  MFN	  status	  in	  the	  U.S.	  would	  increase	  an	  average	  tariff	  facing	  
Chinese	  export	  to	  the	  U.S.	  from	  4	  to	  31%	  and	  that	  Chinese	  MFN	  status	  has	  to	  be	  renewed	  by	  
the	  U.S.	  Congress	  on	  an	  annual	  basis	  (Handley	  and	  Limao	  (2014)).24	  
The	  empirical	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  has	  largely	  abstracted	  from	  
estimating	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty.	  One	  issue	  facing	  the	  literature	  is	  
measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty.	  Handley	  and	  Limao	  (2015)	  argue	  that,	  relative	  to	  
other	  sources	  of	  uncertainty,	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  is	  in	  many	  situations	  
aided	  by	  observed	  information	  about	  the	  applied	  trade	  policy	  and	  the	  maximum	  allowed	  level	  
of	  trade	  policy.	  To	  this	  end,	  all	  studies	  measure	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  as	  a	  function	  of	  the	  gap	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24

Handely	  and	  Limao	  (2014)	  and	  Pierce	  and	  Schott	  (2015)	  document	  several	  anecdotes	  on	  the	  importance	  of	  
uncertainty	  about	  U.S.-­‐China	  trade	  policy	  in	  this	  context.	  	  

45	  
	  
	  

between	  the	  largest	  possible	  import	  tariff	  and	  the	  applied	  tariff	  facing	  a	  product	  (or	  an	  
industry).	  A	  product	  (or	  an	  industry)	  faces	  less	  uncertainty	  when	  this	  gap	  is	  reduced.	  	  
Recent	  studies	  suggest	  that	  this	  channel	  plays	  an	  important	  role.	  One	  set	  of	  studies	  
examines	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  on	  trade	  volumes	  and	  export	  market	  
participation	  (Handley	  (2014),	  Handley	  and	  Limao	  (2015)).	  	  Handley	  (2014)	  examines	  the	  effects	  
of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  that	  occurs	  through	  the	  imposition	  of	  tariff	  bounds	  on	  applied	  tariffs	  
within	  the	  WTO	  for	  the	  case	  of	  Australia.	  	  The	  study	  finds	  that	  the	  reduction	  in	  tariff	  bounds	  is	  
associated	  with	  increased	  entry	  of	  products	  from	  new	  import	  destinations	  to	  Australia.	  	  This	  
effect	  occurs	  even	  though	  the	  Australian	  tariff	  bounds	  exceed	  the	  applied	  tariffs,	  highlighting	  
the	  role	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  (as	  opposed	  to	  changes	  in	  applied	  tariffs).	  	  Handley	  and	  
Limao	  (2015)	  find	  that	  the	  reductions	  in	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty,	  associated	  with	  Portugal’s	  
entry	  into	  the	  European	  Community,	  increased	  export	  participation	  of	  Portuguese	  firms	  in	  the	  
European	  Community.	  Handley	  and	  Limao	  (2014)	  examine	  the	  effects	  of	  China’s	  entry	  into	  the	  
WTO,	  which	  eliminated	  the	  uncertainty	  about	  China’s	  tariff	  levels	  vis-­‐à-­‐vis	  the	  U.S.	  on	  China’s	  
exports	  to	  the	  US.	  	  Elimination	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  is	  associated	  with	  increased	  export	  
volumes	  of	  Chinese	  products	  to	  the	  United	  States.	  	  Furthermore,	  higher	  export	  volumes	  are	  
driven	  by	  increased	  exports	  among	  the	  incumbent	  products	  rather	  than	  by	  the	  new	  entry,	  as	  
emphasized	  in	  the	  Handley	  studies.	  	  
Pierce	  and	  Schott	  (2015)	  examine	  the	  effects	  of	  the	  elimination	  of	  trade	  policy	  
uncertainty	  vis-­‐à-­‐vis	  China	  on	  the	  employment	  in	  the	  U.S.	  manufacturing	  industries.	  They	  
measure	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  prior	  to	  China’s	  WTO	  entry	  with	  the	  gap	  between	  the	  non-­‐
MFN	  tariff	  and	  the	  MNF	  tariff	  imposed	  on	  the	  Chinese	  exporters.	  	  The	  study	  finds	  that	  the	  U.S.	  
manufacturing	  industries	  that	  experience	  the	  largest	  decline	  in	  tariff	  uncertainty	  experienced	  
the	  biggest	  employment	  contraction.	  This	  trade-­‐policy	  uncertainty-­‐based	  interpretation	  of	  
results	  is	  further	  supported	  by	  the	  lack	  of	  corresponding	  losses	  in	  employment	  in	  the	  
manufacturing	  industries	  in	  the	  European	  Union	  after	  China’s	  entry	  into	  the	  WTO.	  	  Unlike	  the	  
United	  States,	  the	  European	  Union	  granted	  China	  permanent	  MFN	  status	  prior	  to	  China	  joining	  
the	  WTO,	  so	  that	  China’s	  entry	  into	  the	  WTO	  did	  not	  change	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  vis-­‐à-­‐vis	  
the	  EU.	  	  
46	  
	  
	  

Overall,	  these	  studies	  suggest	  that	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  matter.	  	  
However,	  the	  size	  of	  the	  effects	  will	  likely	  vary,	  depending	  on	  the	  setting.	  A	  related	  issue	  is	  
identifying	  the	  settings	  in	  which	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  are	  most	  relevant.	  	  The	  
concern	  about	  the	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  likely	  depends	  on	  the	  identity	  of	  the	  trading	  
partners.	  To	  this	  end,	  most	  of	  the	  work	  has	  been	  done	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  uncertainty	  in	  trade	  
policy	  between	  China	  and	  the	  U.S.	  	  This	  is	  not	  surprising	  given	  that	  the	  uncertainty	  surrounding	  
a	  trade	  war	  between	  two	  large	  trading	  partners	  such	  as	  the	  U.S.	  and	  China	  (or	  the	  U.S.	  and	  the	  
European	  Community)	  would	  exert	  a	  large	  influence.	  The	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  policy	  might	  
also	  be	  important	  from	  the	  perspective	  of	  a	  small	  country	  vis-­‐à-­‐vis	  a	  large	  trading	  partner	  (as	  
shown	  in	  Handley	  and	  Limao	  (2015).	  Interestingly,	  to	  date,	  there	  is	  no	  study	  that	  examines	  the	  
effects	  of	  the	  uncertainty	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  in	  the	  context	  of	  small,	  less-­‐developed	  
economy	  vis-­‐à-­‐vis	  large	  trading	  partners.	  	  The	  case	  study	  below	  provides	  an	  informative	  
illustration	  that	  uncertainty	  about	  trade	  policy,	  coupled	  with	  weak	  institutions	  that	  link	  
producers	  to	  exporters,	  could	  play	  an	  important	  role.	  	  
In	  less	  developed	  countries,	  small-­‐holder	  farmers	  often	  do	  not	  produce	  cash	  crops	  for	  
export	  markets	  even	  though	  these	  appear	  more	  profitable	  than	  the	  crops	  produced	  for	  local	  or	  
personal	  consumption.	  	  Uncertainty	  about	  conditions	  on	  the	  export	  markets,	  including	  trade	  
policy	  and	  associated	  regulations,	  could	  play	  a	  role.	  	  A	  randomized	  control	  trial	  by	  Ashraf,	  
Karlan,	  and	  Gine	  (2009)	  examined	  the	  effects	  of	  a	  marketing	  scheme	  that	  provided	  some	  
Kenyan	  farmers	  with	  the	  incentives	  to	  switch	  to	  cash	  crops	  for	  export	  markets	  in	  the	  European	  
Community.	  These	  incentives	  were	  administered	  by	  a	  local	  organization,	  which	  facilitated	  
interactions	  between	  small-­‐scale	  farmers	  and	  exporters.	  	  The	  study	  finds	  that	  the	  incentives	  
initially	  increased	  production	  of	  cash	  crops	  by	  farmers	  in	  the	  treatment	  group	  relative	  to	  the	  
control	  group,	  but	  over	  the	  longer	  time	  frame	  the	  farmers	  abandoned	  cash	  crop	  production.	  	  
After	  the	  implementation	  of	  the	  field	  experiment,	  the	  European	  Community	  increased	  sanitary	  
and	  health	  standards	  on	  food	  imports	  by	  the	  European	  Community	  in	  2005	  (the	  EurepGap).	  
Ashraf,	  Karlan	  and	  Gine	  (2009)	  argue	  that	  the	  drop	  in	  cash	  crop	  production	  was	  related	  to	  the	  
change	  in	  this	  policy.	  Because	  small-­‐holder	  farmers	  did	  not	  become	  certified	  for	  exporting	  as	  

47	  
	  
	  

required	  by	  the	  EurepGap,	  the	  Kenyan	  exporters	  stopped	  purchasing	  the	  crops	  from	  small-­‐
holder	  farmers,	  inducing	  the	  farmers	  to	  abandon	  the	  cash	  crops.	  	  	  
The	  case	  study	  illustrates	  that	  the	  uncertainty	  about	  the	  regulatory	  regime,	  coupled	  with	  
the	  inability	  of	  the	  local	  organization	  to	  foresee	  and	  adequately	  prepare	  small-­‐scale	  producers	  
to	  the	  changing	  regulatory	  environment,	  can	  lead	  to	  the	  collapse	  in	  cash	  crop	  production.	  Low	  
participation	  in	  cash	  crops	  for	  export	  markets	  observed	  in	  low-­‐income	  countries	  might	  reflect	  
such	  considerations.	  	  In	  future	  work,	  it	  would	  be	  interesting	  to	  examine	  the	  role	  of	  trade	  policy	  
and	  regulation	  uncertainty,	  coupled	  with	  lack	  of	  institutions	  to	  effectively	  deal	  with	  uncertainty,	  
in	  explaining	  low	  participation	  in	  export	  markets	  in	  low-­‐income	  settings.	  
Overall,	  the	  existing	  studies	  suggest	  that	  the	  magnitudes	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  
uncertainty	  are	  potentially	  large.	  	  Because	  the	  studies	  so	  far	  have	  focused	  on	  situations	  where	  
one	  would	  ex-­‐ante	  expect	  the	  effect	  of	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty	  to	  potentially	  matter	  the	  most	  
(for	  example	  the	  U.S.-­‐China	  trade)	  further	  research	  is	  needed	  to	  determine	  the	  role	  of	  trade	  
policy	  uncertainty	  in	  other	  contexts.	  Trade	  liberalization	  episodes	  and	  trade	  agreements	  
implemented	  at	  the	  regional	  and	  multilateral	  levels	  provide	  rich	  settings	  for	  further	  
investigation	  of	  this	  topic.	  	  
	  
8. Concluding	  Thoughts	  	  
We	  started	  this	  chapter	  by	  posing	  the	  question:	  Does	  trade	  policy	  still	  matter?	  The	  view	  
that	  it	  does	  not	  seems	  surprising	  given	  the	  evidence	  we	  reviewed.	  Even	  when	  one	  focuses	  on	  
import	  tariffs,	  which	  have	  been	  reduced	  to	  historically	  low	  levels	  in	  developed	  countries	  post	  
World	  War	  II,	  the	  evidence	  suggests	  large,	  nonlinear	  effects	  of	  tariff	  liberalization	  on	  trade	  
volumes	  –	  in	  fact	  such	  effects	  are	  so	  large	  that	  they	  were	  initially	  deemed	  implausible.	  	  
However,	  as	  we	  discussed,	  both	  their	  magnitudes	  and	  time	  patterns	  can	  be	  rationalized	  by	  the	  
interaction	  of	  tariff	  liberalization	  with	  increasing	  vertical	  specialization	  that	  created	  a	  
magnification	  effect.	  	  Accordingly,	  the	  conclusion	  is	  not	  that	  tariffs	  do	  not	  matter:	  they	  do	  
matter	  but	  only	  in	  interaction	  with	  technology,	  specifically	  increasing	  vertical	  specialization.	  	  A	  
perhaps	  more	  difficult	  question	  to	  answer	  is	  whether	  trade	  volumes	  is	  the	  relevant	  outcome	  
48	  
	  
	  

one	  should	  focus	  on	  when	  debating	  the	  relevance	  of	  trade	  policy.	  	  A	  more	  appropriate	  metric	  
would	  be	  welfare.	  	  But	  assessing	  the	  impact	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  the	  welfare	  gains	  from	  trade	  
presumes	  knowledge	  of	  the	  “elasticity	  of	  trade.”	  Surprisingly,	  while	  estimates	  of	  this	  elasticity	  
abound	  in	  the	  literature,	  estimates	  based	  on	  variation	  in	  trade	  policy	  are	  rare,	  and	  the	  ones	  that	  
exist	  point	  to	  substantial	  heterogeneity	  across	  sectors.	  Obtaining	  credible	  elasticity	  estimates	  
that	  can	  be	  directly	  linked	  to	  policy	  is	  a	  fruitful	  area	  of	  future	  research	  and	  a	  prerequisite	  for	  
assessing	  the	  relevance	  of	  policy	  to	  welfare.	  	  
The	  evidence	  on	  the	  relevance	  of	  trade	  policy	  is	  even	  stronger	  for	  outcomes	  that	  
concern	  specific	  parts	  of	  the	  economy	  rather	  than	  aggregate	  outcomes.	  	  This	  is	  especially	  the	  
case	  when	  assessing	  the	  impact	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  firm	  and	  industry	  productivity	  where	  the	  
literature	  has	  consistently	  documented	  large	  effects	  of	  trade	  reforms	  on	  revenue	  productivity.	  
Increased	  availability	  of	  data	  on	  product	  prices	  has	  revived	  the	  debate	  on	  whether	  trade	  policy	  
affects	  firm	  performance	  through	  its	  effects	  on	  markups	  or	  through	  its	  effects	  on	  
cost/productivity.	  The	  strength	  of	  the	  evidence	  is	  partly	  due	  to	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  focus	  on	  
specific	  firms	  and	  industries	  allows	  the	  researcher	  to	  more	  accurately	  measure	  the	  actual	  trade	  
barriers,	  assess	  their	  impact	  through	  particular	  channels,	  and	  take	  into	  account	  the	  specific	  
institutional	  setting.	  	  The	  recent	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  labor	  markets	  also	  
finds	  statistically	  significant	  (and	  at	  times	  economically	  large)	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  the	  
wage	  distribution,	  albeit	  the	  magnitude	  of	  the	  effects	  depends	  on	  the	  particular	  setting.	  
In	  general,	  proper	  measurement	  and	  identification	  of	  causal	  impacts	  are	  first-­‐order	  
issues	  in	  the	  evaluation	  of	  trade	  policy.	  The	  recent	  literature	  has	  made	  progress	  on	  both	  issues.	  	  
Empirical	  studies	  of	  the	  actual	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  increasingly	  focus	  on	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  
policy	  changes	  and	  the	  institutional	  settings	  in	  which	  trade	  policy	  takes	  place.	  	  This	  new	  focus,	  
combined	  with	  the	  increased	  availability	  of	  detailed	  micro-­‐data	  on	  trade	  flows,	  firms,	  and	  
workers,	  has	  enabled	  researchers	  to	  identify	  several	  mechanisms	  through	  which	  trade	  policy	  
affects	  outcomes	  of	  interest	  and	  assess	  the	  economic	  significance	  of	  these	  effects.	  	  The	  
empirical	  evidence	  has	  in	  turn	  influenced	  the	  development	  of	  richer	  theoretical	  models	  that	  
embed	  features	  that	  have	  been	  shown	  to	  be	  important	  empirically	  (e.g.,	  labor	  market	  frictions,	  

49	  
	  
	  

firm	  heterogeneity,	  and	  incomplete	  pass-­‐through).	  	  Such	  models	  can	  be	  used	  to	  yield	  a	  more	  
informative	  counterfactual	  evaluation	  of	  future	  trade	  policy	  changes.	  
Nonetheless,	  several	  open	  questions	  pertaining	  to	  measurement	  remain.	  Most	  of	  the	  
existing	  work	  still	  focuses	  on	  trade	  policy	  as	  measured	  by	  import	  tariffs.	  	  In	  order	  to	  answer	  the	  
question	  of	  whether	  the	  world	  is	  as	  liberalized	  as	  the	  profession	  believes,	  and	  to	  more	  
accurately	  evaluate	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy,	  we	  need	  better	  and	  more	  comprehensive	  
measures	  of	  trade	  policy	  instruments	  beyond	  import	  tariffs.	  	  Some	  of	  these	  measures	  are	  (or	  
could	  be)	  systematically	  collected	  by	  international	  organizations.	  	  Recent	  data-­‐collection	  efforts	  
by	  the	  World	  Bank	  and	  measurement	  of	  Temporary	  Trade	  Barriers	  are	  a	  productive	  step	  
forward	  and	  draw	  on	  the	  Bank’s	  institutional	  capacity	  to	  implement	  such	  large-­‐scale	  
measurement	  projects.	  In	  some	  cases,	  especially	  for	  non-­‐price	  based	  barriers,	  the	  focus	  on	  the	  
effects	  of	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  to	  trade	  requires	  a	  move	  away	  from	  assessing	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  
policy	  at	  the	  economy-­‐wide	  level	  and	  towards	  industry-­‐specific	  studies.	  The	  later	  approach	  
ensures	  that	  the	  impact	  of	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  is	  assessed	  in	  the	  context	  of	  an	  industry’s	  market	  
structure	  (and	  industry-­‐specific	  demand	  and	  supply	  conditions)	  to	  appropriately	  capture	  the	  
institutional	  details,	  restrictiveness,	  and	  consequences	  of	  these	  regulations.	  	  	  
While	  better	  measurement	  of	  trade	  policy	  should	  be	  the	  number	  one	  priority	  of	  future	  
research,	  the	  measurement	  of	  trade	  volumes	  can	  also	  be	  improved.	  The	  increasing	  importance	  
of	  vertical	  specialization	  suggests	  that	  it	  would	  be	  more	  appropriate	  to	  measure	  trade	  flows	  in	  
valued-­‐added	  rather	  than	  gross	  terms.	  In	  general,	  the	  main	  message	  of	  our	  chapter	  is	  that	  for	  
international	  trade	  to	  remain	  a	  policy-­‐relevant	  field,	  it	  needs	  to	  focus	  on	  better	  measurement.	  	  
If	  the	  main	  message	  of	  the	  Leamer	  and	  Levinsohn	  (1995)	  chapter	  in	  the	  1995	  Handbook	  of	  
International	  Economics	  Chapter	  was	  “Estimate,	  don’t	  test!”,	  our	  message	  twenty	  years	  later	  is:	  
“Measure	  before	  you	  estimate!”	  
Our	  survey	  also	  identifies	  several	  promising	  new	  areas	  for	  future	  work.	  	  These	  focus	  on	  
the	  more	  “dynamic”	  aspects	  of	  trade	  policy.	  	  They	  include	  the	  role	  of	  price	  adjustments	  to	  trade	  
policy	  changes,	  the	  impact	  of	  trade	  policy	  on	  the	  performance	  and	  organization	  of	  
multinational	  firms,	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  through	  reductions	  in	  secondary	  
distortions/misallocation,	  and	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  through	  a	  decline	  of	  uncertainty.	  	  
50	  
	  
	  

Initial	  studies	  on	  these	  topics	  suggest	  that	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy	  through	  these	  channels	  
might	  play	  an	  important	  role	  and	  thus	  warrant	  further	  examination.	  

51	  
	  
	  

	  

Bibliography	  	  
Amiti,	  M.,	  and	  Konings,	  J.	  (2007).	  “Trade	  liberalization,	  intermediate	  inputs,	  and	  productivity:	  
Evidence	  from	  Indonesia.”	  The	  American	  Economic	  Review	  97(5),	  1611-­‐38.	  
Amiti,	  M.,	  and	  Davis,	  D.	  (2012).	  "Trade,	  Firms,	  and	  Wages:	  Theory	  and	  Evidence."	  Review	  of	  
Economic	  Studies,	  79(1),	  1-­‐36.	  
Anderson,	  J.	  E.,	  and	  Van	  Wincoop,	  E.	  (2004).	  “Trade	  Costs,” Journal	  of	  Economic	  Literature,	  
42(3),	  691-­‐751.	  
Angrist,	  J.	  D.,	  and	  Krueger,	  A.	  B.	  (1999).	  “Empirical	  strategies	  in	  labor	  economics.”	  	  Handbook	  of	  
Labor	  Economics	  (Vol.3,	  pp.	  1277-­‐1366).	  Amsterdam,	  Netherlands:	  Elsevier.	  
Angrist,	  J.,	  and	  Pischke,	  J.	  S.	  (2010).	  "The	  Credibility	  Revolution	  in	  Empirical	  Economics:	  How	  
Better	  Research	  Design	  Is	  Taking	  the	  Con	  out	  of	  Econometrics,"	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  
Perspectives,	  24(2),	  3-­‐30.	  
Antras,	  P.	  and	  Yeaple,	  S.	  (2014).	  "Multinational	  Forms	  and	  the	  Structure	  of	  International	  Trade."	  
In	  Gopinath,	  G.,	  Helpman,	  E.	  and	  Rogoff,	  K.	  (Eds.),	  Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics	  
(Vol.	  4,	  pp.	  55-­‐130).	  Amsterdam,	  Netherlands:	  Elsevier.	  	  
Arkolakis,	  C.,	  Demidova,	  S.,	  Klenow,	  P.	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare,	  A.	  (2008).	  “Endogenous	  Variety	  and	  
the	  Gains	  from	  Trade.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  Papers	  and	  Proceedings,	  98,	  444-­‐
450.	  
Arkolakis,	  C.,	  Costinot,	  A.,	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare,	  A.	  (2010).	  "New	  Trade	  Models,	  Same	  Old	  
Gains?"	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  102(1),	  94-­‐130	  
Arkolakis,	  C.,	  Costinot,	  A.,	  Donaldson,	  D.,	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare,	  A.	  (2015).	  "The	  Elusive	  Pro-­‐
Competitive	  Effects	  of	  Trade."	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research	  Working	  Paper	  
No.	  21370.	  
Artuc,	  E.,	  Chaudhuri	  S.	  and	  McLaren	  J.	  (2010).	  "Trade	  Shocks	  and	  Labor	  Adjustments:	  A	  
Structural	  Empirical	  Approach."	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  100(3),	  1008-­‐45	  
Ashraf,	  N.,	  Gine,	  X.	  and	  Karlan,	  D.	  (2009).	  	  "Findings	  Missing	  Markets	  (and	  a	  disturbing	  
epilogue):	  Evidence	  from	  an	  Export	  Crop	  Adoption	  and	  Marketing	  Intervention	  in	  
Kenya.”	  American	  Journal	  of	  Agricultural	  Economics,	  91(4),973-­‐990	  
Attanasio,	  O.,	  Goldberg,	  P.	  and	  Pavcnik,	  P.	  (2004).	  “Trade	  reforms	  and	  wage	  inequality	  in	  
Colombia,”	  Journal	  of	  Development	  Economics,	  74(4),	  331-­‐366.	  
Autor,	  D,	  Dorn,	  D.	  and	  Hanson,	  G.	  (2013).	  "The	  China	  Syndrome:	  Local	  Labor	  Market	  Effects	  of	  
Import	  Competition	  in	  the	  United	  States."	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  103(6),	  2121-­‐68.	  	  
Atkin,	  D,.	  and	  Donaldson,	  D.	  (2013).	  “Who's	  Getting	  Globalized?	  The	  Size	  and	  Implications	  of	  
52	  
	  
	  

Intranational	  Trade	  Costs”	  mimeo.	  
Atkin,	  D.,	  Khandelwal,	  A.	  K.,	  and	  Osman,	  A.	  (2014).	  “Exporting	  and	  Firm	  Performance:	  Evidence	  
from	  a	  Randomized	  Trial”	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  
20690.	  
Bagwell,	  K.,	  and	  Staiger,	  R.	  W.	  (2003).	  “Protection	  and	  the	  business	  cycle.”	  Advances	  in	  
Economic	  Analysis	  &	  Policy,	  3(1),	  1-­‐43.	  
Baier,	  S.	  and	  J.	  Bergstrand	  (2001).	  “The	  growth	  of	  world	  trade:	  Tariffs,	  transport	  costs,	  and	  
income	  similarity.”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics	  53,	  1-­‐27.	  	  
Banerjee,	  A.	  and	  Duflo,	  E.	  (2005).	  	  “Growth	  Theory	  through	  the	  Lens	  of	  Development	  
Economics.”	  In	  Aghion,	  P.	  and	  Durlauf,	  S.,	  Handbook	  of	  Economic	  Growth	  (Vol.	  1A,	  pp.	  
473-­‐554).	  Amsterdam,	  Netherlands:	  Elsevier.	  
Banerjee,	  A.,	  A.	  Deaton,	  N.	  Lustig,	  K.	  Rogoff,	  and	  E.	  Hsu	  (2006).	  “An	  Evaluation	  of	  World	  Bank	  
Research	  1998-­‐2005.”	  World	  Bank.	  Washington,	  DC.:	  World	  Bank.	  	  Available	  at	  
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/17896.	  
Bernard,	  A.,	  Eaton,	  J.,	  Jensen,	  J.B.,	  and	  Kortum,	  S.	  (2003).	  “Plants	  and	  Productivity	  in	  
International	  Trade.”	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  93(4):	  1268-­‐1290.	  
Bernard,	  A.,	  Jensen	  J.B.	  and	  Schott	  P.K.	  (2006).	  “Trade	  Costs,	  Firms,	  and	  Productivity.”	  Journal	  of	  
Monetary	  Economics,	  53(5),	  917–37.	  
Berry,	  S.,	  Levinsohn,	  J.	  and	  Pakes,	  A.	  (1999).	  “Voluntary	  export	  restraints	  on	  automobiles:	  
Evaluating	  a	  strategic	  trade	  policy.”	  The	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  89(3),	  400-­‐430.	  
Blanchard,	  E.	  J.	  (2010).	  “Reevaluating	  the	  Role	  of	  Trade	  Agreements:	  Does	  Investment	  
Globalization	  Make	  the	  WTO	  Obsolete?”Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  82(1),	  63-­‐
72.	  
Blanchard,	  E.	  J.	  (2007).	  “Foreign	  Direct	  Investment,	  Endogenous	  Tariffs,	  and	  Preferential	  Trade	  
Agreements.”	  B.E.	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Analysis	  and	  Policy,	  7(1),	  1-­‐52.	  
Blanchard,	  E.	  and	  Matschke,	  X.	  (2015)	  “U.S.	  Multinationals	  and	  Preferential	  Market	  Access.”	  
Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics,	  97(4),	  839-­‐54.	  
Blanchard,	  E.J.,	  Bown,	  C.P.,	  and	  Johnson,	  R.C.	  (2015).	  "Global	  Supply	  Chains	  and	  Trade	  Policy."	  
Mimeo.	  
Blonigen,	  B.	  (2002).	  “Tariff-­‐Jumping	  Antidumping	  Duties.”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  
57,	  pp.	  31-­‐50.	  
Blonigen,	  B.	  and	  Prusa,	  T.	  (2003).	  “Antidumping.”	  In	  Choi,	  E.K.	  	  and	  Harrigan,	  J.	  (Eds.),	  Handbook	  
of	  International	  Trade	  (pp.	  251-­‐284).	  Oxford,	  U.K.	  and	  Cambridge,	  MA:	  Blackwell	  
Publishers.	  
53	  
	  
	  

Blonigen,	  B.	  and	  Prusa,	  T.	  (forthcoming	  2016).	  “Dumping	  and	  antidumping	  duties,”	  In	  Bagwell,	  
K.	  and	  Staiger,	  R.	  (Eds.),	  Handbook	  of	  Commercial	  Policy.	  
Brambilla,	  I.,	  Khandelwal,	  A.	  K.,	  and	  Schott,	  P.	  K.	  (2010).	  “China's	  experience	  under	  the	  multi-­‐
fiber	  arrangement	  (MFA)	  and	  the	  agreement	  on	  textiles	  and	  clothing	  (ATC).”	  In	  Feenstra,	  
R.	  and	  Wei,	  S.	  J.	  (Eds.),	  China's	  Growing	  Role	  in	  World	  Trade	  (pp.	  345-­‐387).	  Chicago,IL:	  
University	  of	  Chicago	  Press.	  
Brambilla,	  I.,	  Lederman,	  D.	  and	  Porto,	  G.	  (2012).	  “Exports,	  Export	  Destinations,	  and	  Skills,”	  
American	  Economic	  Review,102(7),	  3406-­‐3438.	  
Broda,	  C.	  and	  Weinstein,	  D.	  (2006).	  “Globalization	  and	  the	  Gains	  from	  Variety.”	  Quarterly	  
Journal	  of	  Economics,	  121(2),	  541–85.	  
Bustos,	  P.	  (2011).	  “Trade	  liberalization,	  exports,	  and	  technology	  upgrading:	  Evidence	  on	  the	  
impact	  of	  MERCOSUR	  on	  Argentinian	  firms.”	  The	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  101(1),	  
304-­‐340.	  
Cadot,	  O.,	  Fernandes,	  A.	  M.,	  Gourdon,	  J.,	  &	  Mattoo,	  A.	  (Eds.).	  (2011).	  “Where	  to	  spend	  the	  next	  
million?	  Applying	  impact	  evaluation	  to	  trade	  assistance.”	  Centre	  for	  Economic	  Policy	  
Research	  and	  the	  World	  Bank.	  
Caliendo,	  L.,	  and	  Parro,	  F.	  (2015).	  “Estimates	  of	  the	  Trade	  and	  Welfare	  Effects	  of	  NAFTA.”	  	  The	  
Review	  of	  Economic	  Studies,	  82	  (1),	  1-­‐44.	  
	  
Caliendo,	  L.,	  R.	  Feenstra,	  Romalis	  and	  A.	  Taylor	  (2015).	  “Tariff	  Reductions,	  Entry,	  and	  Welfare:	  
Theory	  and	  Evidence	  for	  the	  Last	  Two	  Decades.”	  	  Working	  Paper.	  
	  
Cosar,	  K.	  (2013):	  “Adjusting	  to	  Trade	  Liberalization:	  Reallocation	  and	  Labor	  Market	  Policies,”	  
Working	  Paper.	  	  
	  
Costinot,	  A.	  and	  Rodríguez-­‐Clare,	  A.	  (2014).	  “Trade	  Theory	  with	  Numbers:	  Quantifying	  the	  
Consequences	  of	  Globalization.”	  In	  Gopinath,	  G.,	  Helpman,	  E.	  and	  Rogoff,	  K.	  (Ed.),	  
Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics	  (Vol.	  4).	  Amsterdam:	  Elsevier.	  	  
Deardorff,	  A.	  V.,	  and	  Stern,	  R.	  M.	  (1986).	  The	  Michigan	  model	  of	  world	  production	  and	  trade.	  
London-­‐Cambridge,	  Mass.:	  MIT	  Press.	  
Deaton,	  A.	  (2005).	  “Measuring	  Poverty	  in	  a	  Growing	  World	  (or	  Measuring	  Growth	  in	  a	  Poor	  
World).”	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Statistics,	  87	  (1),	  1-­‐19.	  
De	  Loecker,	  J.	  and	  Goldberg,	  P.	  (2014).	  “Firm	  Performance	  in	  a	  Global	  Market.”	  Annual	  Review	  
of	  Economics,	  6,	  201-­‐227.	  	  	  
De	  Loecker,	  J.,	  Goldberg,	  P.,	  Khandelwal,	  A.,	  and	  Pavcnik,	  N.	  (2012).	  “Prices,	  markups	  and	  trade	  
reform.”	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  17925.	  
Dix-­‐Carneiro,	  R.	  (2014).	  "Trade	  Liberalization	  and	  Labor	  Market	  Dynamics."	  Econometrica	  82(3),	  
54	  
	  
	  

825-­‐85.	  
Dix-­‐Carneiro,	  R.,	  and	  Kovak,	  B.	  (2015a).	  “"Trade	  Liberalization	  and	  the	  Skill	  Premium:	  A	  Local	  
Labor	  Markets	  Approach,"	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  105(5),	  551-­‐57.	  
Dix-­‐Carneiro,	  R.,	  and	  Kovak,	  B.	  (2015b).	  “Trade	  Reform	  and	  Regional	  Dynamics:	  Evidence	  from	  
25	  Years	  of	  Brazilian	  Matched	  Employer-­‐Employee	  Data.”	  Working	  Paper.	  
Edmond,	  C.,	  Midrigan,	  V.,	  and	  Xu,	  D.	  (2015).	  “Competition,	  Markups,	  and	  the	  Gains	  from	  
International	  Trade.”	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  105(10),	  3183-­‐3221.	  
Edmonds,	  E.,	  Pavcnik,	  N.	  and	  Topalova,	  P.	  (2009).	  "Child	  labor	  and	  schooling	  in	  a	  globalizing	  
economy:	  Some	  evidence	  from	  urban	  India."	  Journal	  of	  European	  Economic	  Association,	  
Papers	  and	  Proceedings,	  7	  (2-­‐3),	  498-­‐507.	  
Edmonds,	  E.,	  Pavcnik,	  N.	  and	  Topalova,	  P.	  (2010).	  “Trade	  Adjustment	  and	  Human	  Capital	  
Investment:	  Evidence	  from	  Indian	  Tariff	  Reforms.”	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Applied	  
Economics,	  2(4),	  42-­‐75.	  
Estevadeordal,	  A.	  and	  Taylor,	  A.	  (2013).	  	  “Is	  the	  Washington	  Consensus	  Dead?	  Growth,	  
Openness,	  and	  the	  Great	  Liberalization,	  1970s-­‐2000s.”	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  
Statistics,	  95:	  1669–690.	  	  
Feenstra,	  R.	  (1994).	  “New	  Product	  Varieties	  and	  the	  Measurement	  of	  International	  Prices.”	  
American	  Economic	  Review,	  84	  (1),	  157-­‐177.	  
Feenstra,	  R.	  (1995).	  "Estimating	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy."	  In	  Grossman,	  G.	  M.	  	  &	  Rogoff,	  K.	  
(Ed.),	  Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics	  (Vol.	  3,	  pp.	  1553-­‐1595).	  Netherlands,	  
Amsterdam:	  Elsevier.	  
Feenstra,	  R.	  and	  D.	  Weinstein	  (2010).	  ”Globalization,	  Competition,	  and	  the	  U.S.	  Price	  Level,”	  
NBER	  Working	  Paper	  no.	  15749.	  
Gang,	  I.N.	  and	  Pandey,	  M.	  (1996).	  "Trade	  Protection	  in	  India:	  Economics	  vs.	  Politics?"	  Working	  
Paper	  9616.	  Available	  online	  at	  http://ssrn.com/abstract=5069.	  
Goldberg,	  P.	  (Ed.).	  (2015).	  Trade	  and	  Inequality.,	  Introduction,	  edited	  by	  P.	  K.	  Goldberg,	  Edward	  
Elgar	  Research	  Collections,	  May	  2015	  
Goldberg,	  P.	  (1995).	  "Product	  Differentiation	  and	  Oligopoly	  in	  International	  Markets:	  The	  Case	  
of	  the	  U.S.	  Automobile	  Industry."	  Econometrica,	  63(4),	  891-­‐951.	  
Goldberg,	  P.	  and	  Pavcnik,	  N.	  (2005).	  “Trade,	  wages,	  and	  the	  political	  economy	  of	  trade	  
protection:	  Evidence	  from	  the	  Colombian	  trade	  reforms.”	  	  Journal	  of	  International	  
Economics,	  66(1),	  75-­‐105.	  

55	  
	  
	  

Goldberg,	  P.	  and	  Pavcnik,	  N.	  (2007).	  "Distributional	  Effects	  of	  Globalization	  in	  Developing	  
Countries."	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Literature,	  45(1),	  39-­‐82.	  
Goldberg,	  P.,	  Khandelwal,	  A.,	  Pavcnik,	  N.,	  and	  Topalova,	  P.	  (2010).	  “Imported	  Intermediate	  
Inputs	  and	  Domestic	  Product	  Growth:	  Evidence	  from	  India.”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  
Economics,	  125(4),	  1727-­‐1767.	  	  
Grossman,	  G.M.	  (1986).	  	  “Imports	  as	  a	  Cause	  of	  Injury:	  The	  Case	  of	  the	  U.S.	  Steel	  Industry.”	  
Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  20	  (3-­‐4),	  201-­‐23.	  
Grossman,	  G.	  M.,	  and	  Helpman,	  E.	  (1994).	  	  “Protection	  for	  Sale.”	  The	  American	  Economic	  
Review,	  84(4),	  833-­‐850.	  
Hall,	  R.	  (1986).	  “The	  relation	  between	  price	  and	  marginal	  cost	  in	  US	  industry.”	  Journal	  of	  
Political	  Economy,	  96(5),	  921-­‐47.	  
Halpern,	  L.,	  Koren	  M.,	  and	  Szeidl,	  A.	  (2015).	  "Imported	  Inputs	  and	  Productivity."	  American	  
Economic	  Review,	  105(12),	  3660-­‐3703.	  
Handley,	  K.	  (2014).	  “Exporting	  under	  trade	  policy	  uncertainty:	  Theory	  and	  Evidence.”	  Journal	  of	  
International	  Economics,	  94(1),	  50–66.	  
Handley,	  K.	  and	  Limão,	  N.	  (2015).	  	  “Trade	  and	  Investment	  under	  Policy	  Uncertainty:	  Theory	  and	  
Firm	  Evidence.”	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Economic	  Policy,	  7(4),	  189-­‐222.	  
Handley,	  K.	  and	  Limão,	  N.	  (2014).	  “Policy	  Uncertainty,	  Trade	  and	  Welfare:	  Theory	  and	  Evidence	  
for	  China	  and	  the	  U.S.”	  	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  No.	  19376.	  	  
Harrigan	  J.	  and	  Barrows,	  G.	  (2009).	  “Testing	  the	  theory	  of	  trade	  policy:	  Evidence	  from	  the	  
Abrupt	  End	  of	  the	  Multifiber	  Arrangement.”	  The	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  
Statistics,	  91(2),	  282-­‐294.	  
Harrison,	  A.	  E.	  (1994).	  “Productivity,	  imperfect	  competition	  and	  trade	  reform:	  Theory	  and	  
evidence.”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  36(1),	  53-­‐73.	  
	  Hanson,	  G.	  and	  Harrison,	  A.	  (1999).	  “Who	  gains	  from	  trade	  reform?	  Some	  remaining	  
puzzles.”	  Journal	  of	  Development	  Economics	  59(1),	  125-­‐154.	  
Harrison,	  A.	  and	  Rodríguez-­‐Clare,	  A.	  (2010).	  “Trade,	  foreign	  investment,	  and	  industrial	  policy	  for	  
developing	  countries.”	  In	  Rodrik,	  D.	  and	  Rosenzweig,	  M.	  R.	  (Eds.),	  	  Handbook	  of	  
Development	  Economics	  (Vol.	  5,	  pp.	  4039-­‐4214).	  Amsterdam,	  Netherlands:	  Elsevier.	  	  
Harrison,	  A.,	  McLaren	  J.,	  and	  McMillan,	  M.	  (2011).	  “Recent	  perspectives	  on	  trade	  and	  
inequality.”	  Annual	  Review	  of	  Economics,	  3,	  261-­‐289.	  
Helpman,	   Elhanan,	   Itskhoki,	   Oleg	   and	  Redding,	   Stephen,	   “Inequality	   and	   Unemployment	   in	   a	  
Global	  Economy,”	  Econometrica	  (July	  2010),	  78	  (4),	  pp.	  1239–1283.	  	  

56	  
	  
	  

Hillberry,	  R.,	  and	  Hummels,	  D.	  (2013).	  “Trade	  elasticity	  parameters	  for	  a	  computable	  general	  
equilibrium	  model.”	  Handbook	  of	  Computable	  General	  Equilibrium	  Modeling,	  1,	  1213-­‐
1269.	  
Hsieh,	  C.	  and	  Klenow,	  P.J.	  (2009).	  “Misallocation	  and	  manufacturing	  TFP	  in	  China	  and	  India.”	  
Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  124(4),	  1403-­‐48.	  
Hsieh,	  C.	  and	  Olken,	  B.	  (2014).	  “The	  missing	  ‘Missing	  Middle’.”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  
Perspectives,	  28(3),	  89-­‐108.	  
Jones,	  C.	  (2011).	  "Intermediate	  Goods	  and	  Weak	  Links	  in	  the	  Theory	  of	  Economic	  
Development."	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Macroeconomics,	  3(2),	  1-­‐28.	  	  
Jones,	  C.	  (2013).	  "Misallocation,	  Input-­‐Output	  Economics,	  and	  Economic	  Growth."	  In	  Acemoglu,	  
D.,	  Arellano,	  M.,	  and	  Dekel,	  E.	  (Eds.),	  Advances	  in	  Economics	  and	  Econometrics:Tenth	  
World	  Congress	  (Vol.	  2,	  pp.	  419-­‐58).	  Cambridge,	  U.K.:	  Cambridge	  University	  Press.	  
Johnson,	  R.	  and	  Noguera,	  G.	  (2014).	  “A	  portrait	  of	  trade	  in	  value	  added	  over	  four	  
decades.”	  Mimeo,	  Dartmouth	  College.	  
Kambourov,	  G.	  (2009):	  “Labor	  Market	  Regulations	  and	  the	  Sectoral	  Reallocation	  of	  Workers:	  
The	  Case	  of	  Trade	  Reforms,”	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Studies,	  76	  (4),	  1321–1358.	  	  
Khandelwal,	  A.,	  Schott,	  P.	  and	  Wei,	  S.	  (2013).	  "Trade	  Liberalization	  and	  Embedded	  Institutional	  
Reform:	  Evidence	  from	  Chinese	  Exporters,"	  American	  Economic	  Review	  103(6):	  2169-­‐95.	  	  	  
Khandelwal,	  A.	  and	  Topalova,	  P.	  (2011).	  “Trade	  liberalization	  and	  firm	  productivity:	  The	  case	  of	  
India.”	  Review	  of	  economics	  and	  statistics,	  93(3),	  995-­‐1009.	  
Klenow,	  P.	  and	  Rodriguez-­‐Clare,	  A.	  (1997).	  "Quantifying	  Variety	  Gains	  from	  Trade	  
Liberalization,"	  mimeo.	  
Kovak,	  B.	  (2013).	  	  “Regional	  Effects	  of	  Trade	  Reform:	  What	  is	  the	  Correct	  Measure	  of	  
Liberalization?”	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  103(5).	  1960-­‐76.	  	  
Krueger,	  A.	  (1974).	  "Political	  Economy	  of	  the	  Rent-­‐Seeking	  Society."	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  
64(3),	  291-­‐303.	  	  
Krueger,	  A.	  (1984).	  “Trade	  Policies	  in	  Developing	  Countries.”	  In	  Jones,	  R.	  and	  Kenen,	  P.	  (Eds.),	  
Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics	  (Vol.	  1,	  pp.	  519-­‐69).	  Amsterdam,	  Netherlands:	  
Elsevier.	  
Krugman,	  P.	  (1995).	  “Growing	  World	  Trade:	  Causes	  and	  Consequences.”	  Brookings	  Papers	  on	  
Economics	  Activity,	  1(25),	  327-­‐77.	  	  
La	  Porta,	  R.	  and	  Shleifer,	  A.	  (2014).	  “Informality	  and	  Development,”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  
Perspectives,	  28(3),	  109-­‐26.	  

57	  
	  
	  

Levy,	  P.	  (2008).	  	  “Does	  Trade	  Policy	  Matter?”	  American	  Enterprise	  Institute	  Online,	  available	  at	  
https://www.aei.org/publication/does-­‐trade-­‐policy-­‐matter/	  (accessed	  April	  19,	  2014).	  	  
Leamer,	  E.	  and	  Levinsohn,	  J.	  (1995).	  	  “International	  trade	  theory:	  The	  evidence.”	  In	  Grossman,	  
G.	  and	  Rogoff,	  K.	  (Eds.),	  Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics	  (Vol.	  3,	  pp.	  1339-­‐94).	  
Amsterdam,	  Netherlands:	  Elsevier.	  
Lileeva,	  A.	  and	  Trefler	  D.	  (2010).	  "Improved	  Access	  to	  Foreign	  Markets	  Raises	  Plant-­‐Level	  
Productivity...	  for	  Some	  Plants."	  The	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  125(3),	  1051-­‐1099.	  
Leibenstein,	  H.	  (1966).	  "Allocative	  Efficiency	  vs.	  'X-­‐Efficiency."	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  
56(3),	  392-­‐415.	  
Levinsohn,	  J.	  (1993).	  “Testing	  the	  imports-­‐as-­‐market-­‐discipline	  hypothesis.”	  Journal	  of	  
International	  Economics	  35(1),	  1-­‐22.	  
McCaig,	  B.	  (2011).	  “Exporting	  out	  of	  poverty:	  Provincial	  poverty	  in	  Vietnam	  and	  U.S.	  market	  
access.”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  85(1),	  102-­‐113.	  
McCaig,	  B.	  and	  Pavcnik,	  N.	  (2014).	  	  “Export	  markets	  and	  labor	  reallocation	  in	  a	  low-­‐income	  
country."	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  20455.	  	  	  
McLaren,	  J.	  and	  Hakobyan,	  S.	  (2012).	  “Looking	  for	  Local	  Labor	  –Market	  Effects	  of	  the	  NAFTA.”	  
NBER	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  16535.	  
Menezes-­‐Filho,	  N.	  and	  Muendler,	  M.	  (2011).	  	  "Labor	  Reallocation	  in	  Response	  to	  Trade	  
Reform."	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  17372.	  
Melitz,	  M.	  (2003)	  “The	  Impact	  of	  Trade	  on	  Intra-­‐industry	  Reallocations	  and	  Aggregate	  Industry	  
Productivity.”	  Econometrica,	  71(6),	  1696-­‐1725.	  
Melitz,	  Marc	  J,	  and	  Stephen	  J	  Redding	  (2014).	  “Heterogeneous	  Firms	  and	  Trade.”	  In	  Gopinath,	  
G.,	  Helpman,	  E.	  and	  Rogoff,	  K.	  (Ed.),	  Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics	  (Vol.	  4:	  1-­‐54).	  
Amsterdam:	  Elsevier.	  	  
Melitz,	  M.	  and	  Redding,	  S.	  (2014).	  Missing	  gains	  from	  trade?	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  No.	  19810.	  	  
Nevo,	  A.,	  and	  Whinston,	  M.	  (2010).	  “Taking	  the	  dogma	  out	  of	  econometrics:	  Structural	  
modeling	  and	  credible	  inference.”	  The	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Perspectives,	  24(2):	  69-­‐81.	  
Ossa,	  R.	  (Forthcoming	  2016).	  "Quantitative	  Models	  of	  Commercial	  Policy."	  In	  Bagwell,	  K.	  and	  
Staiger,	  R.	  (Eds.),	  Handbook	  of	  Commercial	  Policy	  
Pavcnik,	  N.	  (2012).	  	  “Globalization	  and	  Within-­‐Country	  Inequality."	  In	  Bacchetta,	  M.	  and	  	  
Jansen,	  M.	  (Eds.),	  Making	  Globalization	  Socially	  Sustainable	  (pp.	  233-­‐259).Geneva,	  
Switzerland:	  WTO/ILO.	  

58	  
	  
	  

Pierce,	  J.	  and	  Schott,	  P.	  (2015).	  “The	  Surprisingly	  Swift	  Decline	  of	  U.S.	  Manufacturing	  
Employment.”	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  18655.	  
Porto,	  G.	  (2006).	  “Using	  survey	  data	  to	  assess	  the	  distributional	  effects	  of	  trade	  policy.”	  Journal	  
of	  International	  Economics,	  70(1),	  140-­‐160.	  
Ravallion,	  M.	  (2001).	  “Growth,	  Inequality,	  and	  Poverty:	  Looking	  beyond	  Averages.”	  World	  
Development,	  29(1),	  1803-­‐1815.	  
	  
Reason	  (2008).	  “Ending	  Global	  Apartheid,”	  available	  at	  
https://reason.com/archives/2008/01/24/ending-­‐global-­‐apartheid/print	  	  (accessed	  April	  
19,	  2014).	  
Restuccia,	  D.	  and	  Rogerson,	  R.	  (2008).	  “Policy	  distortions	  and	  aggregate	  productivity	  with	  
heterogeneous	  establishments.”	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Dynamics,	  11,	  707-­‐720.	  
	  Rodrik,	  D.	  and	  Rodriguez,	  F.	  (2001).	  “Trade	  Policy	  and	  Economic	  Growth:	  A	  Skeptic’s	  Guide	  to	  
Cross-­‐national	  Evidence.”	  In	  Bernanke,	  B.	  and	  Rogoff,	  K.	  (Eds.),	  NBER	  Macro	  Annual	  
2000	  (Vol.15,	  pp.	  261-­‐338).	  Cambridge,	  MA:	  MIT	  Press.	  
	  
Rodrik,	  D.	  (1995).	  "The	  Political	  Economy	  of	  Trade	  Policy."	  In	  Grossman,	  G.	  and	  Rogoff,	  K.	  (Eds.),	  
Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics	  (Vol.	  3,	  pp.	  1457-­‐94).	  Amsterdam,	  Netherlands:	  
Elsevier.	  
Rose,	  A.	  (2004).	  “Do	  We	  Really	  Know	  That	  the	  WTO	  Increases	  Trade?”.	  American	  Economic	  
Review:	  94-­‐98.	  	  
	  
Shapiro,	  J.	  (2014).	  “Trade,	  CO2,	  and	  the	  Environment.”	  Yale	  University	  mimeo.	  
	  
Subramanian,	  A.	  &	  Wei,	  S.	  (2007).	  "The	  WTO	  promotes	  trade,	  strongly	  but	  unevenly."	  Journal	  of	  
International	  Economics,	  Elsevier,	  72(1):	  151-­‐175.	  
Staiger,	  R.	  and	  Wolak,	  F.	  (1994).	  “Measuring	  Industry	  Specific	  Protection:	  Antidumping	  in	  the	  
United	  States.”	  Brookings	  Papers	  on	  Economic	  Activity:	  Microeconomics,	  1,	  51-­‐118.	  
	  
Tomz,	  M.,	  Goldstein,	  J.L.	  	  and	  Rivers	  D.	  (2007).	  "Do	  We	  Really	  Know	  That	  the	  WTO	  Increases	  
Trade?	  Comment."	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  97(5),	  2005-­‐18.	  
Topalova,	  P.	  (2007).	  “Trade	  liberalization,	  poverty	  and	  inequality:	  Evidence	  from	  Indian	  
districts,”	  in	  Harrison,	  A.	  (ed).	  Globalization	  and	  Poverty,	  University	  of	  Chicago	  Press.	  
Topalova,	  P.	  (2010).	  	  “Factor	  Immobility	  and	  Regional	  Impacts	  of	  Trade	  Liberalization:	  Evidence	  
on	  Poverty	  from	  India."	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Applied	  Economics,	  2(4),	  1-­‐41.	  
Trefler,	  D.	  (1993).	  “Trade	  liberalization	  and	  the	  Theory	  of	  Endogenous	  Protection:	  An	  
Econometric	  Study	  of	  US	  import	  policy.”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  101(1),	  138-­‐160.	  	  
59	  
	  
	  

Trefler,	  D.	  and	  Gaston,	  N.	  (1994).	  “Protection,	  Trade,	  and	  Wages:	  	  Evidence	  from	  U.S.	  
Manufacturing.”	  	  Industrial	  and	  Labour	  Relations	  Review	  47,	  574-­‐593.	  	  	  
	  
Trefler,	  D.	  and	  Gaston,	  N.	  (1995).	  “Union	  Wage	  Sensitivity	  to	  Trade	  and	  Protection:	  Theory	  and	  
Evidence.”	  	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  39(1-­‐2),	  1-­‐25.	  	  
	  
Treﬂer,	  D.	  (2004).	  “The	  Long	  and	  Short	  of	  the	  Canada–U.S.	  Free	  Trade	  Agreement.”	  American	  
Economic	  Review,	  94(4),	  870	  –95.	  	  
Verboven,	  F.	  (1996).	  "International	  Price	  Discrimination	  in	  the	  European	  Market."	  RAND	  Journal	  
of	  Economics,	  27(2),	  240-­‐268.	  	  
Verhoogen,	  E.	  (2008).	  	  "Trade,	  Quality	  Upgrading,	  and	  Wage	  Inequality	  in	  the	  Mexican	  
Manufacturing	  Sector."	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  vol.	  123,	  no.2,	  pp.	  489-­‐530.	  
Wood,	  A.	  (1999).	  “Openness	  and	  Wage	  Inequality	  in	  Developing	  Countries:	  The	  Latin	  American	  
Challenge	  to	  East	  Asian	  Conventional	  Wisdom.”	  In	  Baldwin,	  R.	  et-­‐al.	  (Eds.)	  Market	  
Integration,	  Regionalism	  and	  the	  Global	  Economy	  (pp.	  153-­‐181).	  Cambridge:	  Cambridge	  
University	  Press.	  
World	  Trade	  Organization	  (2007).	  World	  Trade	  Report.	  World	  Trade	  Organization.	  
Yeaple,	  S.	  (2005).	  “A	  simple	  model	  of	  firm	  heterogeneity,	  international	  trade,	  and	  
wages.”	  Journal	  of	  international	  Economics,	  65(1),	  1-­‐20.	  
	  
Yi,	  K.	  (2003).	  	  "Can	  Vertical	  Specialization	  Explain	  the	  Growth	  of	  World	  Trade?"	  Journal	  of	  
Political	  Economy,	  111(1),	  52-­‐102.	  
	  
	  
	  

60	  
	  
	  

