                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    BANKRUPTCY AND INVESTMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM CHANGES IN MARITAL PROPERTY LAWS IN THE U.S. SOUTH, 1840-1850

                                              Peter Koudijs
                                             Laura Salisbury

                                          Working Paper 21952
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w21952


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2016




  We thank seminar and conference participants at Berkeley, Gerzensee, NYU, Stanford, the University
  of Minneapolis, Queen's, and the University of Zurich, and in particular Gillian Hamilton, Eric Hilt,
  Ulf Lilienfeld-Toal (discussant), Hanno Lustig, Petra Moser, Joachim Voth, Lucy White, and Gavin
  Wright for comments and suggestions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
  of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2016 by Peter Koudijs and Laura Salisbury. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
  two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
  is given to the source.
Bankruptcy and Investment: Evidence from Changes in Marital Property Laws in the U.S.
South, 1840-1850
Peter Koudijs and Laura Salisbury
NBER Working Paper No. 21952
February 2016
JEL No. G33,K11,K35,N21,N31

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the impact of the introduction of a form of bankruptcy protection on household investment
in the U.S. South in the 1840s, which predated modern bankruptcy laws. During this period, certain
southern states passed laws that protected married women's property from seizure in the case of insolvency,
amending the common law default which vested a wife's property in her husband and thus allowed
it to be seized for the repayment of his debts. Importantly, these laws only applied to newlyweds. We
compare couples married after the passage of a law with couples from the same state who married
before the passage of a law. Since states passed laws at different points in time, we can exploit variation
in protection conditional on state and year of marriage. We find that the effect on household investment
was heterogeneous: if most household wealth came from the husband (wife), the law led to an increase
(decrease) in investment. This is consistent with a simple model where downside protection leads to
both an increase in the demand for credit and a reduction in supply. Demand effects will only dominate
if a modest fraction of total wealth is protected.


Peter Koudijs
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
koudijs@stanford.edu

Laura Salisbury
Department of Economics
York University
Vari Hall 1092
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3
Canada
and NBER
lsalisbu@yorku.ca
1    Introduction

Personal bankruptcy is an important economic institution. By allowing individuals to discharge
unsecured debt and preventing creditors from seizing future income, society allows people to make
a fresh start. Ex ante, this encourages people to take on risky projects that might benefit society
as a whole, but that a risk-averse individual person would never engage in without some sort of
downside protection. There is also a drawback: the possibility of bankruptcy reduces the amount of
collateral an individual can pledge, reducing access to outside finance. Moreover, bankruptcy might
encourage people to take on too much risk or strategically default, further limiting the willingness
of financial intermediaries to provide credit.
    Studying this trade-off empirically is not straightforward. Bankruptcy proceedings in the U.S.
are governed by federal law and are the same for all individuals. Gropp, Scholz and White (1997)
argue that there is one dimension in which bankruptcy protection does vary: different states have
different exemption levels, which determine the amount of an individual’s assets (mostly home
equity) is protected in case of bankruptcy. This has spurred a large empirical literature on the
link between state exemption levels and a host of economic outcomes. Nevertheless, this approach
has certain limitations. First of all, the effect of state-level exemptions is estimated for individu-
als who already enjoy significant downside protection under the (federal) U.S. Bankruptcy Code:
bankruptcy releases a borrower from unsecured debt and stays the garnishment of future income
by creditors. As such, these studies estimate the impact of a marginal increase in protection, and
not its overall effect. It is therefore not obvious to what extent differences in homestead exemp-
tions are informative about the general impact of bankruptcy protection. Second, the impact of
exemptions on investment differs across studies, and it is not fully understood what drives this het-
erogeneity. Third, if credit supply is not infinitely elastic, state-level differences in exemptions could
have important effects on the market supply of credit, leading to general equilibrium effects that
make it difficult to interpret empirical findings (Lilienfeld-Toal, Mookherjee, and Visaria [2012]).
Finally, differences in exemption levels across states might be correlated with other factors, making
it difficult to make causal inferences (Hynes, Malani and Posner [2004]).
    In this paper we study the impact of downside protection in a period and region when there was
virtually no bankruptcy relief: the U.S. South during the 1840s. Though households were sometimes
protected through (limited) homestead exemptions, there was no bankruptcy procedure that could
lead to a discharge of current debts. After the Panic of 1837 led to a spike in insolvencies in the



                                                    2
South (McGrane [1924], Wallis [2001]), many state legislatures decided to remedy this situation.
Modern bankruptcy rules were considered but rejected as being detrimental to creditors (Coleman
[1974]). Instead, a number of states passed so-called Married Women Property Acts, whose main
purpose was to protect a wife’s assets (acquired through dowry or inheritance) from her husband’s
creditors. This way, a family would enjoy downside protection, while, at the same time, creditors
could seize fewer assets, potentially limiting access to credit. In the absence of bankruptcy relief,
these laws arguably had a first order impact on economic outcomes that is comparable with a
(hypothetical) introduction of a modern bankruptcy code.1
       We study the impact of these laws on household investment decisions, in particular the size and
type of household investment measured by the possession of real estate and slaves. Crucially, the
Married Women Property Acts only applied to newlyweds: a retroactive application would have
been unconstitutional, as it would have violated the terms of existing contracts (Kelly [1882]). We
can therefore compare couples in the same state, in the same census year (1850), who were married
before and after the passing of the law. No other study has been able to exploit within state-year
variation in bankruptcy protection. Since states introduced laws at different points in time we can
also control for the year of marriage, making sure that the time since marriage, and age effects more
generally, are not driving our results. Furthermore, since the law change only applied to newlyweds,
a relatively small group of people, general equilibrium effects are probably not first order in the
short term, allowing for a straightforward partial equilibrium interpretation of results.
       The starting point for our analysis is a simple model of household borrowing and risky invest-
ment. Following the large literature on bankruptcy protection (see White [2011], Livshits [2014] for
overviews), downside protection has two opposing effects. First, less collateral is available and this
will shift the credit supply curve inward. Second, downside protection increases the demand for
credit. This goes back to the insights of Dubey, Geanakoplos and Shubik (2005) and Zame (1993)
that if (financial) markets are incomplete, the ability to default on payments in certain states of the
world might actually serve to make markets more complete. This matters for risk averse borrowers
who are now better able to smooth consumption across states. As a result, the demand curve for
   1
     The marital property laws passed in the U.S. South during the 1840s are particularly comparable to bankruptcy
protection because they did not grant married women autonomy over their separate property; they merely shielded
this property from seizure by creditors. This differentiates them from other Married Women’s Property Acts passed
outside the South starting in the late 1840s. This is important, because it means that our southern property laws
affected the way in which households interacted with the credit market without affecting other features of household
production. For instance, these laws should not have affected the quantity of effort married women expended in
household production, because they did not redistribute property rights to these women in any meaningful sense
(Geddes and Lueck [2002]; Hamilton [1999]). This also implies that the channel through which these laws changed
investment behavior is not systematic gender differences in preferences over investment strategies.


                                                         3
credit will shift outwards. The key insight from our simple model is that the net effect of these
two opposing forces depends on the fraction of total assets that is protected. If most assets are
exempt from seizure by creditors, collateral constraints will be very restrictive and, even though the
household would like to borrow extensively, credit will fall. If most assets are unprotected, supply
effects will be minor, while the household might still value the protection and, on net, credit will
increase.
   We find strong support for these predictions in the data. We compile a new database that links
records of marriages contracted in southern states between 1840 and 1850 to the censuses of 1840
and 1850. Though we don’t observe credit, this database does allow us to observe the gross value of
real estate and slave holdings at the household level in 1850. We can compare this measure of family
investment for couples in 1850 who were married before and after a married women’s property law.
Links to the 1840 census allow us to construct a measure of pre-marriage familial assets: average
slave wealth among people with a certain surname from a certain state. This measure captures
how wealthy grooms’ and brides’ families were at the time of marriage, which approximates the
quantity of assets they brought into a union.
   Because these laws did not apply retroactively, we have within-state variation in the property
regime under which couples operated. Because different states passed laws at different times, we
can also exploit cross-state variation in the existence of these laws. This allows us to include both
state and year of marriage fixed effects in our regression analysis. Moreover, because these laws only
protected women’s assets, variation in the relative asset position of husbands and wives generates
variation in the degree of protection, conditional on state of marriage, year of marriage, and level
of total household assets. As such, we can implement what is essentially a differences in differences
in differences design, which is unique in this literature. Using this identification strategy, we show
that, consistent with theory, married women’s property laws had a heterogeneous effect on 1850
real estate and slave holdings: they increased investment when the bulk of a couple’s property was
owned by the husband; however, they had the inverse effect when most of a couple’s property was
owned by the wife.
   In related work, Koudijs and Salisbury (2015) study the impact of the passage of these married
women’s property laws on the marriage market. In particular, they find that rich women are more
likely to marry a poorer man after the passing of a law. To deal with this issue, we explicitly control
for individual pre-marital wealth levels, in addition to a host of other personal characteristics such
as age, literacy and place of birth. Nevertheless, the paper’s estimates will be biased if the average


                                                  4
quality of a marital match changes in some unobservable way that is correlated with differences
in spousal pre-marital wealth. More precisely, it may be that marriages involving relatively rich
husbands had systematically better unobservable qualities after the passage of a property law, and
this might explain why they held more assets in 1850. To evaluate this alternative explanation,
we look at two plausible indicators of match quality – separation and fertility – and we show that
there is no evidence of a disproportionate increase in unobservable quality among matches with
relatively rich husbands after the passage of a law.
   We perform three more robustness tests. First, we investigate whether changes in bequests on
the part of a married couple’s parents can explain the patterns we find. It is possible that, in
response to the law change, parents shifted bequests from daughters to sons since these were less
restricted in its use. In fact, we find the opposite effect: the law change seems to have led parents
to bequeath more wealth to their daughters. As a result, changes in bequest behavior should cause
households with relatively rich women to hold more assets in 1850, not fewer. Second, we show
that our effects are not driven by the introduction of state level bankruptcy exemptions that also
took place during the 1840s. Third, we investigate the possible endogeneity of married women’s
property laws to state-level macroeconomic conditions, and we show that state-level variation in
macro conditions cannot explain our results.

   This paper is directly related to the literature on the consequences of bankruptcy protection on
household borrowing and investment decisions. Bankruptcy protection encourages people to take
greater financial risks but limits access to credit. There is a large literature in macroeconomics that
estimates this trade-off in a structural way (see for example Athreya [2002], Livshits, MacGee and
Tertilt [2007], Chatterjee et al [2007], and Davila [2015]). Closer to our paper, there is an extensive
micro-econometric literature on the topic using cross-state variation in exemptions. Conclusions
differ whether higher exemptions increase or decrease credit and investment. Gropp et al (1997),
the seminal paper in this literature, find that larger homestead exemptions tend to redirect credit
to individuals with high assets to begin with. On the other hand, Severino et al (2013) look at
a recent wave in changes in exemptions and show that higher exemptions are associated with an
increase in unsecured debt that is mainly driven by low-income households. Berkowitz and White
(2004), Berger, Cerquiero and Penas (2011) and Cerquiero and Penas (2011) focus on small-business
owners and show that higher exemptions lead to less credit. Fan and White (2001) find that the
probability of starting a small business does go up. Cerqueiro et al (2014) document that higher



                                                  5
exemptions are related to less innovative activity, emphasizing the importance of external financing
for innovation.
        The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section I provides more historical back-
ground. In Section II, we introduce a simple model of bankruptcy protection and investment.
Section III describes the dataset underlying our analyses and Section IV presents the empirical
results. Section V concludes.


2        Historical Background

Prior to the introduction of married women’s property acts, married women’s property was governed
by American common law, which dictated that virtually all property owned by a woman before
marriage or acquired after marriage belonged to her husband. The exception was real estate.
Although the fruits derived from real estate belonged to the husband (who could use this revenue
as collateral for a loan), the property itself was inalienable and was held in trust by the husband
for his wife. It was supposed to pass on to their children or otherwise would revert back to the
wife’s family (Warbasse 1987, p.9). In most of the states we consider in our empirical analysis
prenuptial agreements were problematic to enforce and therefore rare (Salmon 1986, p. xv). The
key difficulty lay in the dual legal system in the U.S. at the time. The dominant legal framework
was American common law. Under this system prenuptial agreements were not valid. To ‘fix’ some
of the inequities of common law, a separate body of equity law had evolved. This branch of the law
did support prenuptial agreements, but it was less well established and was administered in separate
chancery courts. This created two problems. First, as many southern states did not structurally
report equity cases, chancery judges often knew little of the equity jurisprudence. Second, there
were few courts that solely administered equity law. Usually, a judge mixed equity and common
law cases. As a result, decisions were rife with inconsistencies (Warbasse 1987, p. 165-6).
        Warbasse (1987) suggests that the problems associated with equity law and prenuptial agree-
ments spurred the passing of State statutes modifying the common law to better protect women’s
assets within a marriage. These laws were introduced at different times in different states.2 The acts
can be broadly separated into four categories: debt relief, or acts that shielded women’s property
from seizure by husbands’ creditors but did not allow women to control their separate property;
property laws, or laws that allowed women to independently own and dispose of real and personal
    2
   Information on married women’s property acts is compiled from a number of sources, including Kahn (1996),
Geddes and Lueck (2002), Warbasse (1987), Kelly (1882), Wells (1878), Chused (1983) and Salmon (1982).


                                                     6
property; earnings laws, which allowed women to control their own labour earnings; and sole trader
laws, which allowed women to engage in contracts and business without their husbands’ consent.
       We focus on the first class of married women’s property acts (“debt relief”), which were enacted
in most southern states during the 1840s. Interestingly, the states that did not pass these law
changes had the most well developed equity law systems, such as Virginia and Georgia (Warbasse
1987, p. 167). The passing of these laws followed a major recession after the Panic of 1837, which
was caused by a large decline in cotton prices (Temin [1969]). This depressed land and slave prices
in the southern states, where the economy and financial system was largely based around plantation
agriculture (McGrane [1924]). After a brief recovery, the U.S. economy entered a phase of strong
deflation in 1839, which made it hard for debtors to repay their loans (Wallis 2001). At the time,
bankruptcy relief was virtually non-existent – a (permanent) federal bankruptcy law allowing for the
discharge of unsecured debt was only introduced in 1898 (Coleman 1974). Moreover, all loans were
full recourse and lenders could use the local court systems to press for debt repayment through the
seizure of a borrowers’ assets and by threatening to send a borrower to debtor’s prison.3 This meant
that debtors generally had no other way to discharge their debts than through private negotiation
with their creditors. Since loans were full recourse, this implied that if a husband’s assets were not
sufficient to cover a mortgage, creditors could lay claim on a wife’s assets, an option that seems to
have been widely exercised in the aftermath of the 1837 crisis.
       In response to the crisis, the national government implemented a controversial Federal Bankruptcy
law in the summer of 1841 that allowed thousands of families to file for volutary bankruptcy and
qualify for debt foregiveness. The law was very unpopular with creditors and was repealed within
a year (Coleman [1974], p. 23).4 A number of states therefore decided to introduce (limited) forms
of bankruptcy protection at the state level. The introduction of the married women’s property
laws was an important element of these policies, as it was observed that men’s losses were also
being borne by their wives (Goodman [1993], Kahn [1996], and Thompson [2004], p. 26, 91-2). For
example, an article in the 1843 Tennessee Observer states that “the reverses of the last few years
have shown so much devastation of married women’s property by the misfortunes of their husbands,
that some new modification of the law seems the dictate of justice as well as prudence.” The Geor-
   3
      Debtor’s prison was only abolished after after the Civil War (Coleman 1974, p. 243). In the 1840s and 1850s
it was a tool that was predominantly used to force borrowers to give up their remaining assets, rather than a form
of punishment. Most states put restrictions on the use of debtor’s prison. Generally, a borrower could get a quick
release from prison after assignment of his property to his creditors. If lenders refused to free borrowers, they had to
assume the costs of imprisonment.
    4
      All our results are robust to the exclusion of couples who got married before the summer of 1842.



                                                           7
gia Journal argued in the same year that there is no good reason “why property bequeathed to a
daughter should go to pay debts of which she knew nothing, had no agency in creating, and the
payment of which, with her means, would reduce her and her children to beggary. This has been
done in hundreds of instances, and should no longer be tolerated by the laws of the land” (quoted
in Warbasse 1987, p. 176-177). This seems to have been a widespread sentiment, and even states
that did not succeed in passing a married women’s property act during the 1840s proposed them to
the state legislation.5 Around the same time, states also introduced bankruptcy exemptions; under
which lenders could not seize borrower’s property up to a specific maximum value, usually around
$500 ($16,000 in today’s money) (Farnam [1938]).6
       The first married women property law was passed in Mississippi in 1839, which merely sheltered
a woman’s slaves from seizure by her husband’s creditors; an additional law was passed there in 1846,
securing the income earned from her real and personal property to her separate estate. Alabama,
Florida, Kentucky, North Carolina, and Tennessee all passed similar property laws during the 1840s.
Virginia and Georgia did not pass laws during the period, and Louisiana and Texas were community
property states which kept property owned before marriage separate prior to the 1840s. Arkansas
passed a weak version of a property law in 1846, which was generally considered nothing more than
a strengthening of the equity tradition, which governs premarital contracts (Warbasse 1987). Table
1 contains a list of important legislative dates for each state that we use in our analysis. In all
cases, the statutes did not grant women the right to control their separate property; it was kept
in a trust administered by their husbands. As Kahn (1996) writes, “control remained with the
husband, and courts interpreted the legislation narrowly to ensure that ownership did not signify
independence from the family” (p. 361).
       While the married women’s property acts passed in the South during the 1840s did not grant
women economic independence, they did place real constraints on the way in which this property
was used. As said, wives’ assets were protected from husbands’ creditors. At the same time, a wife
could not contract debt in her own name. Under common law a married women (or ‘feme covert’)
was legally unable to sign contracts; common law assumed that a family was a single legal entity,
led by the husband. The early married women’s property acts did not (yet) change this feature
of American common law. This put a wife’s assets in a special position: neither husband nor wife
   5
     For example, Georgia failed to pass an act in 1843 by a margin of 18 out of 173 votes. Tennessee did not pass an
act until January of 1850, even though the issue had clearly been raised prior to this.
   6
     In one of our robustness tests in Section IV we show that the introduction of exemptions cannot explain our
findings.




                                                         8
could use them as collateral to obtain credit.
    In general, husbands and wives were allowed to jointly sell wife’s assets. However, this did not
mean that the ownership changed or that proceeds could be consumed. The proceeds from the
sale had to be reinvested as part of the wife’s separate estate. For example, an Alabama decision
from 1857 maintains that, even if a wife’s property can be sold by a husband and wife jointly, the
proceeds “are to be reinvested in ‘the purchase of other property’ – not sold for money” (31 Ala.
39). The statute was interpreted to protect a wife’s property “not only against third persons, but
against the husband himself.” This principle seems to have been broadly upheld in court .
    At the same time, the law did make exceptions to prevent hardship on part of the family. For
example, a wife’s property could generally be used for “common law necessaries”, which included
food, shelter and sometimes school fees, if the husband was unable to do so because of insolvency,
sickness or because he abondoned his family. In addition, part of the wife’s property could be sold
to pay for the maintenance of a plantation. In sum, the married women property laws had the dual
purpose of preserving the wife’s property and offering protection from adverse shocks.
    Of course, the extent to which these laws had any meaningful impact depends on the degree to
which women held property during this period. As women’s labor force participation was very low,
women’s property would have to come from family. The historical evidence suggests that women
frequently received real estate and personal wealth from their family. The first channel was dowry.
Though there is a serious lack in research on dowry in the Antebellum South, historical anecdotes
suggest that dowry was a frequent phenomenon. Thomas Jefferson’s wife, for example, received a
dowry of 132 slaves and many thousands of acres of land (Gikandi 2011). Auslander (2011) gives
numerous examples from Antebellum Greenwood county, Georgia of the transfer of slave property
in the form of dowry. The second channel was inheritance. After the American Revolution the
United States had done away with the British standard of primogeniture. In 1792 most US states
(including the South) had passed so-called intestacy laws that guaranteed that in the absence of a
will, sons and daughters would receive equal shares in the inheritance from their parents (Shammas
et al. 1987, p. 64-65; 83). There is very little evidence on the exact shares stipulated in actual
wills, but anecdotal evidence suggests that women could receive sizable inheritances, often in the
form of slaves (Warbasse 1987, p. 143-144; Brown 2006).7
    7
      The tendency to will real estate to men seems to have been a national phenomenon in the first half of the 19th
c.: see Shammas et al. (1987, p. 111) on the case of Bucks county in Pennsylvania.




                                                         9
3        Theory

3.1       Basics

In this section, we develop a simple model to characterize the way in which married women’s
property laws affect household borrowing and investment. Starting point is the observation that
the only financial instruments available to households at the time were simple, non-contingent,
debt contracts. In this case, offering downside protection through the exemption of the wife’s
property likely had two countervailing effects. First, it could reduce the overall amount of credit and
investment because households have less pledgeable collateral after the passage of the law. Second,
it could also increase overall investment: the downside protection makes potential insolvency less
harmful and this could incentivize a family to increase borrowing and invest more. In what follows,
we explore when one of the two effects dominates.
        Husbands and wives enter a marriage with assets wM and wF , respectively. Upon marriage, the
husband becomes solely responsible for the allocation of these assets. The husband allocates these
assets between consumption today (c0 ) and investment, the proceeds of which will be consumed
“tomorrow” (c1 ). We can think of c1 as an amalgam of the couple’s future consumption and a
bequest to children. Both husband and wife are risk averse with log-utility. Men’s preferences over
c0 and c1 are represented by the following utility function:


                                       UM (c0 , c1 ) = log c0 + θM E[log(c1 )]


        Husbands decide how much to invest today. They can invest their (remaining) household wealth,
wM + wF − c0 , and can borrow an amount l to lever up. By assumption, we exclude the possibility
that the household consumes l in t = 0.8
        In modelling the investment decision and the interaction with credit markets, we closely follow
Hart and Moore (1994) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). Investment requires two ingredients:
fixed assets (such as land, slaves, etc.) and variable inputs (wages for free labor, seeds, etc.). For
simplicity, we model the investment technology as Leontief. For each unit of investment, a fraction
α < 1 has to be put into fixed assets and a fraction 1 − α has to go into variable inputs. The
investment project is risky. With probability 1/2 the project is successful and returns α+(1 − α) R;
    8
    It turns out that the household is only willing to consume l in t = 0 if the loan size is sufficiently large so that
they would have to make substantial debt payments in the good state of the world in t = 1 and certain default is
preferable. This endogenously results in a (non-linear) collateral constraint, limiting the loan amount l. This leads
to a more complicated model that is similar in spirit to the model we write down here.


                                                          10
with probability 1/2 the project fails and, again for simplicity, the household is only left with the
value of the fixed assets: α (both per dollar invested). Expected returns are positive if R > 2. The
household also needs to invest its own human capital in the project: if not, the project fails with
certainty. We assume that
                                            1
                                       α>     and R (2α − 1) − 2α > 0;                                          (1)
                                            2

this ensures that, before the law change, the husband will always want to borrow to invest.
       Capital markets are incomplete and only feature simple loan contracts. Lenders are risk neutral
and competitive. If loan contracts are risky, and the debt payment in the bad state of the world
exceeds a fraction α of total investment, lenders can seize all of the borrower’s fixed assets and
realize their full value. Before the passing of a married women’s property law, creditors can seize
up to 100% of fixed assets if the project fails, α(wM + wF − c0 + l). After the law change, only
α(wM − c0 + l) can be seized, as αwF is now protected.
       Crucially, we assume that the husband cannot commit to making large loan payments in the
good state of the world. Suppose that the loan size is such that the loan payment exceeds the value
of the fixed assets. At that point, the husband could threaten to withhold the household’s human
capital and the project would fail; only the value of the fixed assets would be left and creditors
would loose money. This threat is only credible after the passing of the law as the household can
now fall back on the value of the wife’s assets to consume. This gives the husband bargaining power,
and we assume that the lender can only can extract a fraction β ∈ (0, 1) of the total (risk-neutral)
surplus that is on the table, (1 − α)R. This endogenously generates a collateral constraint: the
husband can only borrow a multiple of the household’s net wealth.9 Were he allowed to borrow
more, he would always be able to negotiate the debt payment down to [α + β(1 − α)R] per unit
invested. This places an upper limit on the household’s loan payments in the good state of the
world, which implicitly places an upper limit on the amount of credit lenders are willing to extend.
We assume that
                                                  2 − βR > 0;                                                   (2)

this ensures that the collateral constraint is binding if the husband decides to contract a risky loan.
       In what follows, we look at how consumption and investment change after the passage of a
married women’s property law, conditional on wM and wF . All proofs are in the appendix.
   9
    An equivalent assumption would be that the lender can only appropriate fraction β of the project’s return, above
and beyond the value of the fixed assets which he can fully seize.




                                                        11
3.2   Property laws and Family Asset Allocation

Before a married women’s property law is passed, husbands are at liberty to allocate any amount
of wM + wF to c0 or c1 . Notice that they will always choose to borrow a risk-free amount l∗ <
α(wM + wF − c0 + l∗ ); otherwise, they would receive U = −∞ if the project fails. Since the loan
amount is smaller than the value of the fixed assets, the household will never hit the collateral
constraint.

Proposition 1 Before the passing of the married women’s property law, the husband will contract
a risk-free loan

                                      R(2α − 1) − 2α
                              l∗ =                    (wM + wF − c0 )                           (3)
                                      2(1 − α)(R − 1)
                                        α
                                  <        (wM + wF − c0 ),
                                      1−α

and the household’s period t = 0 consumption is given by

                                                 wM + wF
                                          c0 =           .                                      (4)
                                                  1 + θm

   Husbands choose to allocate a fixed portion of total family wealth to c0 , and they borrow a
fraction of their savings, which is increasing in the return on the risky project.
   After a property law is passed, husbands are forced to invest wF , and their current consumption
is constrained: c0 ≤ wM . Furthermore, since creditors are unable to seize αwF if the project is
unsuccessful, the household’s consumption in t = 1 can never be driven down to zero and the
husband might find it optimal to contract a risky loan: l > α (wM − c0 + l). If this is the case,
lenders will charge a risk premium ρ, which is determined by the lenders’ indifference condition:

                               1+ρ       α                        α
                          l =       l + (wM − c0 + l) if l >         (wM − c0 );
                                2        2                       1−α
                   (1 + ρ) l = max {l, (2 − α)l − α(wM − c0 )} .                                (5)


Such a risky loan exceeds the value of the fixed assets, and the collateral constraint might bind.
Because women’s wealth is protected, this constraint only depends on men’s net wealth, wM − c0 :

Lemma 2 After the passing of the married women’s property law, the collateral constraint is given




                                                  12
by
                                            2α + (1 − α)βR
                                   l≤l=                     (wM − c0 )                             (6)
                                            (1 − α)(2 − βR)

     The husband can only borrow up to a multiple of his own net wealth which is increasing in α,
β and R.

Proposition 3 After the passing of the married women’s property law, there are three different
cases:

     1. When c0 = wM , a household cannot access credit markets, l = 0, and will only invest the
        wife’s wealth. This will happen when the husband’s wealth is relatively small: wM /wF < φ1 ,
        with
                                                       (2 − βR)Re
                                               φ1 =               ,                                (7)
                                                      θM (1 − β)R

        where
                                              e = α + (1 − α) R.
                                              R                                                    (8)


     2. When φ1 < wM /wF < φ2 , the husband will always contract a risky loan at the collateral
        constraint defined by (6), l = l. The household’s period t = 0 consumption is given by:

                                             2            (2 − βR)Re
                                   c0 =          wM +                   wF                         (9)
                                          2 + θM      (2 + θM )(1 − β)R

        Cutoff point φ2 is given by:

                                       2α (R − 1) + θM [R (2α − 1) − 2α]
                                φ2 =                                     > φ1 .                   (10)
                                                     θM R


     3. When wM /wF > φ2 , the household can achieve the same allocation as before the legal change.
        Depending on the exact parameter values, he will either find it optimal to stay at the initial
        allocation, or he will find it optimal to contract a risky loan.

     In Case 2 the household will always contract a risky loan. The intuition follows from the fact
that the household is ensured a consumption of αwF in the bad state of the world. Since R > 2, the
return to the project in the good state of the world (per unit invested) is larger than the marginal
cost of debt:
                                          α + (1 − α) R > 2 − α,


                                                      13
and it is optimal for the husband to lever up as much as he can. The loan size will be exactly at the
collateral constraint. The total amount of credit contracted by the household can either increase
or decrease compared to the pre-law situation. This depends on the ratio of husband’s to wife’s
wealth.
   We are primarily interested in how married women’s property laws affect consumption, bor-
rowing, and investment. In what follows, we will analyze the impact of property laws on these
outcomes for couples captured by Case 2, in which φ1 < wM /wF < φ2 . In other words, we will
analyze the impact of a law on couples who are bound by the law, but who are not induced to
reduce borrowing to zero by the passage of the law. Assuming φ1 < 1, this intermediate case should
describe husbands and wives with similar premarital wealth, arguably the majority of couples if
some assortative matching on wealth is common.

Lemma 4 When φ1 < wM /wF < φ2 , investment net of borrowing will increase after the passage
of a property law.

   This finding is intuitive: because property laws restrict couples to consume out of the husband’s
wealth only, this tends to lower consumption and increase investment net of borrowing. In addition,
only the husband’s wealth can be used to access the credit market, which encourages men to allocate
some of their own assets to future consumption.

Lemma 5        1. Define l∗ to be optimal borrowing before the passage of a property law and l to be
     optimal borrowing after the passage of a property law. When φ1 < wM /wF < φ2 , then l − l∗
     is strictly increasing in wM /wF . There exists a χ such that, if χ < wM /wF < φ2 , l > l∗ ;
     and, if φ1 < wM /wF < χ, l < l∗ .

  2. Define y ∗ to be optimal investment, wM + wF − c0 + l, before the passage of a property law
     and y to be optimal investment after the passage of a property law. When φ1 < wM /wF < φ2 ,
     then y −y ∗ is strictly increasing in wM /wF . In addition y > y ∗ for at least part of the wM /wF
     distribution between φ1 and φ2 .

   Intuitively, total debt will fall if the husband’s wealth is small relative to the wife’s wealth.
At that point, the legal change will impose severe credit constraints on the household. When
the husband is relatively rich, credit constraints will be much milder, as creditors can still seize a
large fraction of total household wealth. At this point, the household will increase its debt, as the
insurance provided by the law encourages the husband to take on more risk and lever up. Overall,

                                                 14
there should be a larger differences between borrowing after the law and borrowing before the law
when husbands own a larger share of total family assets.
         The effect on total investment (wM + wF − c0 + l) is similar. Because families are constrained to
invest the wife’s wealth after a property law is passed, it is not clear whether or not total investment
will ever decrease; this depends on the exact parameter values.10 What is clear is that the gap
between pre- and post-law investment will increase as men hold a larger share of family assets,
as the difference between pre- and post-law borrowing increases in this share. Figure 1 provides
a graphical representation of Lemmas 4-6. The bottom panel of Figure 1 for total investment
illustrates the key theoretical prediction that we will be testing in the empirical section of the
paper.
         In sum, the introduction of the married women property laws forces couple for whom a large
share of property is protected to downscale borrowing, and possibly investment. On the other
hand, couples for whom only a small share of total assets is protected will want to borrow and
invest more after the law passage as the downside protection makes them willing to take on more
risk. Note that the predictions of the model would be dramatically different if we had assumed
that markets are complete.11 In that case, households would issue equity like claims to lenders
guaranteeing households a minimum level of consumption in the bad state of the world. In this
setting, the property laws would not give households additional protection, but they would tighten
credit constraints. It is straightforward to show that this effective reduction of the contract space
would always lead to a decrease in investments.


4         Data

We link data across four sources: (1) county records of marriages contracted in the South between
1840 and 1850 from familysearch.org; (2) the complete count 1850 federal census from the North
Atlantic Population Project; (3) slave schedules from the 1850 federal census from ancestry.com; (4)
and a complete index to the 1840 census from familysearch.org. We begin by extracting information
from approximately 250,000 marriage records from southern states dated between 1840 and 1850
from the genealogical website familysearch.org. These electronic records contain the full name of
both the bride and the groom, the date of marriage, and the county of marriage. Once we have
    10
     For instance, if θM is sufficiently small, or husbands place sufficiently little weight on future consumption, they
will have invested very little before the passage of a property law; this implies that forcing them to invest their wife’s
property after a property law is passed will increase investment, regardless of the impact on credit market outcomes.
  11
     See Vig (2013) for a different explanation why increased debtor protection might reduce investment.


                                                           15
obtained this marriage record data, we match it to the census of 1850 and to slave schedules from
that year, which list the names of slave owners. The 1850 data contain information on place of
residence, birth place, birth year, household composition, occupation, literacy, real estate assets
and slave holdings.12
       Linking marriage records to the census of 1850 is complicated by the fact that we have relatively
little information with which to make these links. The conventional approach to linking census data
is to use information on name, sex, race, birth year and birth place.13 However, our marriage records
only give us information on names; this makes it difficult to identify correct matches from a set of
potential matches. We choose a methodology that aims to maximize the probability that a link is
correct at the expense of a high linkage rate. We begin by identifying married couples residing in the
South in 1850.14 We do this using age, surname and location within the household, which is similar
to the approach taken by IPUMS (Ruggles et al 2010); this is necessary because the 1850 census
does not explicitly ask about marital status. We then search these couples for potential matches
to our marriage records based on husband’s and wife’s first initial and a phonetic surname code.15
We then evaluate the similarity between all three name variables in the marriage record and census
record using the Jaro-Winkler algorithm (Ruggles et al 2010), and we drop all potential matches
that score below a defined threshold. Finally, we keep only unique matches, in which complete first
names are given for both the husband and wife in the 1850 census; we discard potential matches if
there is an additional possible match in the 1850 census with information on only first initials. For
example, “John and Mary Smith” would be discarded if there was another couple named “J and
Mary Smith”. This is a very conservative approach, which is meant to maximize accuracy at the
expense of sample size. It is also important to note that this approach heavily favors individual
with unusual names.
       Table A1 contains statistics on our linkage rates, separately by state. We collect marriage
records from all southern states (broadly defined) besides Delaware, Maryland, and South Car-
olina. Delaware has too few marriage records to be worthwhile; Maryland and South Carolina
do not have available marriage record data. The fraction of marriage records we are able to link
  12
     See appendix B for more details about our data sources and linking procedures.
  13
     See Ferrie 1996, Ruggles et al 2010.
  14
     We only search for couples in the South for two reasons. First, only southern states currently have fully digitized
census data from 1850. However, we also feel that some residency restriction on our target sample is helpful because
of the lack of precise information we have that can be used for matching. Couples married in the South are unlikely
to have left the region within less than 10 years. So, this location restriction (or some version of it) will help us
distinguish between some of the multiple matches that we obtain when matching on name alone.
  15
     We use NYSIIS codes, which are commonly used in record linkage. See Atack and Bateman (1992), Ferrie (1996),
and Abramitzky et al (2012) for examples.


                                                          16
uniquely is 16%, which is on the low side. This appears to be due to the high frequency of multiple
matches: approximately 50% of our marriage records can be linked to at least one 1850 census
record (including those with first initials only) and 40% can be matched to at least one record with
full first name entries.
       To narrow down information on multiple matches, we use information on the implied age at
marriage and discard potential matches with highly improbable ages. We assume that our unique
matches are all true, and we compute P r(A = a|T ), which is the probability that a man’s age at
marriage is equal to a given that a link is true; we do the same thing for women. Then, for each
potential non-unique match, we compute a weight π, which is equal to the probability that each
match is true given the implied age at marriage of the husband and wife using Bayes rule. For a
                                                                          π
marriage record with K potential matches, we compute pk =                PKk          , and define a match as “true”
                                                                           l=1   πl
if pk ≥ 0.95. This raises our overall match rate by almost 5 percentage points, to just over 20%.
       The validity of this procedure depends on the accuracy of our unique matches. Table A2 and
Figure A1 suggest that these matches are typically accurate. Recall that we are matching marriage
records to census records from southern states based on names only; we are not using information
about state of marriage to refine these matches. So, if couples who were married in Alabama, for
example, are more likely to reside in Alabama in 1850 than a randomly selected southern couple,
this suggests that our matches are relatively accurate. Table A2 compares the probability of residing
in or being born in the couple’s marriage state with the probability of residing or being born in
that state for a randomly selected southern couple in 1850. These probabilities are typically an
order of magnitude higher for couples married in state than for all southern couples, suggesting
that our matches are typically accurate.
       Figure A1 plots the distribution of age at marriage for men and women in our uniquely matched
sample. We compute age at marriage by combining information on age in the 1850 census with
information on marriage year from our marriage records. Again, recall that we are not using any
of this information to create our unique matches. So, if our matches were completely random (i.e.
inaccurate), our estimated “age at marriage” would be typically 9 years younger for individuals
married in 1840 compared with those married in 1849. In the top two panels of Figure A1, we plot
the distribution of age at marriage for men in our actual matched sample who were married in 1840
and 1849, and we plot the same distribution for a “placebo” sample of randomly matched data.16
In our matched data, the distribution of age at marriage looks very similar for men married in 1840
  16
       This is done by randomly selecting couples and then randomly assigning them to be “married” in 1840 or 1849.



                                                         17
and 1849, suggesting that the matches are relatively accurate. The same picture emerges when we
look at age at marriage for women, in the bottom two panels of Figure A1.
         The final data source is a complete index to the 1840 census. We use this to measure the
pre-marriage socioeconomic status of husbands and wives. The only socioeconomic information
available in the 1840 census is slave holdings. Specifically, each 1840 census record is taken at the
household level, and contains information on the name of the household head as well as the number
of free and enslaved persons residing in the household. So, we calculate 1840 slave wealth at the
household level as the number of enslaved persons residing there, multiplied by the average slave
price in 1840, which was $377 (Carter et al 2006). Because we do not have detailed demographic (or
even first name) information on household members, it is difficult to link our couples to their precise
1840 households. Instead, we compute a measure of “familial assets” by averaging household slave
wealth by state and surname, and we link this to our matched sample by birth state and surname
(using the maiden name from marriage records for women). This measure is clearly only available
for individuals born in the South. We discuss the properties of this imputed measure of pre-marital
wealth in appendix B.
         Table 2 contains summary statistics for our matched data. We can match approximately 50,000
couples between marriage records and the 1850 census. Of these, we can determine slave ownership
status using the 1850 slave schedules in 75% of cases. In approximately 88% of cases, both the
husband and wife are southern born. Of these, we are able to obtain an 1840 assets measure for
76%, using the method described above. Thus, approximately 40% of all couples linked from our
marriage records to the 1850 census appear in our core sample.17


5         Empirical Approach

5.1         Specifications and hypotheses

Our model generates predictions about the impact of a married women’s property law on con-
sumption, investment, and borrowing. The outcome variable we use to test these predictions is
the couple’s 1850 real estate and slave holdings. We observe real estate assets as reported in the
1850 census, which includes real property that is mortgaged: census enumerators were instructed
to collect the value of real estate owned by each person, and “no abatement of the value [was] to be
made on account of any lien or encumbrance thereon in the nature of debt” (Ruggles et al 2010).
    17
         We show in the appendix that the main results are robust to relaxing some of these sample restrictions.



                                                             18
In addition, we observe each individual’s slave holdings. We multiply the number of slaves each
household owns by the average slave value in 1850 of $377, which was the average slave price in
1850 (Carter et al 2006). We interpret the value of real estate and slaves as gross investment, or
saving plus borrowing for investment. In our theoretical model, this would be wM + wF − c0 + l.
   One attractive feature of our data is that we observe couples who are married in the same state
both before and after a married women’s property law; we also have cross-state variation in the
timing of the passage of these laws. So, our data allow us to include both year of marriage and state
fixed effects. We also have variation in the fraction of familial assets – if any– that are protected,
generated by variation in the fraction of assets owned by the wife. This essentially gives us a triple
difference specification. Thus, we explore the effects of these laws on family assets by estimating
the following equation by OLS:


   log(1 + Ii,j,s,t ) = α + βLAWs,t + ψ1 log Wi,1840 + ψ2 log Wj,1840 + δ1 log Wi,1840 × LAWs,t      (11)

                   + δ2 log Wj,1840 × LAWs,t + γ1 Xi + γ2 Xj + τt + σs + ui,j,s,t


Here, Ii,j,t,s is the value of real estate and slaves belonging to man i and woman j, who were
married in year t in state s. For many households we observe zero investment and for our OLS
estimates we add $1 to all investment in order for the log to be defined. The variable LAWs,t is 1
if a married women’s property law had been enacted in state s by year t; Wi,1840 and Wj,1840 are,
respectively, man i’s and woman j’s familial slaveholding measure from 1840. Interactions between
LAWs,t and log Wi,1840 and log Wj,1840 will capture heterogeneity in the effect of the law, which we
expect will depend on the difference between husband’s and wife’s pre-marriage assets. In some
specifications we interact LAWs,t with log[Wi,1840 /Wj,1840 ] instead. The vectors Xi and Xj are
individual characteristics of man i and woman j, respectively, including literacy, age fixed effects,
and birthplace fixed effects; τt is a marriage year fixed effect, and σs is a marriage state fixed effect.
We impose that couples be resident in their state of marriage, as there is ambiguity about which
state’s laws apply if a couple lives in a different state than the state of marriage.
   A complication is that around 45% of our couples report zero real estate and slave assets in 1850.
As such, we have a censored measure of investment in 1850. To deal with this, we also estimate
the above regression as a Tobit, in which observations with Ii,j,t,s = 0 are treated as though they
are censored.
   According to our model, the introduction of a property law should have an impact on gross


                                                   19
investment that is increasing in men’s wealth (Wi,1840 ) and decreasing in women’s wealth (Wj,1840 ),
keeping partner’s wealth, (Wj,1840 and Wi,1840 , respectively), constant. Property laws also lead to a
reallocation of Wj,1840 to investment, which tends to increase investment after the law. In addition,
if Wi,1840 is relatively large, the passage of a property law leads to an increase in borrowing, and
thus an even greater increase in investment. If Wj,1840 is relatively large, the passage of a property
law leads to a decrease in borrowing, which may or may not negate the increase in investment that
stems from reallocating wives’ assets. In any case, any positive effect of the law on investment
should be smaller for such couples. As such, we expect to find δ̂ 1 > 0 and δ̂ 2 < 0. We normalize
our variables in such a way that estimate β̂ will reflect the impact of the law on couples in which
husbands and wives have equal wealth.
   In addition to total investment in real estate and slaves we also look at the composition of
investment, in particular the share of slave holdings in total assets. Wright (1986) and Kilbourne
(1995) argue that since slaves could be easily moved and used for different tasks, they were superior
to land as a form of collateral. We would therefore expect credit constrained households to shift
their assets towards more slave holdings, as this would have facilitated access to credit. Specifically
we run the following regression:


 log(Si,j,s,t /Ii,j,s,t ) = α + βLAWs,t + ψ1 log Wi,1840 + ψ2 log Wj,1840 + δ1 log Wi,1840 × LAWs,t (12)

                    + δ2 log Wj,1840 × LAWs,t + γ1 Xi + γ2 Xj + τt + σs + ui,j,s,t


where Si,j,s,t is the value of a couple’s slave holdings in 1850. We would expect to find that the
more credit constrained households would hold more slaves, i.e. b
                                                                δ 1 < 0 and b
                                                                            δ 2 > 0. We run this
regression only for couples who reported to own real estate or slaves in the 1850 census.


5.2   Results

Figure 2 displays these results graphically using binscatters. Panel A shows that, keeping a wife’s
family wealth constant, an increase in husband’s family wealth tends to lead to more investment
in 1850. Consistent with the simple model we wrote down, this sensitivity is stronger for couples
married after the law change. Panel B shows the reverse for wife’s family wealth. Panel C summa-
rizes this information by looking at the log-difference between husband’s and wife’s wealth. The
relation between 1850 investment and the difference in spousal wealth is virtually flat for couples
married before a law change, but strongly positive for couples married after the introduction of a


                                                  20
Married Women Property Law. Panel D shows that including additional controls does not change
these conclusions.
   Tables 3 and 4 report the OLS and Tobit estimates of equation (11). Odd numbered columns
include log Wi,1840 × LAWs,t and log Wj,1840 × LAWs,t separately; even numbered columns include
log[Wi,1840 /Wj,1840 ]×LAWs,t . All estimates include state and year-of-marriage fixed effects. Going
from columns (1)-(2) to (5)-(6), we include additional controls. In columns (3) and (4) we include
age-at-marriage, state-of-birth and literacy fixed effects. We also control for the commonness of
family names. As we explain in the data appendix, error in the measurement of a person’s premarital
wealth is positively correlated with the commonness of his or her surname. To ensure that this
does not affect our results, we calculate the prevalence of husbands’ and wives’ family names in
their state of birth in 1840. We then divide husbands and wives in 10 bins where the first bin
includes the rarest family names and the tenth bin the most common ones. We include bin fixed
effects effects for both men and women; estimates therefore capture the effect within groups of
people whose family name is more or less equally prevalent in the population.18 Finally, in columns
(5) and (6) we include a state specific time-trend estimated on the time of marriage. This way
we control for state-specific changes over time. For example, suppose that for a certain state the
wealth of married couples is increasing over time due to improving macro-economic conditions, such
that a married couple in 1849 is on average richer than a couple married in 1841. Further suppose
that this state introduced a Married Women Property Law some time between 1841 and 1849. In
that case, we would mechanically find that couples married after a law change have more property
in the 1850 census. As long as these macro-economic developments can be captured by a linear
trend, a state-specific linear time trend should control for this. We explicitly control for a number
of potentially important macroeconomic conditions in the next section.
   Again, results are consistent with the predictions from our simple model. First, the interaction
terms indicate that investment for couples who got married after the passing of the property laws
is increasing in the difference between husband’s and wife’s wealth. Second, coefficient β̂ is close
to zero. This means that for a household where husband’s and wife’s wealth are approximately
equal the law change has no effect. Together, these findings imply that the changing law leads
households for whom wife’s wealth is relatively important to decrease investment. The reverse
is true for households with relatively rich husbands. The economic magnitude of the interaction
 18
    In the appendix, we also present results in which we overweight observations with uncommon names, and in
which we omit observations with common names from the sample. Our results are robust to these tests.




                                                    21
effects is considerable. All (continuous) independent variables are normalized by their own standard
deviations. This means that a standard deviation increase in the wealth difference between husband
and wife leads to increase in 1850 investment of 6% (OLS) to 12% (Tobit). Adding control variables
does not change these results in any meaningful way.
   Table 5 takes a closer look at the composition of investment. Consistent with the idea that
slaves form a better form of collateral than real estate, we find that households that are more likely
to be credit constrained hold more slaves as a fraction of total assets. In particular, keeping wife’s
wealth constant, we find that households with poorer husbands hold relatively more slaves. We
don’t find the opposite pattern for women: keeping husband’s wealth equal, households with rich
women do not hold more slaves. An explanation for this could be that, due to complications of the
law, it proved harder to sell and reinvest a wife’s assets than a husband’s property.


5.3   Robustness tests

We perform four robustness tests. First, we look at whether possible changes in partner choice after
the passing of the marriage laws could affect our results. Second, we look at whether changing
bequest behavior on part of a couple’s parents can explain our findings. Third, we investigate
whether the introduction of state level exemptions during the 1840s might be driving our results.
Fourth, we explore whether our results can be explained by state-varying macro conditions, which
may have been correlated with the timing of adoption of married women’s property laws.
   Koudijs and Salisbury (2015) document that the passage of married women’s property laws
affected the composition of marriage matches. In particular, they find evidence that these laws
increased the systematic gains from assortative matching on wealth among couples with relatively
richer husbands; however, they lowered the gains from assortative matching among couples with
relatively richer wives. If the systematic gains from assortative matching change, this will change
the profile of matches that actually occur. In our estimates, we explicitly control for individual
pre-marital wealth levels, in addition to a host of other individual characteristics such as age,
literacy and place of birth. Pre-marital wealth is based on information from the 1840 census and
has common support before and after the passing of the law. This means that including individual
wealth levels in the regressions is sufficient to deal with changing spousal wealth pairings caused
by the passage of a law. Nevertheless, the paper’s estimates are still biased if the average quality
of marital matches changes in some unobservable way that is correlated with differences in spousal
pre-marital wealth. Suppose that, before the passage of a law, a man would only marry a poorer


                                                 22
woman if the match was highly favorable in some other, unobservable way. Further, suppose that
spousal wealth became more valuable to men after the passage of a law, so the same man would
require an even higher unobservable match quality in order to marry the poorer woman. In that
case, marriages involving relatively rich husbands would have systematically better unobservable
qualities after the legal change, and this might explain why they held more assets in 1850.
       To explore this possibility directly, we look at two indicators of unobservable match quality:
marital separation and fertility. Intuitively, couples that have better unobserved match qualities
are less likely to separate. While divorce was uncommon during the 1840s, marital separation was
not. Cvercek (2009) estimates that approximately 10% of marriages were “disrupted” during the
mid to late 19th century, most often during the first five years of marriage. As such, co-residence in
1850 should be positively correlated with match quality. Fertility, or investment in children, is also
commonly used as a measure of match quality.19 In our case, we can observe two outcomes which
are related to match quality: (i) whether or not we are able to link a couple to the census of 1850;
(ii) whether or not the couple has children in 1850. We regress indicators for these outcomes on
an indicator equal to one if a couple was married after the passage of a law, the difference between
the husband’s and wife’s premarital wealth, and an interaction between these two variables. We
present these results in table 6.20
       We find no evidence that couples with relatively rich husbands are more likely to be linked to
the census of 1850 if they are married after the passage of a property law. This is inconsistent with
such couples having higher unobserved match quality. A limitation is that we cannot tell exactly
why a couple is not linked to the census. In particular, it could be that couples with relatively rich
husbands produce more children after the passage of a law, and – although they have higher match
qualities – we are no more likely to find them in the 1850 census because of maternal mortality.
However, we also find evidence that couples with relatively rich husbands who were married after
the passage of a law are less likely to have children, conditional on being linked to the 1850 census.
This is conditional on years of marriage, and omits couples who had been married for less than
one year in 1850, or who were married when the wife was over the age of 40. Taken together, we
  19
     Several papers, such as Stevenson (2007), interpret children as an investment in a marriage, and consider the
impact of changing divorce laws on fertility and other marital investments. An implication is that couples in higher
quality marriages should make greater investments in these marriages, such as children.
  20
     When we look at the impact of property laws and premarital wealth on the probability of being matched to the
1850 census, we define premarital wealth for a person with surname i married in state s as mean slaveholdings among
families with surname i in state s. In our baseline estimates, we match to the 1840 census using state of birth rather
than state of marriage, which we believe is the more appropriate measure; however, we do not know state of birth
for couples who we could not find in the 1850 census. Fortunately, the two measures are very highly correlated.



                                                         23
interpret this to mean that changes in unobservable match quality cannot explain our results.
       Next, we investigate whether differences in 1850 real estate and slave holdings are actually the
result of changes in bequest behavior on the part of couples’ parents. For this to explain the baseline
results in Tables 3 and 4, we would need that parents start to bequeath less to their daughters
and more to their sons after the passing of the law – possibly in response to the fact that assets
in the hands of married daughters are less valuable, as they cannot be used as collateral anymore.
The first thing to note is that this not an obvious outcome. For example, in 1846 the Alabama
legislature argued that the passing of a marriage law did not only protect a woman against a
husband’s insolvency, but also against his “intemperance or improvidence”.21 If parents valued this
protection, they might have become less reluctant to bequeath assets to their daughters.
       We can test for this more formally in the following way, starting with the the 1840 census.
For each surname in each state, we calculate the mean fraction of children in households with
that surname that are male (%ChildrenM alej,1840 ). For a wife with maiden name j, this is a
measure of the fraction of her siblings that are male. This is a useful metric because it captures a
family’s scope for shifting bequests away from daughters and toward sons. We test whether there
is any interaction between household asset holdings in the 1850 census, %ChildrenM alej,1840 , and
LAWs,t . Specifically we estimate the following regression:


             log(1 + Ii,j,s,t ) = α + βLAWs,t + ψ1 log Wi,1840 + ψ2 log Wj,1840                                 (13)

                             + ψ3 %ChildrenM alej,1840 + ψ4 %ChildrenM alej,1840 × LAWs,t

                             + δ1 log Wi,1840 × LAWs,t + δ2 log Wj,1840 × LAWs,t

                             + δ3 log Wi,1840 × %ChildrenM alej,1840

                             + δ4 log Wi,1840 × %ChildrenM alej,1840 × LAWs,t

                             + γ1 Xi + γ2 Xj + τt + σs + ui,j,s,t


If parents typically favored bequests to sons over daughters before the passage of a law, we should
expect to find δ3 < 0. The coefficient δ4 measures to what extent this changed after the legal
change. If if our baseline results are driven by changing bequest behavior, we would expect that
  21
     Similarly, in 1839, a newspaper from Vicksburg, Mississippi argued, somewhat less eloquently, that “the property
of ladies should be guarded against the squandering habits of a drunken and gambling husband. The ladies are
virtuous and prudent creatures – they never gamble, they never drink, and there is no good reason why the strong
arm of legislation should not be extended to the protection of the property they bring into the marriage bargain”
(quoted in Warbasse 1987, p. 150 and 170).




                                                         24
δ 4 < 0. Put another way, we should only expect a law to decrease investment for wealthier women
b

with brothers if the results are being driven by parents shifting bequests from daughters to sons.
   Table 7 presents the results. The coefficient b
                                                 δ 3 is negative and significant, indicating that
families with more sons bequeathed less wealth to their daughters. This effect is undone after the
law change: coefficient b
                        δ 4 is positive and significant. In other words, the apparent preference to
convey wealth to sons disappears. This is likely a response to the fact that wealth conveyed to
a daughter is now better protected against a husband’s “improvidence”. The implication of this
finding is that changing bequest behavior cannot account for our baseline results: rather, it seems
to work in the opposite direction. The legal change seems to favor bequests to women, and we
would therefore expect the interaction between a wife’s familial wealth and the Post Law dummy
to be positive, not negative. This suggests that the baseline results in Tables 3 and 4 are actually
a lower bound on the effect of increased bankruptcy protection on investment.
   We look at the impact of the introduction of bankruptcy exemptions at the state level (see
footnote 6, on p. 8). For each couple we determine the level of state exemptions in the year of
marriage based on the information provided by Farnam (1938) and Coleman (1974). The idea
is that material investment decisions might be made around the time of marriage, and that the
exemption level could matter for this decision. Table 8 shows that exemption levels at time of
marriage are negatively and significantly correlated with household investment in 1850, and they
interact negatively (if at all) with the difference between husband’s log wealth and wife’s log wealth.
Without a better understanding of the process underlying the introduction of exemptions it is hard
make causal inferences though. What is important for this paper is that the interaction effect
between the Post Law dummy and the difference in spousal wealth is unaffected by the inclusion
of state exemption levels (compare Table 8 with the coefficients in Tables 3 and 4).
   Finally, we address the possibility that the timing of the enactment of a married women’s
property law may be correlated with the state’s economic performance in the aftermath of the
1837 Crisis, and this may bias our results. First of all, we should note that we consider this
possibility very unlikely. If we were relying exclusively on cross-state variation in protection, then
the endogeneity of laws would be a first order concern. However, because these laws apply only to
newlyweds, we have variation in protection within a state in 1850. If states passed property laws
because of economic distress, then we should expect to see fewer assets held by all couples residing
in a state that has passed a law, not just couples married after the passage of a law. Granted,
it is possible that couples make important investment decisions at the time of marriage, which


                                                  25
depend on macro conditions, so couples who were married in different economic climates may fare
differently later on. Still, this should affect all couples married in the same year equally: there is no
reason for the effect of macroeconomic conditions on investment to be contingent on the fraction
of household wealth owned by the husband or wife. In this sense, our triple difference specification
is especially useful.
    Still, we test whether or not our results are affected by economic performance after the Crisis of
1837. As discussed earlier, the main driver of this crisis was a drop in cotton prices, which precip-
itated a drop in slave prices. So, states that relied more heavily on cotton and slaves should have
fared worst. In figure A4, we plot Kaplan-Meier survival estimates, which capture the probability
of not having passed a property law in each year. We estimate these separately for states with
“high” and “low” cotton intensity – measured as the ratio of pounds of cotton picked in 1840 per
white population – and for states with “high” and “low” slave intensity – measured as the ratio
of slaves per white population in 1840. Some cotton- and slave-intensive states passed laws early
on (Florida, Mississippi, Alabama), but other states with low cotton and slave intensity did too
(Maryland, Kentucky). Moreover, low cotton- and slave-intensity states passed laws in 1849 and
1850 (North Carolina, Tennessee) while states with higher cotton and slave intensities (Georgia,
South Carolina) did not. To explicitly test whether or not this affects our results, we control for
annual cotton and slave prices, interacted with state fixed effects; in addition, we control for state-
level cotton and slave intensity according to the 1840 census, interacted with year fixed effects.
These results are presented in table 9. Our results are not at all sensitive to these controls.


6    Conclusion

In this paper, we study the impact of the introduction of Married Women Property Laws in the
U.S. South in the 1840s on household investment. These laws gave households downside protection
in an environment that lacked virtually any other form of bankruptcy relief. We find that the
introduction of the marriage laws increased household investment when husbands were wealthier
than wives; however, they decreased investment when wives were wealthier than husbands. This
suggests that there was an important interaction between the laws and credit markets. For some
couples, the property laws offered significant protection in downturns, thus increasing the amount
of debt they were willing to take on. For others, it imposed credit constraints, reducing investment.
All in all, the results in this paper confirm that any sort of bankruptcy relief trades off protection



                                                   26
against credit constraints; which of the two dominates depends crucially on the fraction of assets
that is protected. A limited amount of relief seems sufficient to increase households’ demand for
borrowing and investing, while at the same time keeping access to credit unimpeded.
   Our major finding – that bankruptcy protection only increases investment when a modest frac-
tion of total assets is protected – is not surprising. The pioneering work of Gropp et al (1997)
comes to largely the same conclusion, finding that protection only increases borrowing for ex ante
richer households. We are able to show that this finding holds true in an environment with little to
no additional debtor protection, which is not obvious. We are also able address nagging concerns
about causality which plague this literature. To date, microeconometric studies of the impacts of
bankruptcy protection have relied on cross-state variation in homestead exemption limits. Identi-
fication in this literature is threatened by the possibility that the enactment of exemption limits
is endogenous to other important state characteristics. Crucially, our identification strategy allows
us to exploit variation in protection within a state at a given point in time. Moreover, we are able
to exploit variation in the degree of protection within a state in a given year, conditional on total
family wealth. This allows us to cleanly distinguish “fraction of assets protected” from “level of
total assets.” As a result, we are able to conclude with unprecedented certainty that bankruptcy
laws that protect a modest fraction of total assets stimulate investment, while laws that protect a
large fraction of total assets have the inverse effect.



References
 [1] Atack, Jeremy and Fred Bateman (1992). “Matchmaker, Matchmaker, Make Me a Match:
     A General Personal Computer-Based Matching Program for Historical Research.” Historical
     Methods. 25(2):53-65.
 [2] Athreya, Kartik B. (2002). “Welfare implications of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1999”.
     Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 1567-1595.
 [3] Auslander, Mark (2011). The Accidental Slave owner: Revisiting a Myth of Race and Finding
     an American Family, University of Georgia Press, Athens
 [4] Berger, Allen N., Geraldo Cerqueiro and Maria Fabiana Penas (2011). “Does Debtor Protection
     Really Protect Debtors? Evidence from the Small Business Credit Market”, Journal of Banking
     & Finance 35: 1843-1857.
 [5] Brown, Allison. E. (2006). “In Defense of Normalcy: The Financial and Legal Statuses of
     Widows in Antebellum Fayette County, Tennessee”, working paper
 [6] Carter, Susan B et al (2006). Historical Statistics of the United States from Colonial Times to
     Present. New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                                   27
 [7] Chatterjee, Satyajit, Dean Corbae, Makoto Nakajima and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2007), “A
     Quantitative Theory of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default”, Econometrica
     75(6): 1525-1589.

 [8] Cerqueiro, Geraldo, Deepak Hegde, Maria Fabiana Penas, and Robert Seamans (2014).
     “Debtor Rights, Credit Supply, and Innovation.” TILEC Discussion Paper no. 2014-011.

 [9] Cerqueiro, Geraldo and Maria Fabiana Penas (2011). “How Does Personal Bankruptcy Law
     Affect Start-ups?” European Banking Center Discussion Paper no. 2011-029.

[10] Chused, Richard (1983). “Married Women’s Property Law: 1800-1850.” Georgetown Law Jour-
     nal. 71(2): 1359-1425.

[11] Coleman, Peter J. (1974). Debtors and Creditors in America. Insolvency, Imprisonment for
     Debt and Bankruptcy; 1607-1900. Madison: State Historical Society of Wisconsin.

[12] Cvrcek, Tomas (2009). “When Harry Left Sally: A New Estimate of Marital Disruption in the
     U.S., 1860-1948.” Demographic Research. 21(24): 719-758.

[13] Davila, Eduardo (2015), “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Bankruptcy Exemptions”, work-
     ing paper

[14] Doepke, Matthias and Michele Tertilt (2009). “Women’s Liberation: What’s in it for Men?”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(4): 1541-1591.

[15] Dubey, Pradeep, John Geanakoplos, and Martin Shubik (2005), “Default and Punishment in
     General Equilibrium”, Econometrica 73(1): 1-37.

[16] Fan, Wei and Michelle J. White (2003). “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial
     Activity.” Journal of Law and Economics. 46(2): 543-567.

[17] Farnam, Henry W. (1938). Chapters in the History of Social Legislation in the United States
     to 1860. Washington: Carnegie Institution.

[18] Fernandez, Raquel (2014). “Women’s Rights and Development.” Journal of Economic Growth.
     19: 37-80.

[19] Ferrie, Joseph P. (1996). “A New Sample of Americans Linked from the 1850 Public Use Micro
     Sample of the Federal Census of Population to the 1860 Federal Census Manuscript Schedules.”
     Historical Methods. 29: 141- 156.

[20] Geddes, Rick, Dean Lueck, and Sharon Tennyson (2012). “Human Capital Acquisition and the
     Expansion of Women’s Economic Rights.” Journal of Law and Economics. 55(4): 839-867.

[21] Geddes, Rick and Dean Lueck (2002). “The Gains from Self-Ownership and the Expansion of
     Women’s Rights.” American Economic Review. 92(4): 1079-1092.

[22] Goodman, Paul (1993). ‘The Emergence of Homestead Exemptions in the United States: Ac-
     commodation and Resistance to the Market Revolution’, 1840-1880. Journal of American His-
     tory 80-2, p. 470-498.

[23] Gikandi, Simon (2011). Slavery and the Culture of Taste, Princeton University Press



                                               28
[24] Gropp, Reint, John Karl Scholz, and Michelle J. White (1997). “Personal Bankruptcy and
     Credit Supply and Demand.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 112(1): 217-251.

[25] Haines, Michael R., and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (2010).
     Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002 [Computer
     file]. ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
     Research [distributor], 2010-05-21. doi:10.3886/ICPSR02896

[26] Hamilton, Gillian (1999). “Property Rights and Transaction Costs in Marriage: Evidence from
     Prenuptial Contracts.” Journal of Economic History. 59(1): 68-103.

[27] Inwood, Kris and Sarah Van Sligtenhorst (2004). “The Social Consequences of Legal Reform:
     Women and Property in a Canadian Community.” Continuity and Change. 19(1): 165-197.

[28] Kahn, B. Zorina (1996). “Married Women’s Property Laws and Female Commercial Activity.”
     Journal of Economic History. 56(2): 356-388.

[29] Kelly, John F. (1882). A Treatise on the Law of Contracts of Married Women. Jersey City:
     D. Linn & Co.

[30] Kilbourne, Jr., Richard Holcombe (1995). Debt, Investment, Slaves, Credit Relations in East
     Feliciana Parish, Louisiana, 1825 - 1885. Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press

[31] Koudijs, Peter and Laura Salisbury (2015). “Marrying for Money: Evidence from Changes in
     Marital Property Laws in the American South, 1840-1850.” Working Paper.

[32] Lilienfeld-Toal, Ulf, Dilip Mookherjee and Sujata Visaria (2012), “The Distributive Impact of
     Reforms in Credit Enforcement: Evidence from Indian Debt Recovery Tribunals.” Economet-
     rica. 80(2): 497-558.

[33] Livshits, Igor, James MacGee and Michele Tertilt (2007), “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh
     Start”, American Economic Review 97(1): 402-418.

[34] Livshits, Igor (2014), “Recent Developments in Consumer Credit and Default Literature”,
     working paper

[35] McGrane, Reginald C. (1924). The Panic of 1837: Some Financial Problems of the Jacksonian
     Era. Chicago.

[36] Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder,
     and Matthew Sobek. (2010) Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-
     readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

[37] Salmon, Marylynn (1982). “Women and Property in South Carolina: The Evidence from
     Marriage Settlements, 1730-1830.” William and Mary Quarterly. 39(4): 655-85.

[38] Shammas, Carole, Marylynn Salmon and Michel Dalin (1987), Inheritance in America from
     Colonial Times to the Present, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick.

[39] Severino, Filipe, Meta Brown and Brandi Coates (2013). “Personal Bankruptcy Protection
     and Household Debt.” Working Paper.

[40] Stevenson, Betsey (2007). “The Impact of Divorce Laws on Marriage-Specific Capital.” Journal
     of Labor Economics. 25(1): 75-94.

                                               29
[41] Temin, Peter (1969), The Jacksonian Economy, Norton: NY.

[42] Thompson, Elizabeth L. (2004). The Reconstruction of Southern Debtors: Bankruptcy after
     the Civil War. Athens: The University of Georgia Press

[43] Vig, Vikrant (2013). “Access to Collateral and Corporate Debt Structure: Evidence from a
     Natural Experiment.” Journal of Finance. 68(3): 881-928.

[44] Warbasse, Elizabeth (1987). The Changing Legal Rights of Married Women. 1800-1861. New
     York: Garland.

[45] Wallis, John J., “What Caused the Crisis of 1839?”, NBER historical paper 133.

[46] Wells, John C. (1878). A Treatise on the Separate Property of Married Women. Cincinnati:
     R. Clarke & Co.

[47] White, Michelle J. (2013), “Corporate and Personal Bankruptcy Law”, Annual Review of Law
     and Social Science, 7: 139-64.

[48] Wright, Gavin (1986). Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy Since the
     Civil War, Louisiana State University Press

[49] Zame, William R., “Efficiency and the Role of Default When Security Markets are Incomplete”,
     American Economic Review 83(5): 1142-1164.




                                               30
      Figures and Tables
Introduction              Historical context                Model                Data             Empirical results               Conclusions

                                                       Figure 1: Main Results, Model




                                                                                                                                              17/27
      Note: This figure shows how the law change affects A. Investment net of loans, B. Total debt and C. Total investment for couples with
      a different distribution of assets between partners, while keeping total wealth constant.




                                                                         31
                                              Figure 2: Investment and Protection




Note: This figure explores the relation between the difference in spousal familial wealth and 1850 household investment using binscatters
grouping the following x-variables in 25 bins: Panel A: husband’ 1840 familial wealth; Panel B: wife’s 1840 familial wealth; Panels C
and D: the ratio of husband’s to wife’s 1840 familial wealth. Panels A and B show how much investment changes keeping spousal 1840
familial wealth constant. All panels control for state and year-of-marriage fixed effects. Panel D includes additional controls, see Table
5 for details. All variables are in logs.




                                                                   32
                    Table 1: Dates of Key Married Women’s Property Legislation in the 1840’s
    State       Date Main               Protection Wife’s Assets                   Ability to Sell
               Law Change                                                           Wife’s Assets
 Alabama       Mar 1, 1848 All property owned at time of marriage, Wife cannot sell
                               or acquired afterwards
 Arkansas      –
 Florida       Mar 6, 1845 All property owned at time of marriage, Husband and wife can jointly
                               or acquired afterwards                     sell real estate
 Georgia       –
 Kentucky      Feb 23, 1846 Real estate and slaves owned at time          Husband and wife can jointly
                               of marriage, or acquired afterwards        sell real estate
 Louisiana     –
 Mississippi Feb 28, 1846 Real estate owned at time of marriage           Husband and wife can jointly
                               and all other property required for the    sell real estate; wife can sell
                               maintenance of the plantation (incl.       individually if required for
                               slaves)                                    maintenance
 North         Jan 29, 1849 Husband’s interest in the wife’s real         Wife’s real estate cannot be
 Carolina                      estate (i.e. profits or rents) not liable  sold by husband without her
                               for his debts                              written consent
 Tennessee Jan 10, 1850 Husband’s interest in the wife’s real             Husband cannot sell his
                               estate (i.e. profits or rents) not liable  interest is his wife’s real
                               for his debts                              estate
 Texas         –
 Virginia      –
Notes: We omit Maryland and South Carolina from this Table as we do not have a sufficient number of marriage
records to include these states in our analysis. Due to their French and Spanish heritage, Louisiana and Texas had
community property systems in place that, by default, allowed men and women to have separate estates. Sources:
Kahn (1996), Geddes and Lueck (2002), Warbasse (1987), Kelly (1882), Wells (1878), Chused (1983) and Salmon
(1982).




                                                       33
                                    Table 2: Summary Statistics, Linked Data
                                               Mean      SD        Min     Max         N

                                                       Panel A. Sample Restrictions

Husband & wife born in south                   0.88          0.32    0        1       50809
Household linkable to 1850 slave schedules     0.75          0.43    0        1       50809
Resident in marriage state in 1850             0.77          0.42    0        1       50809
Surname/birthplace matched to 1840             0.76          0.43    0        1       44949
Meets all sample restrictions                  0.39          0.49    0        1       50809

                                                   Panel B. Sample Characteristics

Husband’s age at marriage                      26.99         8.82   15       91       19672
Wife’s age at marriage                         21.86         6.73   13       78       19672

Log total wealth, 1850                         3.82          3.56    0      12.16     19672
Fraction of wealth held in slaves              0.29          0.37    0        1       10980
Nonzero slave wealth, 1850                     0.24          0.43    0        1       19672
Zero wealth in 1850                            0.44           0.5    0        1       19672
Employed in agriculture                        0.67          0.47    0        1       19672

Married after law change                       0.20          0.40    0        1       19672
Resident in marriage county in 1850            0.71          0.45    0        1       19672

Groom’s 1840 log slave wealth                  2.65          1.99    0      10.68     19672
Bride’s 1840 log slave wealth                  2.69          1.79    0      11.17     19672




                                                        34
                Table 3: Effect of Married Women’s Property Laws on 1850 Investment - OLS
                                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)
 Dep. var.                                              log(Gross investment), 1850
 Post Law                           -0.025      -0.012       -0.057       -0.045       -0.091           -0.078
                                   (0.105)     (0.104)      (0.095)      (0.094)      (0.114)          (0.114)
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         0.061                    0.059                     0.061
 × Post Law                        (0.066)                  (0.068)                   (0.069)
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840           -0.204                   -0.182                    -0.176
 × Post Law                      (0.067)***               (0.065)***                (0.066)***
 [Husband’s log(W) - Wife’s                      0.065                     0.060                        0.059
 log(W), 1840] × Post Law                    (0.019)***                (0.018)***                    (0.018)***
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         0.523       0.511        0.391       0.381         0.392           0.382
                                 (0.031)*** (0.030)*** (0.031)*** (0.031)*** (0.031)***              (0.031)***
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840            0.493      0.478         0.388       0.375         0.387           0.376
                                 (0.028)*** (0.027)*** (0.026)*** (0.026)*** (0.027)***              (0.026)***

 Adj-R2                              0.090        0.090         0.186        0.186        0.186        0.186
 Obs                                 19672        19672         19672        19672        19672        19672
 State and year-of-marriage FE         Y            Y             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Age at marriage FE                    N            N             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE            N            N             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Frequency names, bin FE               N            N             Y            Y            Y            Y
 State specific lin. time trend        N            N             N            N            Y            Y

OLS estimates. Gross investment: value of household’s real estate and slave holdings in 1850 census, gross of debt.
Dependent variable: log(1+ Gross investment) . Husband’s/Wife’s 1840 wealth: average log slave wealth (log(#
slaves ×377 + 1)) of individuals with the same surname as the husband and wife in their respective states of births
in the 1840 census. Frequency names, bin FE : we calculate the relative prevalence of husband’s and wifes’ family
names per state. We summarize this information in 10 bins, where bin 1 includes the rarest family names, and
bin 10 the most common ones. All (continuous) independent variables are normalized by their standard deviation;
reported coefficients therefore indicate by what % gross investment changes in response to a one standard deviation
increase in the right hand side variable. All interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations from the
mean. The coefficient on Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a Married Woman Property
Act on a household with average wealth or average wealth difference. Standard errors (clustered at the state ×
year-of-marriage level) are reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          35
                Table 4: Effect of Married Women’s Property Laws on 1850 Investment - Tobit
                                       (1)       (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
 Dep. var.                                              log(Gross investment), 1850
 Post Law                            0.029      0.039        -0.031       -0.024       -0.181         -0.171
                                    (0.188)    (0.189)      (0.170)      (0.169)      (0.196)        (0.198)
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         0.150                   0.157                      0.151
 × Post Law                         (0.112)                 (0.113)                   (0.116)
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840            -0.358                  -0.316                    -0.318
 × Post Law                       (0.118)***              (0.113)***                (0.115)***
 [Husband’s log(W) - Wife’s                     0.127                      0.120                      0.119
 log(W), 1840] × Post Law                    (0.034)***                (0.032)***                  (0.032)***
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         0.813      0.795         0.572        0.559        0.573         0.559
                                  (0.057)*** (0.054)*** (0.055)*** (0.053)*** (0.055)***           (0.053)***
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840             0.790     0.768         0.600       0.584         0.601         0.584
                                  (0.052)*** (0.048)*** (0.047)*** (0.045)*** (0.047)***           (0.045)***

 Pseudo-R2                          0.020        0.020        0.046        0.046         0.046        0.046
 Obs                                19672        19672        19672        19672         19672        19672
 State and year-of-marriage FE        Y            Y            Y            Y             Y            Y
 Age at marriage FE                   N            N            Y            Y             Y            Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE           N            N            Y            Y             Y            Y
 Frequency names, bin FE              N            N            Y            Y             Y            Y
 State specific lin. time trend       N            N            N            N             Y            Y

Tobit estimates. Gross investment: value of household’s real estate and slave holdings in 1850 census, gross of
debt. Husband’s/Wife’s 1840 wealth: average log slave wealth (log(# slaves ×377 + 1)) of individuals with the
same surname as the husband and wife in their respective states of births in the 1840 census. Frequency names,
bin FE : we calculate the relative prevalence of husband’s and wifes’ family names per state. We summarize
this information in 10 bins, where bin 1 includes the rarest family names, and bin 10 the most common ones.
All (continuous) independent variables are normalized by their standard deviation; reported coefficients therefore
indicate by what % gross investment changes in response to a one standard deviation increase in the right hand
side variable. All interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations from the mean. The coefficient on
Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a Married Woman Property Act on a household with
average wealth or average wealth difference. Standard errors (clustered at the state × year-of-marriage level) are
reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         36
              Table 5: Effect of Married Women’s Property Laws on 1850 Investment Mix - OLS
                                       (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)      (6)
 Dep. var.                                    log(Value Slaves) - log(Gross Investment), 1850
 Post Law                            0.116      0.116        0.101        0.101        0.131   0.132
                                    (0.108)    (0.109)      (0.103)      (0.105)     (0.134)  (0.132)
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         -0.191                  -0.171                   -0.156
 × Post Law                        (0.083)**               (0.079)**                (0.082)*
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840            -0.014                  -0.024                   -0.014
 × Post Law                         (0.076)                 (0.078)                  (0.078)
 [Husband’s log(W) - Wife’s                     -0.053                    -0.045               -0.043
 log(W), 1840] × Post Law                      (0.034)                   (0.033)              (0.034)
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         0.477      0.462         0.410       0.396        0.409   0.397
                                  (0.032)*** (0.031)*** (0.035)*** (0.034)*** (0.035)*** (0.034)***
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840             0.489     0.471         0.447       0.431        0.447   0.432
                                  (0.030)*** (0.029)*** (0.031)*** (0.030)*** (0.031)*** (0.030)***

 Adj-R2                              0.091        0.090         0.121        0.121        0.122        0.122
 Obs                                 10980        10980         10980        10980        10980        10980
 State and year-of-marriage FE         Y            Y             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Age at marriage FE                    N            N             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE            N            N             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Frequency names, bin FE               N            N             Y            Y            Y            Y
 State specific lin. time trend        N            N             N            N            Y            Y

OLS estimates. Value slaves: value of household’s slave holdings in 1850 census. Gross investment: value of
household’s real estate and slave holdings in 1850 census, gross of debt. Dependent variable only defined for
households with non-zero total investment. Husband’s/Wife’s 1840 wealth: average log slave wealth (log(# slaves
×377 + 1)) of individuals with the same surname as the husband and wife in their respective states of births in
the 1840 census. Frequency names, bin FE : we calculate the relative prevalence of husband’s and wifes’ family
names per state. We summarize this information in 10 bins, where bin 1 includes the rarest family names, and
bin 10 the most common ones. All (continuous) independent variables are normalized by their standard deviation;
reported coefficients therefore indicate by what % gross investment changes in response to a one standard deviation
increase in the right hand side variable. All interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations from the
mean. The coefficient on Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a Married Woman Property
Act on a household with average wealth or average wealth difference. Standard errors (clustered at the state ×
year-of-marriage level) are reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          37
                            Table 6: Changes in unobservable quality marital matches
                                      (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
 Dep. var                              = 1 if linked to 1850 census          = 1 if couple has a child

 Post Law                              0.011       0.011         0.012        -0.014      -0.014       -0.015
                                   (0.004)***   (0.004)***     (0.005)**    (0.006)**   (0.006)**     (0.009)*
 [Husband’s log(W) - Wife’s           -0.001       -0.000        -0.000       -0.005      -0.005       -0.005
 log(W), 1840] × Post Law            (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)*   (0.002)**    (0.002)**
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840          0.002        0.002          0.002       -0.004      -0.003       -0.003
                                   (0.001)***   (0.001)***    (0.001)***   (0.001)***   (0.001)**    (0.001)**
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840              0.002       0.002          0.002       -0.003      -0.002       -0.002
                                   (0.001)***   (0.001)***    (0.001)***    (0.001)**    (0.001)*     (0.001)*

 Adj-R2                              0.0267        0.0434      0.0436        0.0739        0.114      0.114
 Obs                                199,459       199,459      199,459       21,965       21,965      21,965
 State and year-of-marriage FE         Y             Y            Y            Y             Y          Y
 Age at marriage FE                   N/A           N/A         N/A            N             Y          Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE           N/A           N/A         N/A            N             Y          Y
 Frequency names, bin FE               N             Y            Y            N             Y          Y
 State specific lin. time trend        N             N            Y            N             N          Y


Linear probability models. The dependent variable captures if a couple was linked to the 1850 census (implying
a smaller likelihood of being separated) or if a couple, conditional on being identified in the 1850 Census, had at
least one child. Husband’s/Wife’s 1840 wealth: average log slave wealth (log(# slaves ×377 + 1)) of individuals
with the same surname as the husband and wife in their respective states of births in the 1840 census. In columns
(1)-(3), we use state of marriage since state of birth is not available for unlinked observations. Frequency names,
bin FE : we calculate the relative prevalence of husband’s and wifes’ family names per state. We summarize
this information in 10 bins, where bin 1 includes the rarest family names, and bin 10 the most common ones.
All (continuous) independent variables are normalized by their standard deviation; reported coefficients therefore
indicate teh change in probability of being linked to the 1850 census or having a child in response to a one standard
deviation increase in the right hand side variable. All interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations
from the mean. The coefficient on Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a Married Woman
Property Act on a household with average wealth or average wealth difference. Standard errors (clustered at the
state × year-of-marriage level) are reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         38
Table 7: Effect of Married Women’s Property Laws on 1850 Gross Investment - 1840 household sex composition
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
 Dep. var.                                            log(Gross Investment), 1850
                                                OLS                                  Tobit
 Post Law                           -0.028     -0.061       -0.081       0.026       -0.035     -0.155
                                   (0.107)    (0.098)      (0.120)      (0.191)     (0.174)    (0.208)
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         0.058      0.058        0.061       0.144        0.152      0.148
 × Post Law                        (0.067)    (0.069)      (0.069)      (0.112)     (0.114)    (0.116)
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840           -0.206     -0.188       -0.182       -0.359      -0.321     -0.322
 × Post Law                     (0.069)*** (0.067)*** (0.068)*** (0.120)*** (0.116)*** (0.118)***
 % Children male, 1840, wife        -0.023     -0.022       -0.022       -0.042      -0.043     -0.043
 × Wife’s log(Wealth)              (0.017)    (0.016)      (0.016)      (0.029)     (0.027)    (0.027)
    ×     × Post Law                 0.062      0.056        0.056       0.112        0.106      0.105
                                 (0.028)**   (0.031)*     (0.031)*    (0.046)**   (0.050)**   (0.050)**
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         0.521      0.390        0.390       0.806        0.568      0.568
                                (0.032)*** (0.032)*** (0.032)*** (0.058)*** (0.056)*** (0.055)***
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840            0.501      0.393        0.393       0.797        0.604      0.604
                                (0.027)*** (0.026)*** (0.026)*** (0.049)*** (0.045)*** (0.045)***
 % Children male, 1840, wife        -0.001     0.010         0.009        0.005      0.031       0.030
                                   (0.028)    (0.027)      (0.027)      (0.050)     (0.047)    (0.047)
 % Children male, 1840, wife        -0.077     -0.064       -0.062       -0.156      -0.138     -0.134
 × Post Law                       (0.046)*    (0.045)      (0.046)     (0.084)*    (0.082)*    (0.082)

 Adj-R2 / Pseudo-R2                  0.090        0.187         0.187        0.020        0.046        0.046
 Obs                                 19541        19541         19541        19541        19541        19541
 State and year-of-marriage FE         Y            Y             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Age at marriage FE                    N            Y             Y            N            Y            Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE            N            Y             Y            N            Y            Y
 Frequency names, bin FE               N            Y             Y            N            Y            Y
 State specific lin. time trend        N            N             Y            N            N            Y

Gross investment: value of household’s real estate and slave holdings in 1850 census, gross of debt. When
estimating OLS the dependent variable is log(1+ Gross investment). Husband’s/Wife’s 1840 wealth: average log
slave wealth (log(# slaves ×377 + 1)) of individuals with the same surname as the husband and wife in their
respective states of births in the 1840 census. % Children male, 1840, wife: percentage of children that are male
in households with the same surname as the wife in her state of birth in the 1840 census. Frequency names,
bin FE : we calculate the relative prevalence of husband’s and wifes’ family names per state. We summarize
this information in 10 bins, where bin 1 includes the rarest family names, and bin 10 the most common ones.
All (continuous) independent variables are normalized by their standard deviation; reported coefficients therefore
indicate by what % gross investment changes in response to a one standard deviation increase in the right hand
side variable. All interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations from the mean. The coefficient on
Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a Married Woman Property Act on a household with
                                                        39
average wealth or average wealth difference. Standard errors   (clustered at the state × year-of-marriage level) are
reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
        Table 8: Effect of Married Women’s Property Laws on 1850 Gross Investment - Exemption levels
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
 Dep. var.                                             log(Gross Investment), 1850
                                                 OLS                                 Tobit
 Post Law                            -0.015     -0.049      -0.084       0.035       -0.030     -0.186
                                    (0.105)    (0.094)     (0.114)      (0.189)     (0.170)    (0.196)
 [Husband’s log(W) - Wife’s           0.078      0.071      0.070         0.152       0.142     0.141
 log(W), 1840] × Post Law         (0.020)*** (0.020)*** (0.020)*** (0.037)*** (0.037)*** (0.037)***
 State exemption level               -0.243     -0.264      -0.297       -0.244      -0.279     -0.480
                                  (0.063)*** (0.058)*** (0.080)*** (0.095)** (0.094)*** (0.127)***
    × [Husband’s log(W)              -0.012     -0.011      -0.010       -0.023      -0.021     -0.021
 - Wife’s log(W), 1840]             (0.008)    (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.013)*    (0.012)*   (0.012)*
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840          0.518      0.387       0.387       0.804        0.567      0.566
                                  (0.031)*** (0.031)*** (0.031)*** (0.054)*** (0.054)*** (0.054)***
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840             0.473      0.371       0.371       0.754        0.572      0.572
                                  (0.028)*** (0.026)*** (0.026)*** (0.049)*** (0.045)*** (0.045)***

 Adj-R2 / Pseudo-R2                 0.090        0.186        0.186        0.020        0.046        0.046
 Obs                                19672        19672        19672        19672        19672        19672
 State and year-of-marriage FE        Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
 Age at marriage FE                   N            Y            Y            N            Y            Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE           N            Y            Y            N            Y            Y
 Frequency names, bin FE              N            Y            Y            N            Y            Y
 State specific lin. time trend       N            N            Y            N            N            Y

Gross investment: value of household’s real estate and slave holdings in 1850 census, gross of debt. When
estimating OLS the dependent variable is log(1+ Gross investment). Husband’s/Wife’s 1840 wealth: average log
slave wealth (log(# slaves ×377 + 1)) of individuals with the same surname as the husband and wife in their
respective states of births in the 1840 census. State exemption level : $ amount exempt in case of insolvency.
Frequency names, bin FE : we calculate the relative prevalence of husband’s and wifes’ family names per state. We
summarize this information in 10 bins, where bin 1 includes the rarest family names, and bin 10 the most common
ones. All (continuous) independent variables are normalized by their standard deviation; reported coefficients
therefore indicate by what % gross investment changes in response to a one standard deviation increase in the
right hand side variable. All interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations from the mean. The
coefficient on Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a Married Woman Property Act on a
household with average wealth or average wealth difference. Standard errors (clustered at the state × year-of-
marriage level) are reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         40
       Table 9: Effect of Married Women’s Property Laws on 1850 Gross Investment - Macro Conditions
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)
 Dep. var.                                             log(Gross Investment), 1850
                                                 OLS                                Tobit
 Post Law                            0.023      -0.168      -0.005      0.027       -0.311     -0.008
                                    (0.119)    (0.126)     (0.135)     (0.205)     (0.215)    (0.237)
 [Husband’s log(W) - Wife’s          0.067       0.059       0.068      0.138        0.119     0.138
 log(W), 1840] × Post Law         (0.019)*** (0.018)*** (0.019)*** (0.035)*** (0.032)*** (0.035)***
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840         0.380       0.381       0.380      0.554        0.554      0.553
                                  (0.031)*** (0.031)*** (0.031)*** (0.054)*** (0.053)*** (0.054)***
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840            0.376      0.374        0.375      0.584        0.579     0.584
                                  (0.026)*** (0.026)*** (0.026)*** (0.045)*** (0.045)*** (0.045)***

 Adj-R2 / Pseudo-R2                  0.184         0.186        0.184        0.046         0.046        0.046
 Obs                                 19372         19672        19372        19372         19672        19372
 1840 Cotton & Slave
 Intensity × Year FEs                  Y             N            Y             Y            N            Y
 Annual Cotton & Slave
 Prices × State FEs                    N             Y            Y             N            Y            Y

 State and year-of-marriage FE         Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
 Age at marriage FE                    Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE            Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
 Frequency names, bin FE               Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
 State specific lin. time trend        Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y

Gross investment: value of household’s real estate and slave holdings in 1850 census, gross of debt. When
estimating OLS the dependent variable is log(1+ Gross investment). Husband’s/Wife’s 1840 wealth: average log
slave wealth (log(# slaves ×377 + 1)) of individuals with the same surname as the husband and wife in their
respective states of births in the 1840 census. Cotton & slave prices: price per pound raw cotton; average price
per slave; from HSUS. Cotton & slave intensity: pounds of cotton picked per white population in 1840, state
level; number of slaves per white population, state level; from Haines & ICPSR Frequency names, bin FE : we
calculate the relative prevalence of husband’s and wifes’ family names per state. We summarize this information
in 10 bins, where bin 1 includes the rarest family names, and bin 10 the most common ones. All (continuous)
independent variables are normalized by their standard deviation; reported coefficients therefore indicate by what
% gross investment changes in response to a one standard deviation increase in the right hand side variable. All
interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations from the mean. Interactions with state exemption
levels are deviations from zero. The coefficient on Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a
Married Woman Property Act on a household with average wealth or average wealth difference. Standard errors
(clustered at the state × year-of-marriage level) are reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


                                                           41
A     Theory Appendix
Proof. of Proposition 1.
  The husband solves the following maximization problem:
                                 θM
                 max log c0 +       log {[α + (1 − α)R] (wM + wF − c0 ) + (1 − α)(R − 1)l}
                    l,c0          2
                     θM
                 +      log {α(wM + wF − c0 ) − (1 − α)l)} .
                      2
We first solve for the optimal level of l , which yields expression (3). Plugging this into the problem
above, and solving for c0 , we arrive at (4). Since R > 0, The equilibrium loan amount, l∗ , is always
risk free:
                                       R(2α − 1) − 2α         α
                                                          <       .
                                       2(1 − α)(R − 1)      1−α

Proof. of Lemma 2.
    The total debt payment from household to lender in the good state of the world, (1 + ρ)l, is
defined by (5). In this state of the world, the lender can only seize fraction α of the husband’s
investment, wM − c0 + l plus fraction β of the surplus that the household can generate by providing
its human capital, (1 − α)R. This implies that

                           (2 − α)l − α(wM − c0 ) ≤ [α + (1 − α)βR] [wM − c0 + l]

which yields the collateral constraint from expression (6),where we assume that

                                                2 − βR > 0

and the constraint is always well-defined. Since βR > 0, the maximum loan size is always risky:

                                         2α + (1 − α)βR     α
                                                         >     .
                                         (1 − α)(2 − βR)   1−α


Proof. of Proposition 3.
    Case 1: wM /wF < φ1 (where φ1 is given by (7)).
    In this case, the solution for c0 from (9) turns out to be larger than wM . This means that the
husband will be at the constraint and will exactly consume wM .
    Case 2: φ1 < wm /wf < φ2 (where φ2 is given by 10).
    We conjecture that the husband will always pick a risky loan, which means that he solves the
following maximization problem:
                           θM
            max c0 +          log {[α + (1 − α)R] [wM + wF − c0 + l] − (2 − α)l + α(wM − c0 )}
             l,c0           2
                θm
            +      log {αwF }
                 2
subject to (6). Since [α + (1 − α)R] > (2 − α) , the household will always borrow as much as the
collateral constraint allows. We plug in for the constraint from (6) and solve for c0 to arrive at (9).
    We note that a higher wF will lead to more current consumption c0 , as 1−β > 0 and 2−βR > 0
by assumption.

                                                    42
   Case 3: wM /wF > φ2 .
   We conjecture that the husband contracts a loan that is risk-free. This means that the maxi-
mization problem is identical to the one in Proposition 1:
                                 θM
                  max log c0 +      log {[α + (1 − α)R] (wM + wF − c0 ) + (1 − α)(R − 1)l}
                   l,c0           2
                      θM
                  +      log {α(wM + wF − c0 ) − (1 − α)l)} ,
                       2
but subject to the constraint that the loan is risk-free:
                                                 α
                                           l≤       (wM − c0 ) .
                                                1−α
A solution to this problem exists iff

                          R(2α − 1) − 2α                     α
                                          (wM + wF − c0 ) <     (wM − c0 ) ;
                          2(1 − α)(R − 1)                   1−α
                                                 wM /wF > φ2 ,

where φ2 is defined by (10).
   It is straightforward to show that φ2 > φ1 and that the set of wM /wF for which the husband
contracts risky debt is non-empty. This is true iff

                                      2 [1 − β] α(R − 1) > (2 − βR)R.
                                                                   e

The assumption from (1) guarantees that

                                                α(R − 1) > R.
                                                           e

Furthermore,
                                           2 [1 − β] > (2 − βR)
iff
                                                   R > 2.
This must be true in order for the risky project to have a positive expected return.
Proof. of Lemma 4. Combining expressions (4) and (9), we arrive at

                                θM               (2 + θM )(1 − β)R − (1 + θM )(2 − βR)R
                                                                                      e
            c∗0 − c0 = −                    wM +                                        wF .
                         (1 + θM )(2 + θM )            (1 + θM )(2 + θM )(1 − β)R
                        |        {z       }      |                 {z                  }
                                 δ1                                 δ2

To show that c∗0 − c0 > 0 we proceed as follows: we first show that δ2 > 0, we then show that the
values of wM /wF for which c∗0 − c0 ≤ 0 lie to the right of φ2 , i.e δ2 /δ1 > φ2 .

      1. δ2 > 0
        This follows simply from the fact that assumption (1) guarantees that 2 (1 − β) > (2 − βR)
        and R/2 > R.e




                                                     43
       δ2
  2.   δ1   > φ2
       From (10), we know that for this to hold we need that

               (2 + θM )(1 − β)R − (1 + θM )(2 − βR)R
                                                    e
                                                      > 2α (R − 1) + θM [R (2α − 1) − 2α] .
                                1−β
       After some rearranging, one can show that this will hold as long as

                                              2(1 − β) > 2 − βR,

       which will always be the case as long as assumption (1) is in place.


Proof. of Lemma 5.

  1. Loan size.
       The difference between l and l∗ is given by:
                                                                      
                               θm     2α + (1 − α)βR    R(2α − 1) − 2α
                  l − l∗ =                           −                  wM
                             1 − α (2 + θm )(2 − βR) 2(1 + θm )(R − 1)
                                   |                 {z                }
                                                              γ1
                                       (                                          )
                                  1      e [2α + (1 − α)βR] θm [R(2α − 1) − 2α]
                                         R
                               −                             +                      wF .
                                 1−α     (2 + θm ) (1 − β) R    2(1 + θm )(R − 1)
                                       |                     {z                   }
                                                                   γ2

       Because γ2 > 0, the difference in loan size is strictly decreasing in wF . If γ1 > 0, then the loan
       difference is strictly increasing in wM . Together, this implies that the difference in loan size
       is strictly increasing in wM /wF , which implies that the difference in loan size is increasing in
       the fraction of total family assets owned by the husband. We now prove that γ1 > 0.
       First, notice that, because 2 + θM > 1 + θM , the following must hold:
                                                                                                        !
             2α + (1 − α)βR    R(2α − 1) − 2α        1              2α + (1 − α)βR R(2α − 1) − 2α
       γ1 >                  −                  =                                 −
            (2 + θm )(2 − βR) 2(2 + θm )(R − 1)   2 + θM               (2 − βR)       2(R − 1)

       After some algebra, this inequality simplifies to:
                                                                        !
                                           1        βR(R − 2) + 2R
                                   γ1 >                                     >0
                                        2 + θM     2(2 − βR)(R − 1)

  2. Investment.
       The difference between y and y ∗ simplifies to:
                                                                   
                            1           2θM            θM (R − 2)
             y − y∗ =                                −                wM
                          1 − α (2 + θm )(2 − βR) 2(1 + θm )(R − 1)
                               |                    {z              }
                                                         ζ1
                                   (                                                    )
                              1      (2 + θM )(1 − α)(1 − β)R − 2Re       θm (R − 2)
                           +                                        −                     wF .
                             1−α           (2 + θm ) (1 − β) R        2(1 + θm )(R − 1)
                                   |                           {z                       }
                                                                   ζ2


                                                    44
     Then, by the chain rule for partial derivatives

                                    ∂ (y − y ∗ )
                                                                  
                                                    wF          wF
                                                 =      ζ1 − ζ2      ;
                                    ∂(wM /wF )     1−α          wM

     for the derivative to be positive we need that
                                                wM  ζ2
                                                   > .                                          (14)
                                                wF  ζ1
     It turns out that ζ2 /ζ1 < φ1 and condition (14) never binds for φ1 < wM /wF < φ2 . To see
     this, start with the expressions for ζ1 and ζ2 ; after some straightforward algebra we arrive at

       ζ2      (2 + θM )(1 − β)R {2(1 − α)(R − 1) − θM [R(2α − 1) − 2α]} − 4(1 + θM )(R − 1)R
                                                                                            e
          = φ1                                                                                ,
       ζ1                      4(1 + θM )(R − 1)R
                                                e − (2 + θM )(2 − βR)(R − 2)Re

     which indicates that ζ2 /ζ1 < φ1 iff
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                      
          (1 + θM ) 8(R − 1)R   e − (2 − βR)(R − 2)R
                                                   e + (1 − β)R θM [R(2α − 1) − 2α] − 2(1 − α)(R − 1)
                                                                   |      {z      }                   
                                                                          >0
                                                                              

       > (2 − βR)(R − 2)R
                        e + (1 − β)R 2(1 − α)(R − 1) − θM [R(2α − 1) − 2α] ,
                                                           |      {z      }
                                                                          >0

     which is most restrictive when θM = 0. This means that the condition is satisfied when
                      e [4(R − 1) − (2 − βR)(R − 2)] > 2(1 − α)(R − 1)(1 − β)R.
                      R

     This always holds, since
                                       e > (1 − α)(R − 1) = R
                                       R                    e − 1,

     and

                                4(R − 1)   >   2(1 − βR) + (2 − βR)(R − 2)
                                           ⇔ βR2 > 0.




B    Data Appendix

1850 Census

We use the full count 1850 Federal Census from the North Atlantic Population Project (NAPP).
This dataset is largely clean; however, the 1850 census does no identify married couples, so we need
to assign marital status to individuals based on their placement in the household. We use a rule
that is very similar to the rule that IPUMS uses: we define a married couple to be a man (15+) and
a woman (13+) with the same surname, entered adjacent to one another in the census manuscript,

                                                 45
with the man no more than 25 years older or less than 10 years younger than the woman. We also
eliminate potential siblings, defined as being part of descending list of similarly aged individuals
with the same surname. We test our assignment rule by verifying that it broadly assigns the same
marital status to couples in the 1850 1% samples as the IPUMS procedure: our procedure and
the IPUMS procedure assign the same marital status to 97% of southern women in the 1850 1%
sample.
   We then link the 1850 population census to the 1850 slave schedules, which come from the
genealogical website familysearch.org (Baker and Salisbury 2015). The slave schedules contain
information on the name of the slave owner and the county of residence. We match the 1850 slave
schedules to the population census by county of residence (since the slave census and population
census were taken at the same time) and first surname initial. We then evaluate the similarity of
potential matches – both first and last names– using the Jaro-Winkler algorithm (Ruggles et al
2010), and we define a string as “matched” if it scores 0.9 (out of 1) or higher. We break ties in
favor of exact surname matches, head of household status, and gender (if only the first initial of
the first name is given in the slave schedules). We define a household as having zero slave wealth if
they do not match to anyone in the 1850 slave schedules, and we assign slaveholdings from the 1850
slave schedules to all households that uniquely match to the slave schedules. In about 25% of cases,
we are unable to determine the slaveowner status of a household – because of multiple matches
that cannot be refined using our algorithm – so these households drop from our core sample. To
test that our results are not biased by error in linkages between the population census and the
slave schedules, we estimate a version of our model using real estate wealth alone; these results
are presented in tables A4 and A5. We plot the distributions of our 1850 investment measures in
Figure A2.


Marriage Records

We obtain a list of marriages contracted in 9 southern states from the genealogical website fam-
ilysearch.org. These records are available for a subset of counties; details about the coverage of
these records are given in table A3. These records give us information about the bride’s full name,
the groom’s full name, the county of marriage, and the date of marriage. We link these records
to the census of 1850 by groom’s first name, groom’s last name, and bride’s last name. We drop
observations in which only the groom’s or bride’s first initial is provided, as we feel this provides
insufficient information to make quality links.


                                                  46
   We first merge our marriage records with the 1850 census by: (1) Groom’s first initial; (2)
Bride’s first initial; (3) NYSIIS code for groom’s surname (Atack and Bateman 1992). Because we
only have information on names with which to narrow our list of potential matches, it is necessary
to impose some filter prior to evaluating the similarity of our matches. We then calculate a measure
of string similarity between names in our marriage records and names in the census using the Jaro-
Winkler algorithm. We define two strings as “matched” if they score 0.8 (out of 1) or higher, or if
only a first initial is recorded in the census and first initials match. We keep unique matches only,
and then we drop matches with only first initials reported in the census. We are aiming for accuracy
at the expense of sample size. This procedure yields numerous multiple matches – see table A1 for
details. So, we narrow down our matches using information on implied ages at marriage, using the
procedure described in the main body of the text. Evidence on the accuracy of our unique matches
can be found in table A2 and figure A1.


1840 Census

We compute a measure of “familial assets” by averaging log slave wealth by state and surname,
and we link this to our matched sample by state of birth and surname (using the maiden name
from marriage records for women). So, the pre-marital wealth of person i with surname j who was
born in state s will be:
                                                        Kj,s
                                                    1 X
                                       ŵi,j,s   =           wk,j,s
                                                   Kj,s
                                                          k=1

Here, Kj,s is the number of households in state s headed by someone with the surname j. We
match the spelling of surnames exactly. We are able to obtain an estimate of pre-marital wealth for
76% of our linked sample, among couples in which both the husband and wife are southern born.
   One thing to point out is that the distribution of ŵi,j,s depends on Kj,s , with more common
names having a more compressed distribution than uncommon names. In our linked sample, ŵi,j,s
among surnames occurring only has a mean of 2.8 and a standard deviation of 3.7; conversely,
ŵi,j,s among surnames occuring 2-100 times has a mean of 2.8 and a standard deviation of only 1.9.
Among names occurring 100 times or more, ŵi,j,s has a mean of 2.7 and a standard deviation of
0.75. The median man in the sample has a name occurring 15 times, while the median woman in
the sample has a name occurring 28 times. This difference is due to the fact that we are performing
links using men’s surnames, which biases us against finding men with common surnames.
   Given these distributional features of our measure of wealth, it is worth mentioning some of


                                                     47
its properties. Suppose there is no linkage error. So, if we observe person i with surname j from
state s, we assume that this person’s family is one of the Kj,s households used to compute ŵi,j,s .
Suppose also that there is error in the measurement of “true” log wealth (w∗ ), so that measured
wealth (w) is given by:
                                               w = w∗ + 

First, notice that our wealth measure is “unbiased” in the sense that it does not differ systematically
from wi∗ :
                                 E[wi∗ − ŵi,j,k ] = E[w∗ ] − E[w∗ ] = 0

We also derive the expected squared deviation of wi∗ from ŵi,j,k , which captures the variance of
our wealth measure, and is a function of Kj,s and other unknown parameters. Suppose that the
variance of  is σ2 , and the variance of w∗ for state s and surname j is σj,s
                                                                            2 . Further, suppose that

                   ∗
the covariance of wi,j,s      ∗
                         and wk,j,s is ρj,s , for any i, k. Then, it can be shown that:

                                                          Kj,s − 1 2
                             E[wi∗ − ŵi,j,k ]2 = σ2 +           (σj,s − ρj,s )
                                                           Kj,s

After some algebra, this follows from the assumption that  is IID with mean zero, and that wi,j,s is
one of the Kj,s observations used to compute ŵi,j,k . Intuitively, this is increasing in the variance of
the measurement error term, increasing in the dispersion of w∗ within surname-state groups, and
decreasing in the covariance of w∗ within surname-state groups.
    Given that we have no information about these parameters, it is difficult for us to address
this empirically. However, notice also that the overall variance of measurement error is increasing
in Kj,s . This is because, as Kj,s increases, ŵi,j,s starts to converge to the median w. So, the
expected squared deviation of w∗ from ŵi,j,s starts to grow. We can address this by overweighting
observations with less common names. Specifically, we compute the following weight for men from
state s with surname j and women from state t with surname k:

                                                   !−1/2                    !−1/2
                                        Kj,s − 1                 Kk,t − 1
                          λjs,kt =   1+                       1+
                                         Kj,s                     Kk,t

This is an attempt at weighting by the inverse of the geometric mean of the variance of measurement
error associated with the husband’s and wife’s wealth. We show these results in tables A4 and A5.
We also test the sensitivity of our results to dropping households with husbands and wives who have



                                                    48
common names. In figure A3, we plot the OLS coefficient on LAWs,t × [log Wi,1840 − log Wj,1840 ]
obtained by estimating our preferred specification (column (6) of table 3, omitting households in
which the husband or wife has a name occurring more than a certain threshold of times. The
threshold varies from 3 to 100; we have fewer than 500 observations in which both the husband
and wife have a name occurring only once or twice. Our estimate does not appear to be sensitive
to omitting frequently occurring names; however, when we restrict the sample to names occurring
fewer than 8 times, our sample shrinks to fewer than 2,000 observations, so our estimate becomes
quite volatile.




                                               49
       C     Additional Tables and Figures


                                        Figure A1: Accuracy of Matches




Figure 2: Accuracy matches. This figure evaluates the accuracy of our matches using the implied age at
marriage.
       Note:The
              Thisleft panels
                    figure      present
                           evaluates the distributions
                                         accuracy of ourofmatches
                                                           the age-at-marriage    of age
                                                                   using the implied husbands   and wifes
                                                                                         at marriage.      in our matched
                                                                                                      The left
sample panels
        who got    married
              present         in 1840 ofand
                        distributions     the1849.   The rightofpanels
                                              age-at-marriage            present
                                                                  husbands       ages-at-marriage
                                                                            and wifes in our matchedforsample
                                                                                                        randomly matched
       who  got married   in 1840 and 1849.  The  right panels present ages-at-marriage
persons in the 1850 census, assuming they were either married in 1840 or 1849.          for randomly  matched
       persons in the 1850 census, assuming they were either married in 1840 or 1849.




                                                            30



                                                       50
                              Figure A2: Distributions of Wealth Variables


                  Log 1840 Slave Wealth                                           Log 1840 (Wi/Wj)
     .6




                                                                 .4
                                                             .1 .2 .3
     .4
Density




                                                               Density
.2   0




                                                                 0
             −2      0            2         4           6                −5                  0                   5
                             Log 1840 W                                              Log 1840 (Wi/Wj)

                         Groom                  Bride                             Before law             After law



                    Log 1850 Wealth                                      Log of % 1850 Wealth in Slaves
     .4




                                                                 .3
        .3




                                                                    .2
Density




                                                              Density
  .2




                                                             .1
     .1
     0




                                                                 0




             0           5             10               15                 −10                −5                 0
                             Log 1850 W                                          Log of % 1850 W in slaves

                                                                                                                     ®




                                                        51
                             Figure A3: Sensitivity to Omitting Common Names




                                                                                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
           .3
           .2




                                                                                                 Sample size (thousands)
      Coefficient
           0.1
           −.1




                    0   10      20     30   40     50    60     70    80       90   100
                                     Maximum name frequency threshold

                             Coeff. on post law X log(Wm/Wf)             Sample size

                                                                                                                                  ®




Note: Plots the OLS coefficient on LAWs,t ×[log Wi,1840 −log Wj,1840 ], and 95% confidence intervals,
using the specification from column (6) in table 3. At each point, the coefficient and confidence
interval are estimated under the restriction that neither the husband or wife has a name occurring
more than the threshold indicated on the horizontal axis. The sample size associated with each
sample restriction is also plotted.




                                                   52
              Figure A4: Kaplan-Meier Survival Estimates – Passage of New Laws


                                                                      By Cotton Intensity


                   0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00




                                                                  Below average          Above average
                                     .14
                 Raw Cotton Price, $
                   .08   .1    .12            .06




                                                    1836   1841                   1846             1851   1856
                                                                                  Year

                                                                                                                 ®




                                                                      By Slave Intensity
                 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00




                                                                  Below average          Above average
                300 400 500 600 700
                  Average Slave Price, $




                                                    1836   1841                   1846             1851   1856
                                                                                  Year

                                                                                                                 ®




Note: Cotton intensity is defined as the ratio of pounds of cotton picked in 1840 to the white
population, at the state level (Haines & ICPSR 2010). Slave intensity is the ratio of slaves to
whites in 1840, at the state level ((Haines & ICPSR 2010). Cotton and slave prices are taken from
the Historical Statistics of the United States (Carter et al 2006). Sample includes all southern
states (adding Maryland and South Carolina to the base sample). Kaplan-Meier survival estimates
represent the probability of note having passed a property law in each year, subdivided by cotton
and slave intensity.

                                                                             53
                   Table A1: Rates of Matching to 1850 Census by State
                 % at least 1 match % at least 1 full % unique match     % matched     Total number
                  to census (incl.   first name match     to census       using age     of marriage
                  on first initials)      to census                      information      records
Alabama                 0.585               0.487           0.176            0.236         23,843
Arkansas                0.534               0.445           0.167            0.218          5,846
Florida                 0.525               0.455           0.162            0.197          2,378
Georgia                 0.614               0.518           0.196            0.256         27,689
Kentucky                0.558               0.476           0.171            0.216         43,584
Louisiana               0.288               0.219           0.067            0.086          6,140
Mississippi             0.636               0.527           0.210            0.286         10,635
North Carolina          0.569               0.496           0.222            0.266         23,050
Tennessee               0.308               0.243           0.089            0.120         81,380
Texas                   0.493               0.378           0.139            0.215          6,502
Virginia                0.618               0.562           0.243            0.283         26,813

Total                  0.489              0.411            0.158            0.203        257,860



                           Table A2: Accuracy of Matched Data
                  Prob. living in state   Prob. husband born in state    Prob. wife born in state
                 Married in All southern Married in     All southern     Married in All southern
                   state       couples       state        couples          state       couples
Alabama            0.726         0.074       0.224          0.022          0.380        0.034
Arkansas           0.795         0.029       0.116          0.002          0.181        0.004
Florida            0.801         0.008       0.096          0.001          0.225        0.002
Georgia            0.800         0.091       0.572          0.078          0.681        0.088
Kentucky           0.865         0.137       0.637          0.090          0.731        0.101
Louisiana          0.794         0.044       0.515          0.015          0.583        0.019
Mississippi        0.770         0.052       0.203          0.009          0.310        0.014
North Carolina     0.831         0.098       0.806          0.169          0.831        0.152
Tennessee          0.781         0.132       0.554          0.102          0.646        0.117
Texas              0.820         0.028       0.030          0.001          0.074        0.002
Virginia           0.890         0.160       0.833          0.194          0.861        0.180




                                           54
                    Table A3: Coverage of 1840 Marriage Record Data
                                      % counties with     % Population living in
State            # Marriage records marriage record data counties with marriage
                                                               record data
Alabama               27,934                0.67                   0.75
Arkansas               7,186                0.49                   0.56
Georgia               32,756                0.74                   0.78
Kentucky              50,507                0.64                   0.71
Louisiana             5,277                 0.19                   0.37
Mississippi           12,838                0.47                   0.65
North Carolina        27,564                0.73                   0.76
Tennessee             95,371                0.65                   0.72
Virginia              31,292                0.48                   0.54




                                           55
                         Table A4: Additional Robustness Tests – OLS
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)
 Dep. var.                                         log(Gross investment), 1850
 Post Law                          -0.108       -0.123        -0.083       -0.078            -0.078
                                  (0.104)      (0.088)       (0.115)      (0.116)           (0.115)
 [Husband’s log(W) - Wife’s         0.040        0.053        0.052         0.059             0.059
 log(W), 1840] × Post Law        (0.019)** (0.019)*** (0.019)*** (0.024)**                 (0.024)**
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840        0.273       0.369          0.368       0.382             0.382
                                (0.020)*** (0.028)*** (0.031)*** (0.027)***               (0.027)***
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840           0.240       0.327          0.356       0.376             0.376
                                (0.022)*** (0.024)*** (0.027)*** (0.027)***               (0.028)***

 Adj-R2                               0.149         0.180        0.186         0.186        0.186
 Obs                                  27090         24933        19672         19672        19672
 State and year-of-marriage FE          Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
 Age at marriage FE                     Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE             Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
 Frequency names, bin FE                Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
 State specific lin. time trend         Y             Y            Y             Y            Y

Gross investment: value of household’s real estate and slave holdings in 1850 census, gross of debt.
When estimating OLS the dependent variable is log(1+ Gross investment). Husband’s/Wife’s 1840
wealth: average log slave wealth (log(# slaves ×377 + 1)) of individuals with the same surname as
the husband and wife in their respective states of births in the 1840 census. State exemption level : $
amount exempt in case of insolvency. Frequency names, bin FE : we calculate the relative prevalence
of husband’s and wifes’ family names per state. We summarize this information in 10 bins, where bin
1 includes the rarest family names, and bin 10 the most common ones. All (continuous) independent
variables are normalized by their standard deviation; reported coefficients therefore indicate by what
% gross investment changes in response to a one standard deviation increase in the right hand side
variable. All interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations from the mean. The
coefficient on Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a Married Woman Property
Act on a household with average wealth or average wealth difference. Sample Restrictions: Column
(1) defines gross investment as real estate assets only, relaxing the constraint the observations be
linkable to the 1850 slave schedules. Column (2) relaxes the constraint that couples be resident
in their state of marriage in 1850, and adds state of residence fixed effects. Column (3) weights
the regression by λjs,kt , as defined in appendix B. Column (4) clusters standard errors by groom’s
surname. Column (5) clusters standard errors by bride’s maiden name. Standard errors (default
clustering at the state × year-of-marriage level) are reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.




                                                  56
                        Table A5: Additional Robustness Tests – Tobit
                                     (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)               (5)
 Dep. var.                                        log(Gross investment), 1850
 Post Law                          -0.219      -0.216        -0.187       -0.171             -0.171
                                  (0.190)     (0.159)       (0.612)      (0.216)            (0.214)
 [Husband’s log(W) - Wife’s         0.086       0.105        0.107         0.119              0.119
 log(W), 1840] × Post Law        (0.035)** (0.033)*** (0.054)** (0.041)***                (0.041)***
 Husband’s log(Wealth), 1840        0.431      0.539          0.527       0.556              0.556
                                (0.040)*** (0.048)*** (0.082)*** (0.045)***               (0.044)***
 Wife’s log(Wealth), 1840           0.398      0.503          0.542       0.580              0.580
                                (0.042)*** (0.040)*** (0.074)*** (0.045)***               (0.046)***

 Pseudo-R2                            27090         24933        19672         19672        19672
 Obs                                  0.038         0.044        0.046         0.046        0.046
 State and year-of-marriage FE          Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
 Age at marriage FE                     Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
 Birthstate and literacy FE             Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
 Frequency names, bin FE                Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
 State specific lin. time trend         Y             Y            Y             Y            Y

Gross investment: value of household’s real estate and slave holdings in 1850 census, gross of debt.
When estimating OLS the dependent variable is log(1+ Gross investment). Husband’s/Wife’s 1840
wealth: average log slave wealth (log(# slaves ×377 + 1)) of individuals with the same surname as
the husband and wife in their respective states of births in the 1840 census. State exemption level : $
amount exempt in case of insolvency. Frequency names, bin FE : we calculate the relative prevalence
of husband’s and wifes’ family names per state. We summarize this information in 10 bins, where
bin 1 includes the rarest family names, and bin 10 the most common ones. All (continuous)
independent variables are normalized by their standard deviation; reported coefficients therefore
indicate by what % gross investment changes in response to a one standard deviation increase in
the right hand side variable. All interactions with the 1840 wealth variables are in deviations from
the mean. The coefficient on Post Law therefore measures the effect of the passage of a Married
Woman Property Act on a household with average wealth or average wealth difference. Sample
Restrictions: Column (1) defines gross investment as real estate assets only, relaxing the constraint
the observations be linkable to the 1850 slave schedules. Column (2) relaxes the constraint that
couples be resident in their state of marriage in 1850, and adds state of residence fixed effects.
Column (3) weights the regression by λjs,kt , as defined in appendix B. Column (4) clusters standard
errors by groom’s surname-state of birth. Column (5) clusters standard errors by bride’s maiden
name-state of birth. Standard errors (default clustering at the state × year-of-marriage level) are
reported in parantheses: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  57
