                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      JAPANIZATION: IS IT ENDEMIC OR EPIDEMIC?

                                           Takatoshi Ito

                                       Working Paper 21954
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21954


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2016




The earlier draft of this paper was written for 2015 KDI/EWC Conference on “JAPANIZATION:
Causes and Remedies” organized by the East-West Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, 10–11 August 2015.
Comments by Professor Barry Eichengreen, Dongchul Cho, Andrew Mason and other participants
of the conference are highly appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Takatoshi Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Japanization: Is it Endemic or Epidemic?
Takatoshi Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 21954
February 2016
JEL No. E43,E44,E52,E58,E61,E62,F31

                                                ABSTRACT

Japanization is defined as a combinations of the following economic conditions: (1) the actual growth
rate is lower than the potential growth rate for an extended period; (2) the natural real interest rate
is below zero and also below the actual real interest rate; (3) the nominal (policy) interest rate is zero;
(4) deflation, i.e., negative inflation rate. As a summary measure for these conditions, the Japanization
index, the sum of proxy for GDP gap, inflation rate and the nominal interest rate, is proposed. The
growth rate, the inflation rate and the nominal and real interest rate has been declining since 1990.
Since 2009, major advanced countries have shared conditions (1)-(3). Only Japan has experienced
a prolonged period of (4) deflation. A closer examination of how Japan got into the Japanization state
reveals that it is a combination of (a) a hard-landing of the 1990-92 bubble; (b) not dealing with non-performing
loans problem promptly and decisively, resulting in a major banking crisis; (c) the absence of a soft
landing after the banking crisis; (d) the lack of quantitative easing policies when deflation first occurred;
(e) the absence of an inflation target; and (f) the absence of timely, large scale fiscal stimulus. The
fact that Abenomics—a mix of aggressive monetary policy, combined with a 2% inflation target and
fiscal stimulus—in lifting the economy out of deflation shows it is possible to prevent or cure Japanization.


Takatoshi Ito
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
International Affairs Building
Room 927, (MC 3333)
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ti2164@columbia.edu
                       Japanization: Is it Endemic or Epidemic?
                                      Takatoshi Ito


“Turning Japanese; I think I'm turning Japanese; I really think so”
                                     From “Turning Japanese” by The Vapors, 1980.


“[Japan] was suffering from seemingly endless stagnation and deflation. And Western
economists were scathing in their criticisms of Japanese policy. …And these days, I
often find myself thinking that we ought to apologize. …the West has, in fact, fallen into
a slump similar to Japan’s — but worse.” – From “Apologizing to Japan,” Krugman
(2014)


1. Introduction
The Japanese experience of the “lost two decades” (1992-2012), accompanied by
deflation (1998-2012), showed that an advanced country could fall into a prolonged
period of stagnation and deflation. Japan’s nominal GDP peaked at 523 trillion yen in
1997 and then declined to 471 trillion yen in 2009, before recovering to 488 trillion yen
in 2014, which is still the level in 1992. The absolute stagnation in nominal GDP, a
combination of slow growth (in real GDP) and a sustained deflation (in GDP deflator) is
unprecedented among advanced countries in the post-WW II history.


It is said that Japanese deflation was the first since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
During the Great Depression, the growth rate became negative and a sharp drop in
prices were observed in the United States, but the sharp decline in activities and prices
lasted only a few years. In Japan, the stagnation and deflation has continued for more
than a decade, although their magnitudes have been less than those in the Great
Depression.


The main tool of the conventional monetary, the interest rate, was used to combat
declining activities and inflation in the early to mid-1990s. With an eruption of a
banking crisis of 1997-98, economic activities shrank significantly. The policy interest
rate in Japan became zero in 1999. This was beginning of the zero interest rate policy
(ZIRP), which has continued until now except several months in 1990-91 and 2006-08.
Since the nominal interest rate has a floor (the nominal zero bound), the Bank of Japan
has argued that monetary policy cannot help the economy, once the policy rate is


                                            2
lowered to zero. The Bank of Japan’s quantitative easing was first introduced in 2001
and maintained until 2006. Fiscal stimulus has been repeatedly applied. Yet, the
economy fell into and remained in stagnation and deflation.


Before the global financial crisis of 2008-09, the Japanese experience of stagnation and
deflation was viewed as unique to Japan. Several hypotheses were put forward why
Japan fell into a deflationary state. Popular explanations include an asset price bubble,
the second half of the 1980s, and its burst in the 1990s. Procrastination in dealing with
non-performing loans made the problem much bigger and imposed stress on the
Japanese banking system. Loans to problematic, insolvent companies (zombies) were
extended, which was called “evergreening,” without clear corporate rehabilitation plans.
The evergreening crowded out possible new loans to healthy companies, thus delaying
recovery. (See Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap (2008).) Much of stagnation in the 1990s
can be explained by the bubble burst and a series of policies that prolonged
nonperforming loans problem.


Other factors that are regarded relevant to stagnation include monetary policy, not
bringing the interest rate down to zero early in the near deflation stage and raising the
interest rate (ending ZIRP) while the inflation rate was still negative; and fiscal policy
contraction, including hiking the consumption tax rate in April 1997. However, the view
that Japanese deflation and stagnation was a unique endemic case, whatever reasons
were, came to be questioned later.


During the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008-09, the United States came close to a
meltdown of the financial system. It could have severe stagnation and deflation. A
decisive action by the Federal Reserve, led by Chair Bernanke, is often credited to have
prevented the US economy from falling into deflation. However, growth remained
stagnant and the inflation rate remained below the target for several years. The policy
rate became virtually zero in the fourth quarter of 2008 and so remained until the end
of 2015.


In the wake of GFC, the European economies, plagued with a twin crises of a banking
crisis and a sovereign debt crisis, experienced weak activities and declining prices (in
some of the Euro zone countries). Several banks were closed in a few months following
the collapse of Lehman Brothers. The Greek sovereign debt crisis erupted in 2010, and
it affected other Euro zone countries, such as Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Ireland.


                                            3
Economic activities remained weak and possible deflation became a concern. In
response, both the FRB and ECB lowered the interest rate to near zero, and expanded
their balance sheets. Quantitative easing was adopted in the US and Euro zone. By
early 2013, many policy makers and economists in the US and Europe started to
express concerns about possible deflation, as their economic performances started to
look like Japan of a decade earlier.2 The Japanese-style stagnation became a case of
epidemic, that is, economies with similar symptoms became widespread in the US and
Europe.


Then, signs of Japanization also started to show among some of the emerging market
(EM) economies. Traditionally emerging market economies enjoy high growth rate,
accompanied by high inflation rate and high nominal interest rates. The EM growth
rate higher than advanced countries are explained by growth convergence from a
low-income high-growth state to a high-income, low-growth state. The EM inflation rate
higher than advanced countries can be explained by the productivity increase
differential between tradable manufacturing sectors and non-tradable sectors. With a
relatively stable exchange rate, the inflation rate differential amounts to the real
exchange rate appreciation.3 However, as the advanced countries struggled to recover
from the GFC, the slow growth and low inflation rate hit EM economies. Although
deflation has not happened and the policy interest rate is still considerably above zero,
the directions of the change is downward. Further negative shocks like slowdown of the
Chinese economy, if sustained, may drive the inflation rate of some of its trading
partners into the negative territory.


The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 defines Japanization. Section 3
presents data that compare the growth rate, the inflation rate, and the interest rates of
Japan, US and Europe. Section 4 reviews what really caused Japan’s stagnation and
deflation by explaining events and policy actions chronologically. Section 5 reviews
economic policies taken by Prime Minister Abe in 2012-2015 in an attempt to lift the
economy out of deflation. Section 6 discusses what we can learn from the Japan’s
experiences. Section 7 discusses the role of demography in Japanization. Section 8
concludes.

2 Kawai and Morgan (2013) is one of the early papers that have “Japanization” in paper
title.
3 The real exchange rate appreciation of EM economies is often called the

Balassa-Samuelson effect.

                                           4
2. Japanization
2.1. Definition
The economic conditions that are referred to as “Japanization” have several aspects. No
consensus has emerged on a precise definition.4 The following list of stylized facts
constitute a phenomenon that is called “Japanization.”


(1) Stagnant growth: g < g*
The first characteristic is a sustained period of stagnation, that is, the actual growth
rate, g, being below the potential growth rate, g*. Since this condition amounts to a lack
of aggregate demand, there can be explained by familiar stories along the line of
Keynesian economics. Private sectors suffer some negative shocks, external or internal,
and policy responses were either too little or too late. Monetary and fiscal policies being
too tight certainly contribute to the lack of aggregate demand. However, this condition
itself is indistinguishable from a cyclical recession.


(2) Secular stagnation: rn<0 and rn < r
The third characteristic is to explain a prolonged period of stagnant growth, namely
“secular stagnation.” The phrase was first coined by Hansen (1939) and reinvented by
Summers (2013, 2014). See also Bernanke (2015) and Eichengreen (2015) for the
possible cause of secular stagnation. The “secular” happens because aggregate demand
is always below aggregate supply, due to too high real interest rate. When the actual
real interest remains higher than the natural real rate of interest, stagnation cannot be
overcome easily. Secular stagnation can be defined as the natural real rate of interest
becomes negative, while the actual rate stays above the natural rate. (See Eggertsson
and Mehrotra (2014) for a formal modeling.).


(3) Nominal Zero bound: i=0
The fourth characteristic is that the policy rate, i, is lowered to and stuck at (near) zero.
When stagnation continues, the central bank lower the interest rate. Since the nominal
interest rate cannot be (significantly) below zero, this is the maximum easing the
central bank can do with the conventional monetary policy tool. The zero interest rate
policy (ZIRP) was introduced in Japan first in 1999. After the global financial crisis
began to deepen, in the wake of the collapse of the Lehman Brothers in 2008, ZIRP


4 See a monograph by Pesek (2014) and a chapter by Kawai and Morgan (2013) for
earlier contributions to analyze “Japanization,” in Rhee and Posen (2013).

                                              5
spread to the rest of G7 countries. As of end-2015, the ZIRP still is in place in Japan, the
US, and most European countries. The fact that monetary policy of the advanced world
has been stuck at around the ZIRP seems to show that the conventional tool alone
cannot lift the economy out of secular stagnation.


The interest rates of EM countries have a downward trend, but they have not reached
zero yet. The global environment of the low interest rate and low growth rate affects
monetary policy of the EM. In order keep growth to recover, the EM countries have been
lowering the policy interest rate since mid-2013, the interest rate is still well above zero.


(4) Deflation (π < 0 < π*).
The last piece of Japanization is deflation. Japanese price levels (measured by CPI, CPI
without food and energy, or GDP deflator) have been declining since 1998. The
magnitude of deflation has been rather small, at least compared to those in the Great
Depression in the 1930s.


Combining characteristics (4) and (5), the real interest rate, that is the nominal interest
rate minus the inflation rate, has to be positive. If the natural rate is the negative, as
described in characteristic (2), the actual real interest rate is indefinitely above the
natural rate. Thus this creates and secular stagnation. Table 1 shows the taxonomy
around the secular stagnation and Japanization.


                                   <Table 1> about here


Japanization is a state of the economy that satisfies all of the above, (1)-(4). It is a
chronic state of underperforming, deflationary economy, and there is no conventional
monetary policy to stimulate the demand. The economy can be caught in a deflationary
trap.


When the economy is falling into a long stagnation, the inflation rate falls. In response
to widening GDP gap and the inflation rate being less than the target rate, the nominal
policy rate is likely to be cut at the speed faster than that of the inflation rate. Thus the
real interest rate tends to decline as the inflation rate declines. However, the positive
correlation between the inflation rate and the real interest rate is reversed once the
nominal interest rate hit the zero bound. The nominal rate is stuck at zero, while the
inflation rate may continue to fall and there is no lower bound for the inflation rate.


                                             6
When the inflation rate becomes negative and continues to fall, the real interest rate
becomes positive and rising. It is important to understand that the correlation between
the inflation rate and the real interest rate will be reversed when the nominal interest
rate is stuck at zero, and there is no conventional monetary policy can do to help the
economy to escape the deflation trap. This relationship between the inflation rate and
the real interest rate before and after the nominal interest rate becoming zero is
illustrated in Figure 1. The state of Japanization is in the region where the nominal
interest rate hit zero and the inflation rate is negative.


                                  <Figure 1 about here>


2.2. Turning Japanese
As mentioned in Introduction, Japanization first occurred in Japan but its
characteristics are more often observed now in the rest of the world. In fact, with closer
examinations in the next section, economies around the world have started to move
toward the state of Japanization well before the global financial crisis of 2008-09 (GFC).


For example, the low interest rate can be viewed as a reaction to deflation and
stagnation. But, a trend of declining interest rates started well before the GFC. This
point was forcibly made in Bean, Broda, Ito and Kroszner (2015), hereafter BBIK. There
must be a reason for the interest rate to decline since 1990, not only in Japan, but
globally. A hypothesis that is consistent with this observation is the so-called “global
saving glut” (Bernanke, 2015, a, b). An increase in global saving has exceeded an
increase in global investment. Capital movement has become freer over the time. An
increase in savings among emerging market economies, combined with a decline in
highly productive investment opportunities, may explain the declining interest rate in
advanced countries.


The combination of stagnation and deflation implied that aggregate demand was
chronically lower than the aggregate supply. This aspect is sometimes described as
“secular stagnation” (Summers, 2013, 2014, 2015a, b). Eichengreen (2015) also argued
that a decline in the relative price of investment goods is associated with secular
stagnation when a long economic history is considered. Buiter (2015) and Teulings,
Coen and Richard Baldwin (2014) provide extensive examinations of various
arguments.



                                             7
So the “Japanization” is an extreme state of the long run trend of declining growth,
inflation rate and the interest rate. The extreme state means its accompaniment with
deflation. The distinctive feature is “deflation” and its associated difficulty of getting out
of there. In order to avoid Japanization, it is important to adopt some strong policies,
which may be unconventional, before the economy is fully caught in a deflationary trap.
In a later section, it will be discussed how to get out of the deflationary trap, but it
seems harder to get out of it than to avoid it.


In addition, a movement toward Japanization state, namely disinflation and declining
interest rate, combined with lower than potential growth can be loosely said to be a
process of turning Japanese. With these definition and taxonomy in mind, let us first
observe the facts.


3. Facts
3.1. Inflation Rate
Figure 2, panel A, shows the time series of the (headline) inflation rate for the four
countries, US, UK, Japan and Germany from 1985 to 2015. 5 It is remarkable that the
inflation rates of these four advanced countries have moved in the same directions most
of the time since the mid-1980s. In addition to the co-movement, it is also remarkable
that Japanese inflation rate is much lower than the other three countries since 1985,
and below zero most of the time since 1998. The four countries had a peak of the
inflation rates in 1990-91, followed by gradual decline until the mid-2000s. From 2004
to 2007, the four countries experienced increasing inflation rates, due to rising oil prices
and economic booms (driven by the subprime loans encouraging housing booms in the
US). With the GFC, the inflation rates became below (or very close to) zero. The three
countries, except Japan until 2013, was able to stimulate the economy to raise the
inflation rate. But, again, sharp declines in the inflation rates of the four countries took
place from 2013 to 2015 took place. This is partly due to the sharp decline in oil prices,
and partly due to sovereign debt crisis in southern European countries.


Figure 2, panel B, shows the period average of the inflation rates in the four
sub-periods: 1985-1990 (pre-1990 peak); 1991-2000 (moderate declines in the inflation
rate); 2001-2007 (boom before the GFC); and 2008-current (post-GFC). The Euro zone

5 The Japanese inflation rate is adjusted for the value-added tax rate hikes in April
1997 and in April 2014. For the twelve-month period following the tax rate hike, the
inflation rate is adjusted to show the underlying inflation rate, by taking out the
estimated pass-through of the VAT rate hike to CPI.

                                              8
average is also added to the sample for the period after 1991. It shows the trend decline
in all countries over 30 years. It also show that Japan is an outlier that its inflation rate
has been about 2 percentage point lower than other countries, while other three
countries (and Euro zone) have almost same average inflation rates for each period
since 1991.


                          <Figure 2, panels A and B about here>


Deflation may be attributable to a particular set of monetary policy actions. Having a
low but positive inflation rate (say, 2%) in the inflation target framework tends to
anchor inflation expectation at the target rate. An application of nonconventional policy,
once the policy interest rate hit zero, would also contribute to converging and anchoring
inflation expactation. These points will be discussed further in Section 4. So far, only
Japan has experienced the prolonged period of negative inflation rate, which is a
hallmark of Japanization. But other countries are close to turning Japanese in the last
three years.


3.2. Growth Rate
Figure 3, panel A, shows a time-series of the growth rate (of real GDP) for 1985-2015,
for US, UK, Japan, Germany and the Euro Zone. Again, it is remarkable that growth
rates of these four countries (and Euro zone) exhibit co-movement. The second half of
the 1980s was a boom for all regions. From the late-1990s to 2007, all regions had a
stable growth rates. The global financial crisis of 2008-09 hit all regions with a huge
negative shock to growth. It is rather remarkable that Japan suffered most in terms of
growth in the GFC despite its relative strength among their financial institutions.
Japan was hard hit through the trade channel in the GFC, in addition to its low
potential growth rate.


Figure 3, panel B, shows the period averages of the growth rates. (The four sub-periods
are the same with Figure 2.) It clearly shows the declining trend for all regions. The
growth rates in the second half of the 1980s was above 3%. The average growth rates
became in the range between 1% (Japan) and 3% (US) in the 1990s and pre-GFC 2000s.
In the post-GFC period, the growth rates of all the regions came down to between 0 and
1. For the 30 years, the growth deceleration is remarkable.


                          <Figure 3, panels A and B about here>


                                             9
A period from 1992 to 2012 is known as the “lost two decade” in Japan. It is believed
that the growth rate continued to underperform. Figure 4, panel A, shows the levels of
nominal and real GDP for Japan and the USA. Note that the levels are measured in the
yen for Japan (right scale) and in US dollars for the US (the right scale), so the
magnitudes are not comparable between Japan and US. The Japanese nominal GDP
basically stopped its increase at around 1992, while the US nominal GDP shows a
consistent growth, except the period of GFC, 2008-09. Since nominal GDP measures the
combination of growth and inflation, the stagnant GDP of Japan shows that Japan is
really in the static state in both fronts.


Figure 4, panel B, shows movements of real GDP. In both countries, real GDP is
expressed in GDP in constant prices at 2005 prices. However, they are in the different
currency units so that the levels of two lines are not comparable. Again, the Japanese
growth shows a distinct kink at around 1990. In the 1980s, the Japanese growth rate
was higher than the US. In the 1990s, the growth trend in Japan has slowed down with
a huge drop in 2008-09, while growth in US does not have a visible kink in its growth
trend.
                          <Figure 4 Panels A and B about here>


3.3. Interest Rates
Figure 5, panel A, shows the time-series of the nominal policy rates for US, UK, Japan
and the Euro Zone. For Japan, the call rate is used; for US the federal funds rate; for
UK, Sonia, and for the Euro zone, Eonia. The Japanese policy rate was lowered to 0.5%
in 1995, and then guided down to zero in 1999. The spring of 1999 marked the
beginning of the zero interest rate policy (ZIRP). Except for brief periods in 2000-01 and
2006-2008, when the rate was lifted from zero, the policy rate has stayed zero until now.
In other countries, the interest rate became near zero only after the global financial
crisis (GFC) of 2008-09, in response to the financial turmoil in the wake of a collapse of
the Lehman Brothers.


Figure 5, panel B, shows the period averages of the interest rate for the 4 sub-periods. It
shows the dramatic decline and convergence toward zero in all regions. Japan was the
front-runner, followed by the US, UK, and the Euro zone. This may be the best picture
for the advanced economies all turning Japanese.



                                             10
                         <Figure 5, panels A and B about here>


Again, the declining trend started in the early 1990s or even earlier. So, the global ZIRP
is post-GFC, but the declining interest rate has a much longer history. GFC itself cannot
be a whole explanation of Japanization. Of course, the nominal interest rate tends to go
down when the inflation rate goes down. For the economic activity, the real interest rate
is the relevant rate.


Figure 6 shows the nominal long-term (10 year bond) interest rates for US, UK, Japan
and Germany. Panel A shows the time series and Panel B shows the period averages.
The time series shows a remarkable co-movement, and at similar rates, among US, UK
and Germany. The Japanese bond rate stayed much lower than the other three
countries for the entire sample period, but with a similar speed of decline. The nominal
long interest rate of Japan has become almost zero by 2015 and so has Germany. In this
sense, Germany (or the Euro Zone in general).


                         <Figure 6 panels A and B about here>


The declining trend is confirmed in the panel B, period averages. To repeat an earlier
observation, the declining interest rate well precedes the GFC. It started in the early
1990s or even earlier.


For the criteria of secular stagnation, it is the real interest rate, not the nominal
interest rate that matters. By subtracting the inflation rate, the real interest rates are
constructed for the short-term one and the long-term one. However, one point in the
examination of the real interest rate that needs a caution. In the Japanization state, the
rising real rate, if due to the declining inflation rate, that signals worsening situation
(recall Figure 1). As mentioned above, the distinctive feature of Japanization is the
positive real interest rate despite the zero nominal interest rate and the below-potential
growth.


Figure 7, panel A, shows the time-series of the real policy interest rate, which is defined
to be the difference between the nominal short rate (Figure 5) minus the inflation rate
(Figure 2). Figure 7, panel B, shows the real interest rate of all countries having a
declining trend. Japanese real interest rate stayed near zero between 1998 and 2008,
because both the interest rate and the inflation rate were near zero. The US real short


                                            11
interest rate fluctuated between +4% and -4% between 1985 and 2008 with a declining
trend.


                         <Figure 7, panels A and B about here>


In the wake of GFC, the real exchange rate showed a contrasting movement between
Japan and the rest. In Japan, the real rate stayed positive from 2009 to 2012. This is
the result of the nominal short interest rate being zero, while the inflation rate become
negative. This shows the heart of the problem—it is a deflationary trap. The real
interest rate in 2009 rose when the economy, with a sharp drop in real GDP, very much
needs monetary stimulus. The real interest rate in Japan remained positive until 2013.
Japan during the period between 2008 and 2012 shows a typical Japanization state.


The real short interest rate for US, UK, and the Euro Zone became negative in 2009 and
stayed negative until 2014, helping the economic recovery from the depth of GFC. This
is a result of ZIRP, quantitative easing and other measures that the governments and
central banks adopted in this period. It was fortunate for countries other than Japan to
have had positive inflation rates. The contrast between Japan and the rest is
remarkable between 2009 and 2012.


Figure 8 shows the real long-term interest rates for the same four countries and the
Euro Area. Comparing Figure 8 panel A together with Figure 6 panel A, it is
immediately clear that the nominal interest rates of the three west countries, US, UK
and Germany, move closely together than real interest rates. The real long rates of
Japan is closer to the three west countries than that of the nominal long rates.


Between 2009 and 2012, the real long rates of the four countries show the similar
behaviors of the real short rates. Namely, the Japanese real long rates were positive and
real long rates of the three western countries were negative. Again, this confirms that
only Japan suffered from true Japanization, or the deflationary trap.


Figure 8, panel B, shows the period averages. The real long rates of the four countries
show declining trend. Japanese real long rate behaved similarly to the other three
countries. In the post-GFC period, the UK real long rate is close to zero, while other
three countries had 1 percent.



                                           12
                          <Figure 8, panels A and B about here>


3.4. Japanization Index
It may be easier to understand those macroeconomic trends regarding stagnation and
Japanization in one summary variable. One variable that capture Japanization can be
the sum of growth (or under-performance of it, namely GDP gap), inflation rate, and the
nominal policy rate:


Japanization index (J) = GDP gap (g-g*) + inflation rate (π) + nominal policy rate (i)


The lower the number, closer the country is to the Japanization state. If the J-index is
negative, the country is in the Japanization state, or be in the deflationary trap. It
captures the essential part of the stagnant, deflationary problem. The ballpark figure
for a normal state in the US used to be a combination of zero GDP gap, 2% inflation rate,
and the 4% policy rate. Thus, the number 6 may be a healthy state. When an economy is
caught in stagnation and deflation, combined with zero interest rate, the J index
becomes negative. The negative number is the state of the Japanization.


One may wonder whether the natural real interest rate should be added to the
components of Japanization index, or alternatively be used instead of the nominal policy
rate. This is a valid proposal. However, the natural real interest rate should be
calculated independent of inflation rate or GDP gap. The usual definition of the real
interest rate, if added to the definition, will cancel out the inflation rate from the index.


Figure 9, panel A, shows the time-series of the Japanization index (J-index) for Japan,
Germany, UK, US and the Euro Area. The time series is shown from 1991 to 2014,
except for Euro Area that lacks for 1991-93. In this Figure, the GDP gap is estimated as
the difference between the current growth rate and the potential growth rate, where the
latter is the average of the growth rate from 1985 to the current.


The J-index for these countries were all above 5 in 1991. The J-index for Japan quickly
descended toward zero in a few years and stayed below zero most of the time since 1992.
All other countries and Euro Area experienced a mild downward trend. The sharp
downturn in 2009 is a result of large GDP gap due to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).
After a brief recovery from the GFC, the J-index for all countries have stayed below 3 for
2012-2014. The J-index of Euro Area is almost the same as that of Japan, for these three


                                             13
years. The Euro Area is on the verge of Japanization, if not already in it.


Figure 9, panel B, shows the period average of the Japanization index. This clearly
shows the advanced economies have come from a normal economy (J-index above 6) to a
state of Japanization in the last 20 some years. Looking at Figure 9, Japanization
certainly looks like an epidemic rather than endemic.


                         <Figure 9 panels A and B about here>


The J-index, defined and shown here, is admittedly a crude index. Any improvement to
the definition and construction of the variable is left for future research. The purpose of
proposing this index is to stimulate the research toward a good summary statistics that
would warn the danger of falling into a deflationary trap.


4. Chronology 6
4.1. Bubble and Burst
The preceding section described the time series of macroeconomic variables that are
relevant to how Japan fell into lost two decades, which is now known as Japanization.
Here, building on the facts we reviewed, a succinct chronological description is
presented. Major debating points will be analyzed in the subsequent subsections.
References are made to the inflation rates from 1985 to 2015 as shown in Figure 10. In
addition to headline inflation rate, two other inflation rates are shown: Core inflation
rate that excludes fresh food only (including energy price) and Core-Core inflation rate
that excludes food (but not alcohol beverages) and energy. In order to assess the
underlying inflation trend, it is better to use either Core (when energy prices are stable)
or Core-Core (when energy price movements are volatile).


                                 <Figure 10 about here>


The second half of the 1980s is known as the period of a bubble economy, as stock prices
and real estate prices tripled and quadrupled in four years. The Nikkei stock price index
recorded the peak on the last business day of 1989 at 38915.87 yen. But, ten months
later, the Nikkei would become drop to below 20,000 yen. Urban land prices, both
residential and commercial, rose three-fold in the second half of the 1980s and then lost


6Descriptions and explanations of the Japanese experience in this section parallel with
Bean, Broda, Ito and Kroszner (2015, ch. 3).

                                            14
half of the gain in four years and all the gains in “lost two decades.” Figure 11 shows
movements of these asset prices. The asset price bubble and its burst in the 1990s is
often identified as a major cause of the economic malaise that Japan experienced in the
subsequent twenty years.


                                  <Figure 11 about here>


During the boom years, banks lent close to a full value of collateralized assets—land,
housing structures, office buildings—to developers, construction companies and retail
customers, assuming that the value of collaterals would continue to rise. Traditionally
in Japan, land values were considered to move only upward, as the supply of land,
especially in the urban area, is limited and preference for owning houses is strong. The
real estate boom was supported by banks’ credit.


The period of 1990-92 was the initial phase of bursting bubble. Monetary policy and
financial policies were still on the side of tightening in 1990-91. The economy was still
buoyant while asset prices started to decline.


The headline inflation rate reached 4.0% (the core inflation rate being 3.2%) in January
1991, significantly higher than the level of two years earlier, which was 1%. When asset
prices started to rise in 1985-87, the CPI inflation rate was subdued. Hence lowering
the interest rate to fight deflationary pressure from a record yen appreciation was
understandable. However, the sign of the overheating from the traditional measure of
CPI inflation was evident by the early 1989. The headline inflation rate was in the
range of 1.5% to 1.7% in 1989, rising above 2% in January 1990 and hit 4% in January
1991. The Bank of Japan raised the policy rate from the spring of 1989 but it was too
late and too slow to react (see Ito (2013)).


Policy measures were applied to accelerate the declines of asset prices. Little
consideration was given to possible adverse effects on the financial system at this point.
The inflation rate was still higher than 2% in 1990-1992.


A further decline in the stock prices and slumping real estate markets in 1992 caused
the growth rate to come down sharply. By 1992, the stock prices were down by 60% of
the peak, and the weight of non-performing loans was growing. This was the beginning
of the lost two decades. In 1992, the growth rate became significantly lower, around 1%.


                                               15
The period of 1992-95 was increasingly shadowed of nonperforming problems among
financial institutions. Capital bases of banks were gradually but substantially eroded.
Smaller institutions with undiversified assets started to fail. Even among large
institutions, possible losses from nonperforming loans grew to the level that seriously
affected their capital positions. The fragility of the financial system and evergreening
nonperforming loans adversely affected lending to healthier firms. The economic growth
slowed down substantially and remained low. The inflation rate in December 1992 was
2.0%, but disinflation continued, and it reached 0% (even negative for a few months) in
1995. Some part of the disinflation of the year can be attributed to a sharp yen
appreciation in the spring of 1995.


The policy makers grossly underestimated the increasing weight of non-performing
loans to the entire banking system. As early as 1992, many developers suspended
interest payments to banks. However, banks were willing to lend more to NPL
companies in order to hide nonperforming loans. The forbearance was also found among
the regulator. There were not alarmed by declines of stock and land prices until very
late. A few real estate firms going bankrupt may not be a big problem. But when all real
estate companies stop payments, it becomes the problem of banks. In fact, a systemic
crisis was in the making. Taking out excesses in the bubble—or “cleansing” of
excesses—seemed to be given a higher policy priority than financial stability.


The inflation rate would decline to below 1% by April 1994. The inflation rate would
stay below 1% for the following two decades (except for several months in 2007-08 due to
oil price increases.


In 1995-96, strong policies were taken to stimulate growth. A large fiscal stimulus, with
a relatively large additional tax cut and expenditure increase was applied in 1995 (see
Kuttner and Posen (2002)).The policy rate was lowered from 2 percent in January 1995
to 0.5 percent in September. The economy was recovering in 1996. The growth rate
exceeded 2% in 1996, and the inflation rate stay above zero, but just barely.


In April 1997, the consumption tax (VAT) rate was hiked from 3% to 5%. This was
combined with expiration of income tax credit and an increase in social security
contribution rates. A fiscal drag of 2% of GDP was applied. The second quarter,
April-June, of 1997 recorded a negative rate of growth, but the growth rate recovered to


                                           16
a positive territory in the third quarter. Then came a huge shock that is probably a
single most important event in Japanization.


4.2. Banking Crisis, deflation, ZIRP and QE
In 1997-98, the banking crisis hit Japan. In November 1997, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank
(one of top 20 banks at the time), Yamaichi Securities (one of the big four securities
firms at the time) and Sanyo Securities (a medium-sized securities firm) all failed. In
many ways, the failure of these firms was comparable the US and European experiences
with Lehman Brothers in 2008. The Japanese Finance Minister two years earlier said
“None of 20 large banks would fail.” Moreover, there was no plan on how to deal with
other fragile large banks. Japanese financial institutions were de facto shut out from
international markets, and they even could not trust each other. Two other large banks
failed in 1998, despite capital injection of March 1998, and it took another capital
injection of much larger amounts in March 1999 to stabilize the financial system.


With near meltdown of the banking and financial systems, the growth rate became
negative and the inflation rate become negative in 1998. This was the beginning of
deflation that would persist for the following 15 years. The Bank of Japan would
attempt a series of policies in response to stagnation and deflation. 1998 was also a
watershed in terms of wage flexibility. Until 1997, total compensations to labor tended
to downward in a prolonged recession, but a decrease was in terms of cut in overtime
work and twice-a-year bonus payments, which is applicable to almost all full time
workers in Japan.


In 1999, the zero interest rate policy 1999-2001, ZIRP. The Bank of Japan lowered the
policy interest rate to zero in the spring of 1999. This was the beginning of the zero
interest rate policy (ZIRP). The Bank of Japan communicated that ZIRP will be
maintained until “deflationary concerns are dispelled”. However, the exit condition was
not defined numerically (see Ito (2004)). The policy rate was raised in August 2000. The
first episode of ZIRP was short-lived, and the exit was made when the inflation rate was
still negative.


Once the inflation rate fell into the negative territory, the real interest rate becomes
positive, even with the zero nominal interest rate. The deeper the economy sinks into
deflation, the higher becomes the real interest rate, which reduces the aggregate
demand reinforcing the recession. Japan got into this trap in 1999.


                                          17
In March 2001, the Bank of Japan adopted the quantitative easing (QE), for the first
time among G7 countries, in light of weakening the economy. With non-remunerated
excess reserves, providing an ample liquidity via QE meant the interest rate became
zero again. The QE would continue with expanding the balance sheet. On the asset side,
the Bank of Japan bought short-term government bonds (maturities less than three
years) and on the liability side, the balance of zero-interest excess reserves at the Bank
of Japan increased. The policy rate became zero. The Bank did not communicate clearly
what the expected transmission channels are, what if the inflation rate it was targeting,
and the exit condition of QE. The Bank of Japan opposed to the idea of adopting the
inflation targeting framework (see Ito (2004)). According to Ito and Mishkin (2006), a
lack of inflation target and miscommunication reduced the power of QE.


In 2003, another bank failure took place. A large bank, Resona Bank, was de facto
nationalized with capital injection and one small bank failed in 2003. However, the
financial sector remained calm, as the failures were dealt with an established orderly
resolution mechanism, which was legislated in the wake of 1997-98 banking crisis.


In 2004-06, an economic recovery took place. The growth rate started to pick up, with
strengthened financial sector, the dollar strength (i.e., yen depreciation), and political
stability under popular Prime Minister Koizumi. The inflation rate continued to be
negative despite the recovering output activities.


In 2006-2008, the second exit from ZIRP was made. The headline inflation rate finally
rose to the positive territory in the spring of 2006 and the Bank of Japan raised the
interest rate (the 2nd exit from ZIRP) in August 2006. However, the headline inflation
rate turned negative again in 2007, but started to rise in the second 2008, and reached
2% in July 2008. Almost all of the increase in headline inflation rate was due to oil and
commodity price increases and imported inflation due to yen depreciation. This is
evident from the Core-Core inflation rate remained at around 0% when the headline
CPI rose to 2%, as shown in Figure 10. The impression was given that the Bank of
Japan was targeting the zero (or just above zero) inflation rate, and the communication
from the Bank of Japan did not contradict the view.


In 2008-2012, the global financial crisis of 2008-09 affected Japan in several ways. The
failure of the Lehman Brothers triggered a severe fragility in the financial systems in


                                           18
the United States and Europe. The Japanese financial institutions were not affected by
the financial crisis in the west, since they did not invest in securities that lost values
quickly in the crisis.


However, Japan was affected in several ways. First, as the world demand shrank
rapidly, Japanese exports declined substantially, and the GDP growth rate recorded the
worst performance in the post-WW II period. Second, the inflation rate plunged to the
negative territory partly because domestic and external weak demands but also a sharp
decline in commodity and oil prices. The headline inflation rate plunged from plus 2% in
July 2008 to minus 2% in July 2009. The Core-Core inflation rate, which was hovering
in the range of minus 0.1% to 0.2% in 2008 sank to minus 1 percent in September 2009.
Both the headline and Core-Core inflation rate would stay negative until the spring of
August 2013. Third, the yen appreciated sharply from about 120 yen per dollar to 80
yen per dollar in the wake of the GFC. This put downward pressure on prices and
output activities, aggravating the degree of deflation.


When the Lehman Brothers failed in September 2009, the global financial markets
suddenly fell into a liquidity shortage and many financial markets became
dysfunctional (See Ito (2010)). Prices of Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs) backed
by subprime mortgages became practically worthless. Several US and European
financial institutions failed due to insolvency, or came close to failing due to lack of
liquidity. Federal Reserve bought various assets in dysfunctional markets, injected
capital in some of large financial institutions (de facto nationalization) and arranged
mergers. The large scale asset purchases by the Federal Reserves and the Bank of
England expanded their respective balance sheets. In many European countries,
similar failures, mergers, and rescues occurred. ECB also expanded the balance sheets
by purchasing covered bonds.


The most striking effects of those expansion of the balance sheet was on the exchange
rates. The dollar appreciated against the euro and emerging market currencies, and the
yen appreciated against the dollar. The yen and the Swiss franc were considered to be
“safe haven” and the two currencies became the strongest.


Japanese financial institutions remained relatively healthy as they had not invested in
subprime-related securities. So, the Bank of Japan probably found little reason to
introduce asset purchases for the financial stability purpose. However, the drop of GDP


                                            19
in 2009 was biggest in Japan. The crisis in the US and Europe came to Japan through
the trade channel. When output activities slow down and the inflation rate became
negative, a possibility of adopting unconventional policies, such as quantitative easing,
similar to US and Europe, could have been adopted. However, at this point, no strong
action was taken, and the yen appreciated against the US dollar and the euro.


The Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) took the majority in the Lower House in the
election of August 2009, and formed the government in September 2009. This was the
first time that the DPJ, or any party other than Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), had a
majority in the Lower House. Economic policy was geared toward income transfer to the
lower income families, children and farmers. Fiscal stimulus did not occur and sharp
downturn of activities were not corrected by fiscal policy either.


The Bank of Japan also lowered the policy rate to near zero (0.1 percent), but did not
embark on QE. The balance sheet of the Bank of Japan remained flat, while the balance
sheets of the western banks expanded rapidly, as shown in Figure 12. The difference
between the Bank of Japan and the western central banks was believed to be a major
factor behind the sudden yen appreciation.


                                 <Figure 12 about here>


The conventional monetary policy relying on adjusting the policy rate had become
powerless since 1999. The repeated negative shocks causing prices to decline made the
real interest rate higher, so that investment and consumption demands declined,
reinforcing a recession. An economy caught in a deflationary trap with persistent
stagnation, i.e., below potential growth, despite stimulative efforts of ZIRP and a flat
yield curve, is a Japanized economy. The case of Japanization is found in Japan between
1999 and 2012, but an undisputable way between 2009 and 2012.


5. Great Escape from deflation
The period of 2013-2015 is a period that all policies were aimed at escaping the
deflationary trap that Japan had been caught in the preceding 15 years. The economic
policy package became known as Abenomics. The general election of December 2012
made a sea change in Japanese politics. The Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) that had
been in power for three years was replaced by the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) led
by Prime Minister Abe as a ruling party. The Abe cabinet was formed at the end of


                                            20
December 2012 and pushed the Bank of Japan to adopt the 2% inflation target, selected
Governor Kuroda, who is an inflation target believer. Governor Kuroda introduced
Quantitative and Qualitative Easing (QQE) on April 4, 2013.


Between mid-November 2012, when the House of Representatives was dissolved and
April 4, 2013, the yen depreciated from about 80 yen/dollar to 95 yen/dollar; and the
Nikkei 225 stock index rose from 8,500 yen to 12,000 yen. These changes in asset prices
were based on purely expectation of drastic policy changes, which Mr Abe had
advocated. After the QQE announcement, whose contents exceeded market expectation,
the yen depreciated to the 100 yen/mark and the Nikkei rose to 15,000 level, in the
subsequent weeks. The yen depreciation—or to be precise, a correction of overvalued
yen—from mid-November to the summer was a result of the public expecting and the
Bank implementing QQE. The channel of aggressive monetary policy turned out to be
asset price changes, prompted by portfolio rebalancing.


In the general election of December 2012, Shinzo Abe ran on a platform prioritizing an
escape from the deflationary trap. The program subsequently implemented comprised
“three arrows”: aggressive monetary expansion (so-called quantitative and qualitative
easing, or QQE) together with an explicit inflation target of 2%; initial fiscal stimulus
that would turn to consolidation once growth resumed; and structural reforms to boost
potential output growth. All three arrows combined are expected to lift the Japanese
economy out of a deflationary bad equilibrium to a normal good equilibrium with higher
growth and 2% inflation. The inflation rate is Core CPI, which excludes fresh food but
includes energy.


As Prime Minister Abe urged the Bank of Japan to agree to a document to set the target
of inflation rate at 2%, and the document was signed in January 2013. Mr. Haruhiko
Kuroda, then President of Asian Development Bank, became a new Governor in March
2013. The Quantitative and Qualitative Easing (QQE) was launched in April 2013.


The QQE policy comprised of two parts, quantitative and qualitative: (1) Expanding
monetary base at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen by asset purchases; and (2)
lengthening the average maturity of the Japanese Government Bonds (JGB) from 3
years to 7 years with purchase of about 50 trillion yen; and purchasing ETFs (an annual
pace of 1 trillion yen) and J-REITs (an annual pace of 30 billion yen). Belatedly, the
balance sheet size (change from January 2007) of the Bank of Japan started to increase


                                           21
sharply in April 2003, as seen in Figure 12.


Prime Minister Abe also applied the second arrow, the flexible fiscal policy. Immediately
after he took office. He ordered to form a large supplementary budget in February (just
two months remaining in the fiscal year) in order to kick start the economy.


With the yen depreciation and stock price increases due to the first and second arrows,
exporters started to report profits and investors in the stock market started to feel
wealth effects. The inflation rate started to get out of the negative territory and
continued to rise and the growth rate started to rise. This paved way to give a go to raise
the tax rate, which was legislated in 2012, to be implemented in April 2013. There was a
group of people who doubted the wisdom of fiscal consolidation when getting out of
deflation was not certain. However, those who thought fiscal deficits were too large to
sustain prevailed to persuade Prime Minister. By April 2014, all indicators were
showing good signs. The inflation rate rose to 1.5% (yoy, excluding effects of
consumption tax rate hike.)


The direction of the inflation rate, the growth rate, and overall business sentiments, all
look fine at the first year anniversary of QQE, in April 2014.     However, effects of the
rate hike of consumption tax in April 2014 sent the economy into a negative growth
territory, again. The growth rate remained low for the rest of the year, in spite of prior
expectation of V-shape recovery after an expected negative growth for one quarter
immediately after the tax hike.


As growth continued to be sluggish, the inflation rates started to decline. The inflation
rate of Core CPI, adjusted for contribution of consumption tax rate hike, started to
decline in May 2014, and would reach to 0.0%--back to square one—in March 2015. The
Bank of Japan was concerned whether the expected rate of inflation would start decline,
although the inflation rate was declining mostly because oil prices were declining. The
Bank of Japan revised the QQE by accelerating the pace of asset purchase.


In the October 2014 meeting of monetary policy Board meeting, the Bank of Japan
narrowly (5 to 4) decided to increase the size of asset purchases (QQE2). The pace of
asset purchase was increased to 80 trillion annually. In November, Prime Minister Abe
announced that the second scheduled rate hike of the consumption tax would be delayed
form October 2015 to April 2017.


                                            22
One of the stated goal of Abenomics is the inflation targeting. Although deflation seems
to be defeated, the inflation rate is slow to move up. During the first year of
implementation, Abenomics produced intended results. It rose from -0.5% in April 2013
to +1.5% in April 2014. However, the inflation rate fell back to 0.0% in April 2015. About
a half of the decline can be explained by oil price decrease, while the other half is due to
diminished activities in the wake of the consumption tax, effective in April 2014.


The economy finally started to grow in the first quarter of 2015. The inflation rate
started to increase during the summer, and when the oil price effects are eliminated, the
Core-Core inflation rate has been increasing, and reached hovering at around 0.9% in
September 2015. Hence, as the oil price decline effects will dissipate by end-2015, the
inflation rate will go up above 1 % by the spring of 2016 and toward 2% by end-2016, as
the Bank of Japan now forecast. The inflation targeting framework is still maintained.


In summary, what is the consequences of policies by Abenomics with Kuroda’s QQEs?
The inflation rate was raised out of the negative territory; the stock prices rose from
8,500 to 20,000; the exchange rate depreciated from 80 yen/dollar to the 120-125
yen/dollar range by July 2015. At least the deflationary equilibrium is far behind, but
the economy has not reached a new normal equilibrium. In order to increase a potential
growth rate for Japan despite the demographic onus (disadvantage), structural reform
to change environment for investments, the so-call third arrow of Abenomics, is
essential; not the first and second arrow. The growth strategy based on deregulation
and liberalization of the unnecessarily regulated industries, such as agriculture, health
care and education is the most important step of Abenomics. We have yet to see a
significant progress on that front.


6. Lessons
6.1. Bubble
From the above mentioned chronology, several lessons can be drawn in order to avoid
Japanization. First, if at all possible, it is better to avoid a bubble. However, it is well
known that it is difficult to tell the difference between a fundamentals-supported boom
and a financial bubble. To prevent creating a bubble is important because financial
instability needs to be avoided in the event of a bubble burst. If financial institutions
are robust to asset price declines, asset price booms can be tolerated. It may be equally
wasteful to squash a good boom prematurely in a fear of a bubble.


                                            23
What will turn out to be a dangerous asset price increases is the one financed by a huge
leverage. Hence, it is important to avoid concentration of lending to real estate sectors
among the financial institutions. What is called macro-prudential measures is
important in this respect. The Japanese experiences of the second half of 1980s show
that weak supervision on banks allowed banks to extend too much leverage.


With benefits of hindsight, the peak levels of stock prices or real estate prices could not
be justified by discount sum of future rents or dividends. The declines of the asset prices
in the subsequent 20 years all but erased those gains in the second half of the 1980s. It
is often argued that monetary policy was too loose in the second half of the 1980s
despite the rising asset prices. It can be also argued that the factors that contributed to
deflation was not monetary policy but prudential policy to make sure that risk of
possible asset price declines are not concentrated among financial institutions. One
solution is to set the maximum loan-to-value ratio so that banks would be resilient to a
possible price fall in the future. Even more crude regulation, such as a cap on the total
amount of lending to real estate sectors from the banking sector, which was introduced
in March 1990, can be introduced much earlier.


Too conservative an attitude toward price increases may result in premature tightening.
Too low an inflation target increase a risk that a negative shock easily push the
economy in to a deflation.


6.2. Burst
When the eventual burst came in 1990-91, it was first welcomed by the public and policy
makers as the asset prices will decline to affordable levels. In a sense, the bursting
bubble was viewed as a process toward normalization. The fiscal and monetary
authorities were belatedly tightening in 1990-91, accelerating the decline in asset prices,
rather than relaxing to moderate the decline. The policy interest rate was raised from
1989 to 1991. The total lending amount from banks to the estate sector was capped in
March 1990. Moreover, the national land holding tax was introduced in 1991 and the
short-term capital gains tax was raised in 1991.


Even with careful monetary policy and prudential policy, a bubble may happen and a
burst may occur. Then it is difficult to manage the situation. The Japanese experience of
the early 1990s show that bringing down the asset prices quickly may have unintended


                                            24
consequences, including deflation. When a burst comes, the financial stability is equally
important as finding a new equilibrium. Sometimes soft-landing of the economy and the
soundness of financial institutions may outweigh the timeliness of finding a new
equilibrium. Here, a judgement is required.


As described above, in 1990-91, policies were introduced when asset prices were already
declining. Tight monetary and credit policies (raising the interest rate and capping
credit to the real estate sectors) and fiscal and tax policies (introducing land tax and
hiking real estate capital gains tax), after the peak had passed, were considered
necessary to make sure that the bubble would not come back. The prospects for
returning to robust output growth are higher if the excess is cleaned up once and for all,
quickly. This may be labeled as the cleansing view.


One of the reasons to support the cleansing view is that it would make a recovery faster.
Theoretically, the cleansing view advocate believe that the price level goes down to the
fundamentals-consistent level faster and then, economic growth would resume faster. It
was politically good that ordinary citizens may afford housing, as prices came down.
Greedy developer may suffer but it can be also politically good.


With benefit of hindsight, there were three problems with the then-popular cleansing
view. First, the market had already turned the corner from buying assets based on
expected appreciation to selling assets based on expected price declines. The rapid
decline of asset prices pushed down the fundamentals, because the acceleration of price
decline made the economy to sink further, resulting in fundamentals to deteriorate
further. Instead, asset prices went into a “reverse bubble,” namely, expectation of price
decline would cause further price decline. Second, therefore a new equilibrium may not
be well defined or known. This may be parallel to a proposition that we may not know
whether price increase is a bubble or not. Third, when the price decline is not stopped,
damages to the financial system may outweigh losses from a slow adjustment toward a
new equilibrium.


Another observation is that when hard-landing may cause wide-spread defaults among
real estate and construction sectors and banks had already lent with high loan-to-value
ratios, the hard-landing has more negative impacts to the economy than otherwise. In
order to avoid that kind of negative impacts, efforts to moderate a sharp decline in real
estate prices after a bubble burst can be applied. For example lowering the interest


                                           25
rates and purchase of mortgage backed securities or REITs would contribute to making
landing softer. This may be a revisionist view in Japan, but the importance of
preventing too quick a decline was recognized by FRB Chairman Ben Bernanke in
2008-09. The credit easing (later dubbed as quantitative easing (QE-1) was precisely to
support housing prices and to prevent further banking failure. Thanks to the support by
the Federal Reserve QE, the US real estate prices in the wake of GFC did not decline as
much as the Japanese counterpart. Figure 13 shows the representative real estate
prices in Japan and in US, lining up timing of the peak of the prices at the same time.
The US real estate price decline stopped after a decline by one-third, while Japanese
real estate price decline continued until almost all the gains made in the second half of
the 1980s was lost. The burden on the financial system and the economy at large was
much bigger in Japan.


                                      <Figure 13>


6.3. Downward flexibility of wages
The banking crisis of 1997-98, with four large financial institutions failure, and
resulting recession in 1998 caused a structural changes in the labor market. Large
financial institutions (are forced) to let go employees, which was unprecedented, labor
unions and workers put job security first in the negotiation. Accordingly, it became
prevalent that payments to workers were reduced. Downward nominal wage rigidity
was broken in the recession of 1998. Earlier Japanese companies had dealt with a
recession by lowering “bonuses” (paid to all workers). After 1998, nominal wages started
to go down. This set up the deflationary wage-price spiral. So, since 1998, the downward
spiral of wages and prices continued until 2012. Wages went down because of
deflationary expectations; lower wages resulted in lower consumption; and lower
consumption widened the GDP gap. As deflationary expectation had sunk in, it became
difficult to lift the economy. The Japanese economy seemed to have fallen into a state
where demand is permanently lower than potential output. The recessionary state can
be viewed as a deflationary trap or secular stagnation. However, the mechanism may be
different from Alvin Hansen or Lawrence Summers. It is more similar to, but a milder
version of, Irving Fischer’s Debt Deflation.


It shows that it is important to apply strong policies to avoid a price-wage downward
spiral. It would be easier to stimulate with conventional tools when wages and prices
are still increasing than to stimulate with unconventional tools to break a wage-price


                                               26
deflationary cycle.


6.4. Disinflation, deflation and Japanization
It is important to distinguish between the period of disinflation and that of deflation.
The disinflation regime is when the inflation rate was positive and declining
(1992-1998) and the deflationary regime is when the inflation rate was negative
(1998-2012, except 2006-08).


Disinflation has been considered to be a good thing, when the central banks were
fighting too high an inflation rate. However, lowering the inflation rate too low is as
dangerous as hyper-inflation. This was learned in Japan’s deflation. The inflation
target of 2% is a good policy to avoid deflation but risk is symmetric between upside and
downside. Since Japan did not adopt the inflation targeting framework during the
disinflation and deflation periods, the warning of peril of deflation was not conveyed to
the public.


The United States came close to deflation in late 2008, but a strong credit easing (QE1)
in 2009 prevented deflation. Some of the Euro zone countries are still on the verge of
deflation. Since monetary policy is controlled for the average of Euro zone countries,
deflation in one country may not be dealt with properly. That is a risk.


6.5. Big push, or “Abenomics”
Even the nominal interest rate is lowered to zero—and it is not possible to set the
nominal interest rate at the negative rate without causing de-intermediation—the real
interest rate becomes positive since nominal inflation rate is negative. Monetary policy’s
main tool is ineffective. Many favor fiscal policy at the liquidity trap, or in this case
deflationary trap. But, sooner or later, mounting debts become a concern.


If the goal is to avoid a protracted period of deflation, it is important to act quickly as
soon as the inflation rate becomes negative. Once deflation is sustained and inflation
expectation turns negative, it would become harder to get out of deflation. In case of
Japan, deflation had continued since 1998. After the GFC, a situation got worse, as
the yen appreciated vis-à-vis the US dollar by about 30%, and deflation got worsened.
Mr. Abe won the general election on the platform of defeating deflation by installing
someone who can implement inflation targeting of 2% and aggressive monetary policy.
In addition, Prime Minister Abe ordered fiscal stimulus by formulating a


                                            27
supplementary budget. With expectation of quantitative easing and more-than-expected
quantitative and qualitative easing that Governor Kuroda announced in April 2013
corrected overvaluation of the yen, which caused a sharp increase in stock prices and
the inflation rate to rise.


7. Demography
Japan is experiencing a demographic transition from a stage with large skilled work
force to that with large retired people who are “aging.” This is a result of birth rate
declining for decades. The working age (ages 20-65) population has turned to decline in
1998, and total population in 2007. Japan is the first country to experience the aging
with shrinking population, although several countries are expected to experience the
same phenomenon in the near future.


Japan’s demographic transition has several economic implications. First, aging is
expected to lower the household saving rate. The lifecycle theory predicts that higher
the population growth, the higher the household saving rate. When baby boomers are
making life’s transition from middle-aged to just near retirement, that economy
produces large saving. Japan in the 1970s to 1990s and many emerging market
economies at present belong to this category. However, Japan is already in the next
stage of baby boomers to retire and start dis-saving.


Second, fiscal deficits tend to worsen in an aging society. On the expenditure side, aging
will require higher expenditures on social security, including pension and health care.
Aging will also reduce income tax revenues. Third, the potential growth rate will
become lower, as the labor supply will be lower. With smaller labor supply may motive
labor-saving technological progress, thus investment may rise. However, if labor-saving
technology is not available, like in many service industries, the capital expenditures
will become lower with population. Fourth, aging and shrinking population may result
in a rising real interest rate, when the declining saving outweighs the declining
investment demand. Although Japan has enjoyed low nominal and real interest rates,
this may turn out to be temporary, cyclical phenomenon of being in the deflationary bad
equilibrium.


With these observations, a demographic transition to an aging society predicts a lower
growth from the supply side, but not a lower interest rate.



                                           28
In explaining stagnation, demographic transition to “aging” (an increasing proportion of
the retired to the workers) and “decreasing population” is straightforward and
important. Consumption of wide ranging goods will shrink, although demand for
medical care is expected to increase. As the domestic market for consumptions goods is
expected to continue shrinking, companies are reluctant to invest, except for medical
facilities and health care related investment.


It is quite certain that Japanese growth rate is pushed down, by 1.0 - 1.5%, due to a
decline in (working age) population. The per-working age output growth (hereafter, per
capita growth) in lost decades were not bad. In fact, per capita growth in Japan during
for the best part of the last two decades (2004-2007) are comparable to the United
States, or to the 1970s and 1980s. Those who emphasize that per capita growth was
respectable even in the lost decades do not think Japan was achieving potential growth
during the lost decades and deflation was not problem. (BIS study). We agree that the
stagnation looks less problematic if we take the per capita growth,


Whether demographic transition to aging also explains Japan’s deflation and/or
declining, low real interest rate is not straight forward. Some argues that demographic
changes put downward pressure on the inflation rate and the real interest rate. The
aggregate demand decline that causes stagnation would also explains deflation. If this
is true, deflation does not have a quick cure by fiscal or monetary policy. However,
demand decline is only a half story. The same demographic transition will have supply
side effects too. The lack of workers constrains production, so the aggregate supply also
drops. If the aggregate supply comes down faster than aggregate demand, then the
inflation rate will rise instead of decline. So, a theoretically expected result will be
“stagflation” rather than “deflationary stagnation.” The real interest rate may also
increase if the inflation rate tends to increase due to supply constraint. Whether aging
causes deflation or not thus depends relative magnitude of demand declines and supply
declines.


Whether monetary and fiscal policy can compensate for demographic weights on
demand and supply declines can be debatable.      Changed in long-run real output and
growth, due to demographic transition, cannot be controlled by policy. The long-run
Phillips curve is vertical and aging tends to move it to left. Monetary and fiscal polies
can influence on the short-run Phillips curve but not the permanent one. However on
the inflation/deflation effect of demography is most likely offset by proper monetary


                                           29
policy. Monetary policy with good communication is essential in maintaining
expectation close to the targeted inflation rate.


8. Concluding Remarks
Japanization is defined as the prolonged state of deflation, combined with secular
stagnation and zero nominal interest rate. The short-term nominal interest rate is zero,
but deflation makes the real interest rate positive. The yield curve is almost flat,
making the long interest rate is also very low. The paper first reviewed the general
trends of the inflation rates, the growth rates and the interest rates of US, UK, Japan
and Euro zone (or Germany). All four advanced countries share the same declining
trends in these variables with varying degree of starting point and speed. Then the
paper reviewed the experiences of Japan, in an attempt to answer why only Japan
suffered from the state that is now known as Japanization. It was shown that
Japanization occurred as a result of large financial shocks combined with a particular
set of policies. If it is important to avoid Japanization, there are set of policies toward
the objective. So far, the US and the UK seemed to have escaped Japanization. As of this
writing, the Euro Zone economy seems to be still at risk.


Many emerging market economies have experienced disinflation and growth slowdown.
However, Japanization is a result of negative shocks and a particular set of policies. If
correct roles and consequences of policy actions are learned, Japanization is avoidable.
Abenomics is succeeding in getting the economy out of deflation.




                                            30
References


Bean, Charles; Christian Broda; Takatoshi Ito; and Randall Kroszner, (2015), “Low for
Long? Causes and Consequences of Persistently Low Interest Rates,” Geneva Reports
on the World Economy, no. 17, International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies
and CEPR, October.


Bernanke, Ben S. (2015), “Why are interest rates so low?” Ben Bernanke’s Blog, Part 1
(March 30), Part 2 (March 31), Part 3 (April 1), Part 4(April 13). Brookings,
http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/ben-bernanke
(Last accessed November 11, 2015)


Buiter, Willem, Ebrahim Rahbasi and Joe Seydl, (2015), “Preventing secular stagnation
from becoming the ‘new normal’: Why the time of one-armed economic policy is gone”
Citi Global Economics View, June 2, 2015.


Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap (2008), "Zombie Lending and
Depressed Restructuring in Japan." American Economic Review, 98(5): 1943-77.


Eichengreen, Barry, (2015), “Secular Stagnation: The Long view” American Economic
Review, vo. 105, no. 5: 66-70.


Eichengreen, Barry and Molly Fifer (2002), “The Implications of Aging for the Balance
of Payments Between North and South,” in Horst Siebert (ed.), The Economics of Aging
Societies, Berlin: Mohr.


Gordon, Robert J. (2012), “Is U.S. economic growth over? Faltering innovation confronts
the six headwinds”, NBER Working Paper No. 18315.


Gordon, Robert J. (2014), “The demise of U.S. economic growth: Restatement, rebuttal
and reflections”, NBER Working Paper No. 19895.


Hansen, Alvin (1939) “Economic progress and declining population growth.” American
Economic Review, 29(1), pp. 1-15.


Ito, Takatoshi (2004). “Inflation Targeting and Japan: Why has the Bank of Japan not


                                            31
adopted Inflation Targeting? ” in Christopher Kent and Simon Guttmann (eds.) The
Future of Inflation Targeting, August 2004: 220-267.


Ito, Takatoshi (2010), “Fire, Flood, and Lifeboats: Policy Responses to the Global Crisis
of 2007-09, in Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (ed.), Asia and the Global
Financial Crisis, San Francisco: pp. 207-249.
 http://www.frbsf.org/economics/conferences/aepc/2009/agenda.php


Ito, Takatoshi (2013), “Great Inflation and Central Bank Independence in Japan” in M.
D. Bordo and A. Orphanides, (eds.), The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central
Banking, NBER University of Chicago Press.


Ito, Takatoshi and Frederic S. Mishkin, (2006), “Two Decades of Japanese Monetary
Policy and the Deflation Problem,” in T. Ito and A. Rose, (eds.) Monetary Policy with
Very Low Inflation in the Pacific Rim, NBER-University of Chicago Press, 2006:
131-193.


Kawai, Masahiro and Peter Morgan, (2013), “Banking Crises and ‘Japanization’:
Origins and Implications,” ADBI working Paper Series No. 430, July. Also in Rhee and
Posen (2014: Ch. 2).


Krugman, Paul, (2014), “Apologizing to Japan,” New York Times, The Opinion Pages,
October 31, (in print). Also available on line,
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/31/opinion/paul-krugman-apologizing-to-japan.html?r
ref=collection%2Fcolumn%2Fpaul-krugman&action=click&contentCollection=opinion&
region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=101&pgtype
=collection


Kuttner, Kenneth N. and Adam S. Posen, (2002), “Fiscal Policy Effectiveness in Japan,”
Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol 16, Issue 4, December: pp
536–558.


Pesek, William, (2014). Japanization: What the World Can Learn from Japan's Lost
Decades, Singapore: Wiley.


Rhee, Changyong and Adam S. Posen (2013), Responding to Financial Crisis: Lessons


                                             32
from Asian then, the United States and Europe Now, Manila: Asian Development Bank.


Summers, Lawrence H. (2013), “IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor
of Stanley Fischer”, November 8,
http://larrysummers.com/imf-fourteenthannual-research-conference-in-honor-of-stanley
-fischer/


Summers, Lawrence H. (2014), “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation,
Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound”, Business Economics, National Association for
Business Economics, Vol. 49, No. 2, April: pp.65-73.


Summers, Lawrence H. (2015a). “On secular stagnation: Larry Summers responds to
Ben Bernanke” in Ben Bernanke's Blog, Brookings, April 1,
http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/ben-bernanke
(Last accessed November 11, 2015)


Summers, Lawrence H. (2015b), “Reflections on the ‘New Secular Stagnation
Hypothesis”, in Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin eds. Secular Stagnation: Facts,
Causes and Cures, A VoxEU.org eBook, pp. 27-48.
http://www.voxeu.org/sites/default/files/Vox_secular_stagnation.pdf


Teulings, Coen and Richard Baldwin (2014), “Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and
Cures,” VoxEU, http://www.voxeu.org/content/secular-stagnation-facts-causes-and-cures




                                           33
Table 1. Taxonomy



       Taxonomy                                Possible reasons
 <1>   Stagnation           g < g*             Too tight monetary policy (if not ZLB), timid QE(if ZLB); too tight fiscal policy
                            n          n
 <2>   Secular Stagnation   r < 0 and r < r    Multiple equilibria; Too low rate of inflation (expectation); Saving Glut
 <3>   ZLB                  i =0               monetary policy response to stagnation

 <4>   Deflation            π＜０ <π*            Too tight monetary policy

       J apanization        All of the above




                                                                  34
Figure 1: The relationship among the inflation rate, the nominal interest rate and the real interest rate and




                                                                   35
Figure 2. Inflation Rates (headline) (Japan, US, UK, Germany)
        Panel A. Time-series




                                                                36
Panel B. Period Averages




                                       Inflation rate (headlline CPI)

                                  1985 to 1990       1991 to 2000       2001 to 2007   After 2008

       Japan (w /o VAT effect)          1.279               0.678            -0.269        0.104
                           USA          3.904               2.803             2.692        1.792
                     Germ any           1.509               2.394             1.647        1.423
                            UK          6.098               2.695             1.701        2.722
                           EURO                             2.423             2.187        1.621



                                                   37
Figure 3. Growth Rates (1985-2015, US, UK, Japan, Germany, Euro Zone)
       Panel A. Time-series




                                                            38
Panel B. Period Averages




                                       GDP grow th (annual %)

                                1985 to 1990     1991 to 2000   2001 to 2007   After 2008
                     Japan            5.227            1.138          1.411        0.128
                       USA            3.503            3.449          2.449        1.142
                  Germ any            3.146            1.978          1.408        0.740
                 Euro area            3.228            2.255          2.001       -0.097
                           UK         3.540            2.406          2.896        0.542




                                                39
Figure 4. GDP (Japan and US)
       Panel A. Nominal GDP




                               40
Panel B. Real GDP




       Notes: Real GDP in each country is at the 2005 prices.




                                                        41
Figure 5. Nominal Short-term Interest rate (1985-2015. US, UK, Japan Euro Zone)
        Panel A. Time-series




                                                              42
Panel B. Period Averages




                                                                 United      United
                                          Germany Japan                                  Euro area
                                                                 Kingdom States
                           1985 to 1990       5.64        5.93        12.12         7.75
                           1991 to 2000       5.09        1.68          6.54        4.85       4.26
                           2001 to 2007       2.89        0.11          4.70        2.83       2.89
                           2008 to 2014       0.60        0.10          0.63        0.13       0.60




                                                             43
Figure 6. Nominal long interest rate
        Panel A. Time-series




                                       44
Panel B. Long-term nominal interest rate, Period Averages




                                                               United      United
                                        Germany Japan                                 Euro area
                                                               Kingdom States
                         1985 to 1990       6.95        5.67        10.39        8.76       9.68
                         1991 to 2000       6.28        3.43          7.38       6.41       7.33
                         2001 to 2007       4.15        1.40          4.74       4.52       4.27
                         2008 to 2014       2.40        1.01          3.13       2.80       3.55




                                                           45
Figure 7. Real Short Interest rate
        Panel A. Time-series




                                     46
Panel B. Period averages.




                                                           short real interest rate
                                                            United      United
                                    Germany     Japan                               Euro   area
                                                            Kingdom States
                     1985 to 1990        4.13         4.65         7.18       3.84
                     1991 to 2000        2.69         1.00         3.85       2.05          0.56
                     2001 to 2007        1.24         0.38         2.99       0.14          0.70
                     2008 to 2014       -0.91         0.01        -2.28      -1.80         -1.14




                                                               47
Figure 8. Real Long interest rates
        Panel A. Time-series




                                     48
Panel B. Period Averages




                                                        Long real interest rate
                                                         United     United
                                   Germany    Japan                            Euro   area
                                                         Kingdom States
                    1985 to 1990       5.44         4.39       5.45       4.86        9.68
                    1991 to 2000       3.89         2.75       4.69       3.61        4.91
                    2001 to 2007       2.50         1.67       3.03       1.83        2.08
                    2008 to 2014       0.89         0.92       0.21       0.88        1.80




                                                            49
Figure 9 panel A. Japanization Index




Note: The Japanization index is the sum of GDP gap, inflation rate, and the nominal short-term interest rate.
Source: Author’ calculation




                                                                  50
Figure 9 panel B.




                                 United     United
               Germany Japan                           Euro area
                                 Kingdom States
1991 to 2000       6.76    -0.05       8.93       7.91
2001 to 2007       3.81    -1.12       6.45       4.74       4.63
2008 to 2014       0.98    -1.58       1.67       0.42       0.21




                                                                    51
Figure 10. Inflation rates in Japan




                                      52
Panel 11. Nikkei225, so residential and commercial indexes




                                                             53
Figure 12. Central Bank balance sheets




                                         54
Figure 13. The land prices bubble: Japan – US comparison




                                                           55
