                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                        THE LIMITS OF MERITOCRACY:
           SCREENING BUREAUCRATS UNDER IMPERFECT VERIFIABILITY

                                   Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
                                        Xiao Yu Wang
                                         Shuang Zhang

                                      Working Paper 21963
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21963


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 2016, Revised May 2019



Previously circulated as "The Limits of Political Meritocracy: Screening Mayors in China Under
Imperfect Verifiability." We thank the editor and two anonymous referees for very useful
suggestions. We are also grateful to Douglas Almond, Kehinde Ajayi, Attila Ambrus, Abhijit
Banerjee, Pat Bayer, Charlie Becker, Prashant Bharadwaj, Allan Collard-Wexler, Julie Cullen, Esther
Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, Erica Field, Raquel Fernandez, Fred Finan, Rob Garlick, Bob Gibbons, Gopi
Goda, Cynthia Kinnan, David Lam, Danielle Li, Hugh Macartney, Matt Masten, Michael Powell,
Nancy Qian, Debraj Ray, John van Reenen, Orie Shelef, Erik Snowberg, Duncan Thomas, Chris
Udry, Daniel Xu, Xiaoxue Zhao, and participants in the NBER/BREAD Fall Development
Meetings, the Duke Labor/Development seminar, the Colegio de Mexico seminar, the 2015 World
Congress of the Econometric Society, the 2015 Society for the Advancement of Economic Theory,
NEUDC Brown, the Stanford GSB PE seminar, the NYU Development seminar, and the MIT Sloan
Organizational Economics seminar for helpful comments. This paper was previously circulated
under the title “The One Child Policy and Promotion of Mayors in China.” Suárez Serrato and Zhang
thank the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR) for financial support. Suárez
Serrato gratefully acknowledges support from the Kauffman Foundation. We thank Pawel Charasz,
Stephanie Karol, Han Gao, Matt Panhans, and Victor Ye for providing excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, Xiao Yu Wang, and Shuang Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Limits of Meritocracy: Screening Bureaucrats Under Imperfect Verifiability
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, Xiao Yu Wang, and Shuang Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 21963
February 2016, Revised May 2019
JEL No. D23,D73,D86,M12,M51,O12,O15,O53,P23,P26,P48

                                         ABSTRACT

Does bureaucratic ability predict promotion in governments? We show that self-reported
performance in enforcing the One Child Policy predicts mayoral promotion in China. However,
misreporting handicaps screening—a non-manipulated performance measure does not predict
promotion. We show that this is consistent with a model where a government has a meritocratic
objective but underestimates the imperfect verifiability of performance, rather than a model
where a government is only interested in the illusion of meritocracy. Thus, despite meritocratic
intentions, we challenge the notion that a successful promotion system effectively substituted for
democratic institutions in explaining Chinese growth.

Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato                      Shuang Zhang
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Duke University                                 University of Colorado Boulder
213 Social Sciences Building                    UCB 256
Box 90097                                       Boulder, CO 80302
Durham, NC 27708                                shuang.zhang@colorado.edu
and NBER
jc@jcsuarez.com

Xiao Yu Wang
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
xy.wang@duke.edu
                                  The Limits of Meritocracy:
            Screening Bureaucrats Under Imperfect Verifiability∗
                        Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato                   Xiao Yu Wang
                        Duke University & NBER                  Duke University & NBER

                                              Shuang Zhang†
                                      University of Colorado Boulder

                                                 May 22, 2019



                                                    Abstract

           Does bureaucratic ability predict promotion in governments? We show that self-reported
       performance in enforcing the One Child Policy predicts mayoral promotion in China. However,
       misreporting handicaps screening—a non-manipulated performance measure does not predict
       promotion. We show that this is consistent with a model where a government has a meritocratic
       objective but underestimates the imperfect verifiability of performance, rather than a model
       where a government is only interested in the illusion of meritocracy. Thus, despite meritocratic
       intentions, we challenge the notion that a successful promotion system effectively substituted for
       democratic institutions in explaining Chinese growth.

       JEL Codes: D23, D73, D86, M12, M51, O12, O15, O53, P23, P26, P48.




   ∗
      We thank the editor and two anonymous referees for very useful suggestions. We are also grateful to Douglas
Almond, Kehinde Ajayi, Attila Ambrus, Abhijit Banerjee, Pat Bayer, Charlie Becker, Prashant Bharadwaj, Allan
Collard-Wexler, Julie Cullen, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, Erica Field, Raquel Fernandez, Fred Finan, Rob Garlick,
Bob Gibbons, Gopi Goda, Cynthia Kinnan, David Lam, Danielle Li, Hugh Macartney, Matt Masten, Michael Powell,
Nancy Qian, Debraj Ray, John van Reenen, Orie Shelef, Erik Snowberg, Duncan Thomas, Chris Udry, Daniel Xu,
Xiaoxue Zhao, and participants in the NBER/BREAD Fall Development Meetings, the Duke Labor/Development
seminar, the Colegio de Mexico seminar, the 2015 World Congress of the Econometric Society, the 2015 Society
for the Advancement of Economic Theory, NEUDC Brown, the Stanford GSB PE seminar, the NYU Development
seminar, and the MIT Sloan Organizational Economics seminar for helpful comments. This paper was previously
circulated under the title “The One Child Policy and Promotion of Mayors in China.” Suárez Serrato and Zhang
thank the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR) for financial support. Suárez Serrato gratefully
acknowledges support from the Kauffman Foundation. We thank Pawel Charasz, Stephanie Karol, Han Gao, Matt
Panhans, and Victor Ye for providing excellent research assistance.
    †
      Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato: Department of Economics, Duke University, and NBER, jc@jcsuarez.com.
Xiao Yu Wang: Department of Economics, Duke University, and NBER, xy.wang@duke.edu.
Shuang Zhang: Department of Economics, University of Colorado Boulder, shuang.zhang@colorado.edu.
Bureaucracies play a central role in providing goods and services to people around the world, and the
selection of bureaucrats has enormous impacts on welfare and inequality (Acemoglu, 2005, Besley
and Persson, 2010, Rasul and Rogger, 2016). Scholars argue that political meritocracies—incentive
systems explicitly designed to identify able leaders—may supplant democratic institutions by ef-
fectively screening for bureaucratic ability.1 We provide a new assessment of the screening power
of meritocratic incentives by recognizing the fact that bureaucrats are often evaluated on the ba-
sis of imperfectly observed and unverifiable measures of performance. How effective are political
meritocracies when performance metrics are manipulable?
    We answer this question by analyzing the promotion patterns of mayors responsible for the
implementation of China’s One Child Policy (OCP). We find that, while provincial governments
used promotion incentives to screen for mayoral ability, manipulation of reported birth statistics
weakened the screening power of the meritocracy to the extent that promoted mayors were not
ultimately of higher ability.
    Answering this question is hampered by several challenges. First, output may be rewarded
with promotion even in cases where there is no screening motive. This underscores the need to first
establish whether a set of incentives is driven by an objective to identify high-ability leaders. Second,
unobserved factors that can lead to cadre advancement (e.g. political connections, unobserved ability,
economic growth) may be correlated with observed performance and may confound the relation
between performance and compensation. Third, it is often not possible to detect manipulation in
performance metrics, which is essential to evaluating the screening efficacy of any incentive system.
    We overcome these challenges by combining theoretical insights with institutional features of Chi-
nese mayoral promotion. First, we formalize the incentive design of a government that compensates
mayors who differ in privately-known ability on the basis of manipulable performance measures.
The model captures our empirical setting and connects the equilibrium incentive structure with
the strength of the government’s screening motive (i.e. meritocracy). We show that screening is
costly for the principal, in the sense that incentives that prioritize screening reduce total output.
Intuitively, a principal that prioritizes screening over production will provide incentives that sepa-
rate the effort exerted by agents of differing abilities, as this increases the chance that agents with
higher output are also the ones with higher ability. However, these incentives reduce the effort of
lower-ability agents as well as total production. We characterize this trade-off between extracting
information and maximizing production, and derive testable comparative statics describing how the
impact of increased output on the probability of being promoted varies with respect to features of
the environment, such as promotion competitiveness and output variability. These theoretical in-
sights enable us to establish empirically whether observed incentives are consistent with a screening
(meritocratic) motive.
    We apply these insights to the promotion of Chinese mayors and provide empirical evidence that
provincial governments used the implementation of the OCP to screen for high-ability cadres. We
focus on the OCP as it is broadly recognized as one of the top three priorities in cadre evaluation
(Birney 2014), and as this setting provides a unique opportunity to evaluate whether imperfect
   1
     Bell (2015) defines political meritocracy as “the idea that a political system is designed with the aim of selecting
political leaders with above average ability to make morally informed political judgments.” Bell and Li (2012) provide
an overview of meritocracy in the Chinese political system from the point of view of political science.


                                                           1
verifiability limited the system’s effectiveness at screening bureaucrats. First, we find that mayors
with better self-reported OCP performance are more likely to be promoted.2 On average, reducing
the reported rate of natural increase by 1 in 1,000 people increases the probability of promotion by
13% and is equivalent, in its effect on promotion, to an 10% increase in GDP.3 Second, we find that
promotion patterns are consistent with the comparative statics of a system of meritocratic incentives.
We show that OCP performance is more predictive of promotion in provinces where OCP is a more
informative signal of mayoral ability. We also show that OCP performance is less predictive of
promotion in provinces where promotions are more competitive, as it is more difficult for any given
mayor to achieve the maximum output–and thus be promoted–when the pool of competitors is
larger.4 These results suggest that, beyond implementing the OCP, promotion incentives were used
deliberately to screen for high-ability mayors.
    Finally, we study whether the meritocracy succeeded at identifying high-ability mayors. Since
mayors are evaluated on the basis of self-reported data, mayors may misreport. We use population
auditing surveys and employ a retrospective measure of performance based on census microdata to
analyze potential cheating behavior. We find that mayors adjust their manipulation of data on the
rate of natural increase. This is consistent with our model’s prediction that mayoral effort increases
and misreporting decreases when audits increase the probability of detection.
    Our model shows that the scope for manipulation limits the power of the screening mechanism
to select high-ability mayors: the expected ability of the promoted mayor is a combination of the ex-
pected ability under a random promotion scheme and a scheme where OCP performance is perfectly
verifiable. Our results show that provincial leaders attempted to use promotions as a meritocratic
screening device, and that mayors respond to these incentives by working harder in years when au-
dits are stronger. While provincial governments were not able to evaluate the extent of misreporting
in real time, our retrospective analysis shows that, in practice, mayor manipulation rendered the
meritocracy ineffective as actual OCP performance using census data is not predictive of promotion.
    We explore the robustness of our results to a number of potential concerns. We assuage concerns
that our conclusions are the spurious byproduct of unobserved measures of performance or political
connections (Shih et al. 2012, Jia et al. 2015). By focusing on the comparative statics of the model,
the finding that OCP incentives are consistent with a meritocratic objective relies on non-trivial
patterns that are unlikely to result from spurious correlations. In particular, any story of potential
confounders that may explain the effect of OCP performance on promotion must also account for
   2
     Throughout, we use the demographic concept of the rate of natural increase, which is defined as the crude birth
rate minus the crude death rate. Targets for the rate of natural increase are set every five years in Five-year Plans.
We measure mayors’ performance in implementing the OCP by the gap between the centrally-set target of natural
increase and the rate they report achieving.
   3
     In particular, we show that OCP matters for promotion beyond meeting the target, providing empirical evidence
for Wong (2012), who reports that officials are penalized in promotion for poor population control, regardless of their
performance in other categories.
   4
     These results are robust to alternative measures of noisiness and competitiveness. We use three measures of
noisiness: the province-level variance in birth rates, the province-level variance in gross migration, and the average
of both measures. We use the average tenure of provincial officials as a first measure of competitiveness. Intuitively,
provinces with higher average tenure are more competitive, since this means slots for promotion open up less frequently
for aspiring mayors. We also use the average promotion rate as a second measure of competitiveness as well as the
average of both measures.




                                                          2
the comparative statics on noise and competitiveness.5 Nonetheless, we pursue several alternative
strategies to allay these concerns. First, we use the panel structure of our data and include mayor
fixed effects.6 Second, we control for alternative, non-manipulable measures of economic growth.7
Third, we pursue an identification strategy to isolate variation in OCP performance that is exogenous
to time-varying political connections. We use changes in the targets set by the central government
in five-year plans as an instrument for OCP performance.8 Finally, we show the robustness of
our results to other potential concerns, including measurement error, prefecture-level incentives,
and alternative specifications. In all cases, we find that OCP performance has economically and
statistically significant effects on promotion, that the comparative statics are consistent with a
system of meritocratic incentives, and that actual OCP performance is not predictive of promotion.
       Rather than attributing these results to corruption or to an aversion to meritocracy in the
Chinese government, our results show that provincial governments attempted to use the OCP to
identify and promote high-ability leaders. However, the imperfect verifiability of birth rates limited
the efficacy of the meritocracy and resulted in a promotion rule that effectively promoted mayors
at random. Counter to common belief (e.g., Wong, 2012), the use of the OCP as a screening tool
may have lowered the human cost of the policy, since incentives that did not prioritize screening
would have resulted in higher overall effort in controlling population growth. Overall, our results
form a counterpoint to the argument that the success of the Chinese authoritarian government can
be attributed to a successful system of meritocratic promotions (Bell and Li, 2012).
       Our model makes three innovations that are at the core of our results. First, in contrast to
the career concerns model of Holmstrom (1999), we analyze a setting where multiple agents with
private abilities compete. This feature gives rise to the trade-off between signal separation versus
production.9 Second, our model extends the classic literature on tournaments (e.g. Lazear and
Rosen 1981) by enriching the principal’s objective to allow for an unobserved value for meritocracy.
The possibility that the government values the screening motive beyond ability’s role in production
is crucial for studying political meritocracy. Finally, we allow for imperfectly-verifiable performance
metrics to show how misreporting limits the screening power of meritocracies. These theoretical
   5
      We also derive alternative comparative statics on noise and competitiveness whenever promotion is based on an
unobserved metric that is correlated with OCP performance. We show that if OCP performance is correlated with
connections or with an unobservable measure of performance, we would not expect to see the empirical comparative
statics that are revealed by the data.
    6
      Our regressions also include prefecture fixed effects, year fixed effects, prefecture-year characteristics, and potential
determinants of the targets.
    7
      These measures include the log of economic output, economic growth rate, and non-manipulable measures of
output such as railway cargo volume and electricity usage.
    8
      We show that the instrument is not correlated with economic growth, indicating that the effect of OCP perfor-
mance on promotion is not a spurious byproduct of economic development. We also provide evidence for the validity
of this strategy by showing that new province targets are not set to favor particular mayors, and that mayors are not
strategically promoted to help them avoid toughened targets.
    9
      Our focus on the relation between government objectives and equilibrium incentives is more closely tied to research
on organizational forms (e.g., Maskin et al. 2000) than to the career concerns literature. In contrast to the current
literature that expands on the career concerns model of Holmstrom (1999) (see, e.g., Persson and Zhuravskaya 2015,
Jia 2014, and Jia et al. 2015), this paper allows for strategic interaction between agents in their effort choice and
misreporting behavior, which is crucial for analyzing the principal’s objective. For example, Jia et al. (2015) analyze
single-agent promotion where the agent is non-strategic—her ability is exogenously-given and she takes no actions.
In this setting, there is no role for the principal to use incentives, like promotion, to influence agents’ efforts, and it
is not possible to infer the principal’s objective from equilibrium incentives.



                                                              3
innovations open the door to studying a variety of new questions. In our setting, they enable us to
use observed patterns of compensation to learn about the underlying objectives of the government,
and to evaluate how effective the government is at achieving those objectives.
    Our model simplifies some features of the environment that are not critical for our purposes.
First, we focus on a single performance measure, in order to isolate the trade-off between production
and signal extraction, while allowing for a manipulable measure of performance. In contrast, the
standard multi-tasking model is single principal-single agent, and there is no misreporting of output
by agents. Strategic misreporting from multiple mayors on multiple tasks complicates the analysis
beyond the scope of this paper, leads us away from our main research questions, and is unlikely
to affect our main results.10 Similarly, we do not directly model the role of political connections.
Instead, our model derives testable predictions for the case where the measure of performance is
related to an unobserved margin, such as a political connection. We find that the predictions go
against the case of meritocracy, which implies that we may empirically separate the two cases.
Regardless of these abstractions, our model shows that treating the structure of incentives as an
equilibrium object and understanding the underlying objectives that determine them is essential to
a complete understanding of meritocracy, its effect on incentives, and its efficacy in selection.
    Given the wide-ranging policies that are implemented through promotion incentives in China, the
economics literature is just starting to recognize the importance of this mechanism for the effective
implementation of economic policy.11 In particular, the literature on political selection is not able
to empirically distinguish incentives designed for screening from those designed for output produc-
tion, or to identify screening made ineffective by misreporting. This paper provides a fundamental
reassessment of the empirical relation between promotion and reported performance by combining
a rich empirical environment with a model that is suited to the empirical setting. Our model shows
that identifying a truly meritocratic objective requires tracing out the principal’s trade-off between
screening for ability and maximizing output, and that meritocratic policies may fail to select high
ability mayors in the presence of misreporting.
    While there is evidence to suggest that the implementation of the One Child Policy was used to
screen mayoral ability beyond other measures such as GDP (e.g. Birney (2014); Scharping (2003);
Wong (2012)), this is ultimately an empirical question. We test the rich predictions from our model
and show that the implementation of the world’s largest population control program in history was
significantly affected by the use of promotion incentives.12 We provide evidence both that perfor-
mance measures are manipulated,13 and that this weakens the efficacy of the screening mechanism
  10
     We know from Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) that, in multi-tasking settings, noisiness in one performance
measure may depress the power of the optimal, linear wage for all tasks. Even if this multi-tasking intuition generalizes
to multiple agents and imperfectly verifiable output, our main result relating the principal’s trade-off between signal
extraction and production should remain unchanged. The key insight that the principal moves from a piece rate to a
tournament as her value of screening grows should not change since the power of both schemes would be reduced.
  11
     See, for example, Shih et al. 2012, Li and Zhou 2005, Zheng et al. 2014, Landry 2008, and Fisman and Wang
2015.
  12
     Our results thus add to the literature on incentive design by taking theory to a unique dataset in an interesting
Chinese setting. While papers in contract theory explore incentive structures given noisy signals of effort or ability (
Lazear and Rosen 1981, Baker et al. 1994, Holmstrom 1999, Rochet and Stole 2003), the body of empirical evidence
testing these theoretical mechanisms is relatively small (Baker et al. 1994, Prendergast 1999, Chiappori and Salanie
2000).
  13
     Our paper is also related to forensic economics, a literature which uncovers evidence of hidden behaviors and



                                                           4
in identifying high-ability individuals.14
    The enforcement of the OCP is uniquely suited to our analysis for several reasons. First, the
central government audits population figures by conducting fertility surveys.15 The timing of the
audits generates variation in audit probabilities, which are a central part of our model. Second,
data from auxiliary population surveys can be used to measure misreporting and to evaluate the
screening efficacy of promotion incentives. Third, changes in directives from five-year plans generate
identifying variation in incentives. Finally, enforcing the OCP is recognized as the most difficult
task among local officials (Scharping, 2003); thus, an official’s proficiency in controlling births is
likely an effective signal of a mayor’s ability. In addition, we deepen the understanding of the OCP
(e.g., Qian 2009, Ebenstein 2010, Wei and Zhang 2011, Choukhmane et al. 2014). Our findings
suggest a mechanism for the persistence of the OCP—in addition to caring inherently about reducing
births, the meritocracy-minded government, unable to accurately evaluate the strength of its audits,
erroneously believed that reported success at implementing the OCP was informative of mayors’
ability.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes institutional details of the
OCP and its implementation. Section 2 develops a model of optimal compensation for mayors and
discusses testable predictions. We describe our data in Section 3. Section 4 tests the theoretical
predictions on the promotion rule and Section 5 provides evidence of data manipulation in response
to audit risk and analyzes the efficacy of the promotion mechanism in selecting high-ability mayors.
Section 6 concludes by discussing the role of manipulation in analyzing equilibrium promotion rules.


1     Institutional Details of the One Child Policy
In 1979, soon after China’s Cultural Revolution and after a decade-long economic crisis, Deng Xiaop-
ing expressed the fear that “without birth planning, economic growth will be consumed by population
growth.” Since then, all economic planning has presupposed success in population control. At the
national level, a specific target on population growth was set so that the total population would
not exceed 1.2 billion in 2000. Chinese scientists working for the government further developed a
projection that showed that, in order to achieve the population target, the optimal fertility level
should be one child per woman (Scharping 2003). This recommendation was incorporated into the
family planning policy in the same year and the policy was thereafter known in the West as the One
Child Policy (OCP).16
corruption, and which studies the role of audits in limiting corruption. See Zitzewitz (2012) for a review of recent
papers in forensic economics, as well as studies that use audits to detect corruption, including Olken (2006), Ferraz
and Finan (2008), Ferraz and Finan (2011), and Bobonis et al. (2013).
   14
      Whether screening mechanisms successfully select high-ability agents for promotion is still an open question in
many areas. For example, recent studies find empirical evidence of incentive distortions, including teacher manipula-
tion of test scores (Jacob and Levitt 2003) and of student composition in test-taking pools (Cullen and Reback 2006).
However, these studies do not investigate the impact that manipulation has on the quality of teachers hired.
   15
      In contrast, it is difficult to evaluate the accuracy of local GDP figures and no formal auditing is used by upper-level
government to verify these reported measures of performance.
   16
      The OCP was intended to end by 2000. Amendments have relaxed this policy for single children, and it was further
relaxed to a universal two-child policy in 2015. However, birth planning remains a 基本国策 (i.e., “a fundamental
national policy”) of the government (http://news.sina.com.cn/c/2016-01-11/doc-ifxnkkuy7874744.shtml).




                                                              5
   Under the OCP, a limit of one child per family was strictly enforced in urban areas, and second-
child permits were issued for special exemptions in rural areas and for ethnic minorities. Some other
exemptions were also granted, for example, to couples who were disabled or who lived in remote
areas. Provinces with a tight policy restricted themselves to common norms for exemptions, while
regions with a more relaxed policy may include other criteria. The national policy was relaxed in
1984 to allow rural couples to have a second child if their first-born was a girl.

1.1   Enforcement Mechanisms
A variety of birth control methods have been used to enforce the OCP. Sterilization and insertion
of an intrauterine device (IUD) after the first or second birth were implemented on a large scale.
Between 1979 and 1999, the percentage of women of reproductive age who underwent sterilization
rose from 21% to 35% (Scharping 2003). Meanwhile, coerced abortions of unauthorized pregnancies
have been used as a “remedial measure making up for contraceptive failures.” For above-quota births,
financial sanctions are the main instrument for enforcing the OCP. Depending on the location and
time period, the birth of an extra child can cost a family 10%-25% of their annual income for 7-14
years. Other punishments widely used include denial of bonus payments, health and welfare benefits,
denial of job promotions or even demotions in urban work units, as well as the confiscation of family
farmland in rural areas.
   Strong resistance and non-compliance at the grassroots level, especially in rural areas, made it
very challenging to enforce the OCP. As documented by Scharping (2003), internal reports issued
within the party in the 1980s and 1990s acknowledged that assaults on local birth-planning cadres
were frequently provoked by coercive abortions, sterilizations, and the administration of penalties.

1.2   Mayoral Promotions and the OCP
      “计划生育是天底下最难的一项任务!”
      “Birth planning is the hardship number one under heaven!”

                                                            –A Chinese cadre (Scharping, 2003)

The central government controls the appointment, evaluation, promotion, and demotion of subna-
tional officials in China, and the career paths of these officials are determined by the performance
of their jurisdictions (Xu 2011). The central government directly controls the key positions at
the province level and grants the provincial government the power to appoint key officials at the
prefecture level. The provincial government stipulates a set of performance criteria for mayors.
   Economic growth, social stability, and enforcement of the One Child Policy are consistently
among the highest priorities (Birney 2014). In a published list of performance indicators of 104
prefectures in 2000, GDP per capita was used to evaluate economic growth and the birth rate was
used to evaluate enforcement of the OCP (Landry 2008). However, despite the consensus that the
OCP is among the highest priorities of the Chinese government, we are not aware of empirical
evidence on the role of enforcing the OCP in the evaluation of officials. This is the first study to



                                                   6
present a bigger picture by considering the role of the OCP, in addition to economic growth, in
determining promotion of officials.
       A centrally-controlled planning system has monitored the local enforcement of the OCP since
the 1980s. At the highest level, the State Planning Commission sets birth plan targets as part of
five-year plans, with the original goal of meeting the national population goal of 1.2 billion by the
year 2000. Thus, the annual province-level targets for population and birth rate are set every five
years. Only national and provincial targets are set; these targets are assigned to prefectures and
further distributed to lower levels (Hardee-Cleaveland and Banister 1988). Prefectures are responsi-
ble for local implementation and submit the population and birth data to provinces. Provinces then
transmit these numbers to the central government.
       Birth control performance is directly linked to cadre evaluation. Hardee-Cleaveland and Banister
(1988) document the following:

         In Shaanxi in March 1987, the provincial party committee deputy secretary and acting
         governor “demanded that leaders at all levels should simultaneously grasp two kinds of
         production - economic production and reproduction - and take measures to do this work
         well and firmly. Otherwise, they are not qualified leaders.”

1.3       Data Collection and (Mis)reporting by Chinese Mayors
Data for the evaluation of mayoral OCP performance are gathered by a birth planning commis-
sion (Scharping 2003). The birth planning commission is in charge of workers in villages (rural),
neighborhood committees (urban), and industrial enterprises (urban), who file cards on women of
reproductive age, and keep track of their births. Prefectures do random checks twice a year to verify
these numbers, while the birth planning commission does random checks more frequently. These
local workers have no direct incentive to deviate from their assigned task, since their incomes and
careers do not explicitly depend on these numbers, in contrast with the mayor. The prefecture then
aggregates these local numbers and sends a prefecture-level number to province. The data manipu-
lation (misreporting) is most likely to occur through the mayor (either directly or indirectly), since
her performance evaluation depends explicitly on this number.
       In addition to the birth rate, the birth planning rate, which is the percentage of total births that
are authorized, is also reported from lower level governments. In practice, lower level authorities often
report very high birth planning rates of 98-99%, which are extremely unrealistic and unreliable. This
is because it is much more difficult for the central government to verify whether a birth is authorized
than whether a birth occurred. For this reason, the birth planning rate is not used in the evaluation
of mayor performance (Scharping 2003).
       The leadership has been aware that, even for birth rate numbers, there are potential problems
with data quality since the data are reported by officials whose evaluations depend on these data.
Population census data are ideal as a systematic comparison with reported numbers, but are only
conducted approximately every ten years (1982, 1990, and 2000).17 A mini census for 0.1% of the
  17
    Census data are collected independently by the City Bureau of Statistics (organized by the National Bureau of
Statistics (NBS)). They survey every household to gather birth and population information. It is viewed as the best
data on birth and population counts.


                                                        7
population was conducted in 1995. To further investigate the credibility of reported birth numbers,
the State Birth-Planning Commission was charged with conducting national fertility surveys for
0.1% to 0.2% of the population in 1988, 1992, and 1997. These census and national fertility surveys
were organized at the province level, where they serve as the main instrument for data validation.
As an example, the 1992 fertility survey uncovered an underreporting of 18% in reported birth rates.
A particularly striking case of underreporting was found in Guangxi province and the leadership was
forced to deliver a written self-criticism (Scharping 2003).
    Figure 1 displays an official document from Fujian province that links OCP performance to
promotion outcomes and details guidelines for local officials with respect to the implementation of
the OCP. The first highlighted section states that local officials are responsible for reporting accurate
birth rates and other OCP statistics. The second highlighted section states that local officials should
ensure the accuracy of the reported numbers and avoid underreporting, misreporting, faking, and
failing to report birth rate statistics. Finally, the third highlighted section states that the province
government is responsible for investigating violations of these guidelines. If these guidelines are
violated, the responsible officials are denied positive credits in their annual evaluation and their
records are sent to the personnel department of the province government.




2     A Tournament Model with Non-Contractible Output
We are interested in whether self-reported and actual OCP performance predict mayoral promotion,
and what we can learn from any discrepancy or parity. Because we cannot observe the government’s
true objective, or the compensation schemes that bureaucrats actually faced, we write a model that
yields a relationship between promotion patterns and the government’s objectives. In particular, we
show that different objectives correspond to differences in how the marginal impact of self-reported
output on promotion probability varies in competition and noise. The key theoretical insight is
that a tournament with one prize generates more “separation” in output across agents with different
ability and convex effort costs, while an incentive structure which applies more continuous pressure,
such as a piece-rate, generates more total output. The principal’s relative value of screening (i.e.
meritocracy) determines whether she designs incentives to magnify differences in the output of high-
ability versus low-ability agents (a tournament), at the cost of total output, or to generate as much
output as possible, which reduces what individual output reveals about the underlying ability of the
agent (a piece-rate). We also characterize the degree to which imperfect verifiability of performance
affects the efficacy of a tournament as a screening mechanism for ability.

2.1   The Model
The world is populated by a risk-neutral principal and N ∈ {2, 3, 4, ...} risk-neutral agents. Agents
are heterogeneous only in their privately-known ability, ai . Utility for all agents is described by
ui (x) = x for x ∈ R. In our setting, the principal is the provincial governor and the agents are the
mayors competing for promotion.


                                                   8
                                                                                                                             “     ”
                             “                                                                                                                      ”
                                             [2004]51




                                             Figure 1: Official Document From Fujian Province
                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                             (           )




                                                  ( )             (       )                  (       )               (   )                  (   )
                 (   )




                                                                      ( )           (            )


                         ( )
                                     (   )                                                                           1                  2
                         3                        4                           5                                  6
                                                                                        1    5 6
                         ( )                                              “             ”


                         ( )                                                                                                     70%
                         ( )                                                                                                           95%
                         ( )
                         ( )                                                                ( )
                         ( )
                         ( )
                         ( )
                         ( )      ( )
                         (       )


                                     (   )
                                     (   )    (           )




                                                      (       )   (   )       ( )   ( )




Note: This document from Fujian Province outlines guidelines for local officials on the One Child Policy
and links performance to promotion outcomes. The first highlighted section states that local officials are
responsible for reporting accurate birth rates and other OCP statistics. The second highlighted section
states that local officials should ensure the ( accuracy
                                                    )
                                                          of the reported numbers and avoid underreporting,
misreporting, faking, and excluding birth rate statistics. Finally, the third highlighted section states that the
province government is responsible for investigating violations of these guidelines. If they are violated, the
responsible officials are denied positive credits in their annual evaluation, and their records are sent to the
personnel department of the province government. Source: http://yz.zfxxgk.gov.cn/ShowArticle.
asp?ArticleID=75204



               http://yz.zfxxgk.gov.cn/ShowArticle.asp?ArticleID=75204
                                                                                                         9
    The governor chooses a compensation scheme and which single mayor to promote in order to
maximize the following weighted sum of total output produced and the expected ability of the
promoted mayor:
                                             N
                                         "           #
                                             X
                                    ωE             yi + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted].                                     (1)
                                             i=1

In our setting, output yi is the birth rate achieved by mayor ai .18 The weight ω may capture the
trade-off between output maximization and an inherent value of meritocracy, between maximizing
short-run versus long-run output, and between maximizing output in one task versus maximizing
output across several tasks, to name a few interpretations. If ω = 1, the governor focuses only on
maximizing output. If ω = 0, the governor focuses only on promoting the mayor with the highest
ability. ω is determined by the central government in our empirical setting and is held constant
across regions.
    Mayor ai produces output yi = ei + εi , where ei is unobservable and non-contractible effort, and
εi ∼ exp(λ) is noise with mean E(ε) = λ1 , variance V (ε) =                1
                                                                           λ2
                                                                              ,   and is iid across agents.19 The effort
                          1
cost to ai is c(ei ) =    ai   exp(ei ) . These assumptions ensure that a given level of effort is less costly
and that marginal cost of effort is lower for higher-ability mayors, that higher levels of effort are
more costly for all mayors, and that effort cost increases at an increasing rate. Assume for notational
convenience that a1 > a2 > ... > aN ≥ 1; a mayor with a higher i index has lower ability. The
governor and the mayors know the average ability in the population, ā = N1 N
                                                                           P
                                                                               a.
                                                                            i=1 i

    Output is not observable or contractible, but the governor can compensate mayors based on their
self-reports ŷi .20 Suppose the governor audits mayors’ reports, but these audits are limited in their
scope. The governor commits to firing any mayor who can be proven to be over-reporting (the mayor
incurs disutility F << 0 from being fired), but proving this is difficult. In particular, the audit is
                                                           ŷi
sufficient proof with certainty if and only if             yi    > δ: the mayor exaggerates by a lot. If the mayor
                                             ŷi
only slightly exaggerates, that is,          yi    ∈ (1, δ], then the audit is sufficient proof with only probability
p ∈ (0, 1). That is, given that a mayor is over-reporting, the audit generates sufficient proof with
probability p and the mayor is fired, but generates insufficient proof with probability (1 − p) and the
mayor is not fired. In other words, even if a governor knows a mayor is lying, if she cannot prove it,
she cannot fire him. The strength of the audit is captured both by p and δ. Both δ = 1 and p = 1
capture the case where output is contractible.21
    The governor chooses between two compensation schemes: a tournament based on reported
outputs where one mayor is promoted, or a piece rate. Note that mayors can still be observed to be
promoted while facing a piece rate on OCP performance, as their promotion can depend on their
performance in non-OCP tasks.
   18
      The principal prefers a lower birth rate, and agents must exert more effort to achieve a lower birth rate. “Higher
y is better” is standard, but in the case where output is the birth rate b, we can define output y ≡ 1b .
   19
      Assume that λ ∈ (0, 1), a parametric assumption for objects to be well-defined: this ensures that V (ε) ∈ (1, ∞).
   20
      See Appendix A.5 for the case where output is contractible.
   21
      Punishing liars is both an actual feature of our empirical setting (mayors are told explicitly they will incur demerits
in their performance review if they are caught lying), as well as strategic for the principal. Suppose instead that the
principal did not commit to punishing detected and proven liars, believing that she can correctly back out true output
from reported output, because she knows the degree of inflation. Then any mayor could profitably deviate by inflating
even further. This leads to unraveling, since mayors will all pool on reporting infinity.



                                                                 10
       The timing of the game is as follows:

   1. Each mayor observes her own private ability ai and chooses effort level ei , which is non-
         observable and non-contractible by the governor.

   2. Each mayor’s output yi is realized. Output remains private information.

   3. Each mayor submits a private report of output to the principal: ŷi .

   4. The governor audits each mayor. If the mayor reported ŷi = yi , she is truthful and will not be
         wrongfully charged with lying. If the mayor reports ŷi > yi , audits detect and are sufficient
                                        ŷi                                       ŷi
         proof with probability 1 if    yi    > δ, and with probability p if      yi    ∈ (1, δ]. Mayors proven to be
         lying are fired.

   5. The governor promotes one mayor based on any criterion of her choice, and compensates
         mayors who are not fired based on their self-reported output.22

       There are three “types” of pure strategy equilibria:23

   1. “All lie”: all the mayors misreport their output.

   2. “All truth”: all the mayors truthfully report their output.

   3. “Partial lie”: some mayors misreport and some mayors report truthfully.

We characterize the partial lie/partial truth equilibrium in Appendix A.6. In particular, when audits
are weaker, such that most or all agents misreport in equilibrium, the lowest-ability (and lowest-
performing) agents have the smallest incentive to misreport. This is because the lowest-performing
agents need to misreport more in order to win the tournament. In order to avoid punishment,
the lowest-performing agents simply tell the truth, which decreases the likelihood that they are
promoted even further. The remaining mayors are likely to be promoted and all misreport. Since
the mayors that are likely to be promoted all misreport, the rest of our analysis focuses on the “all
lie” equilibrium.24

2.2      Equilibrium Promotion Patterns
We show that if the governor sufficiently values meritocracy, then tournaments are preferred over
piece rates. We characterize the relationship between self-reported OCP performance and probability
of promotion when the tournament is chosen and when the piece rate is chosen, as well as how this
  22
      Note that the principal is not allowed to promote zero mayors (although she is allowed to set a bonus of zero).
This would be an extra incentive tool for the principal to induce effort. Ruling this out is realistic (when a slot opens
up, some agent does get promoted to fill it), and also “works against us” in the sense that this makes the tournament
a less potent tool. Since one of our key goals in constructing this model is to show that there exists an intuitive subset
of the parameter space, specifically, a screening motive, for which the principal’s equilibrium choice of compensation
scheme is a tournament, showing that the principal chooses to use a weakened tournament when she cares about
screening implies that a more flexible tournament would be even better.
   23
      We focus on pure strategies as it is unclear how to empirically interpret mixed strategies in OCP enforcement
effort and reporting in a static game.
   24
      We test this assumption empirically in Table A.21 and Table A.22, which show that low-performing mayors (those
who do not reach the target) misreport less and are also less likely to misreport at all.


                                                           11
relationship varies with different degrees of competition between mayors and different degrees of
noisiness in production. Our final result characterizes the extent to which a tournament mechanism
based on self-reported performance selects mayors who are actually of high ability as performance
becomes less and less verifiable.

The Relationship between Compensation Scheme and the Government’s Objective

We first characterize the compensation scheme set by the governor, depending on the relative im-
portance of meritocracy.

Proposition 1. There exists an ω̃ ∈ (0, 1) such that, if ω > ω̃ (the governor values output for
production relatively more than for screening), the governor uses a piece rate mechanism. If ω <
ω̃ (the governor values output for screening relatively more than for production), the tournament
mechanism is chosen.

       Please see Appendix A.2 for a detailed proof.25
       The intuition behind this result is the following. When the governor’s sole concern is output
maximization, continuous incentive pressure is the cheapest way to induce total effort. The convexity
of effort costs makes it less costly to smooth effort across agents of all ability levels. On the other
hand, if the government’s objective is to use observed output to identify the highest-ability agent,
then tournaments are preferred. Since the reward for output is discontinuous, and the marginal cost
of effort is decreasing in ability, the differences between the effort exerted by lower- and higher-ability
mayors will be greater than under the continuous piece rate.26 This “effort separation” across the
heterogeneously-able individuals reduces total output produced but enables the governor to infer
mayors’ abilities from output observations. When the governor sufficiently values promoting the
highest-ability mayor, the tournament mechanism becomes optimal as it induces bigger differences in
effort exerted by mayors of different ability, thereby increasing the expected ability of the promoted
mayor. However, the manipulability of output limits informativeness, as the governor can only
contract on reported output and detects lies imperfectly.27
       Figure 2 clearly illustrates the intuition. Mayors are ordered by ascending ability along the x-
axis. The chosen parameters are provided at the bottom of the figure. Given those parameters, we
solve for the best piece rate and the best tournament bonus for the governor. The dark-grey bars
indicate effort exerted under the piece rate scheme, and the light-grey bars indicate effort exerted
under the tournament. Both the “effort separation” and the lower total effort generated by the
tournament are evident.
  25
     If we allow for a combination of tournament and piece rate, we see that a mechanism with both elements (e.g.
a tournament with bonus B and piece rate payments for individual outputs) weakly dominates pure tournament or
pure piece rate. However, as ω → 0, the optimal mechanism converges toward pure tournament, and as ω → 1, the
optimal mechanism converges toward pure piece rate, so we can still compare tournament-heavy with piece rate-heavy
mechanisms and our results continue to apply.
  26
     Note that the governor cannot condition compensation directly on ability, as it is private information.
  27
     This result survives allowing the governor to choose a scheme which includes both piece rate and tournament
components. A scheme with both components always weakly dominates pure piece rate and pure tournament; however,
as ω → 1, the pure piece rate again becomes optimal, and as ω → 0, the pure tournament again becomes optimal.




                                                       12
                                    Figure 2: Numerical Example of Effort Separation




                              1.5
                              1
                     Effort
                              .5
                              0




                                             1               2                3               4                5             6
                                                                         Ability (Increasing)
                                                                     Piece-Rate                      Tournament
                                    Note: λ = 0.78, p = 0.05, N = 6, δ = 1.3, ω = 0.8, and {ai} = {6.5,6.6,6.7,6.8,6.9,7}.


Note: This figure plots equilibrium effort levels under the optimal piece rate and tournament compensation
mechanisms given a set of parameter values. The figure shows that tournaments lower overall effort but
increase effort separation across mayors of different abilities.


Equilibrium Properties of Promotion under a Pure Production Objective (ω = 1)

When ω = 1, so the governor cares about the OCP for population control and not as a means to
screen mayoral ability, the governor compensates self-reported output (lower birth rate) with a piece
rate. Thus, conditional on agent ability, the promotion rule is independent of OCP performance.



Proposition 2. If ω = 1, mayors are compensated with a piece rate and, conditional on ability,
increasing self-reported OCP output does not increase mayor ai ’s probability of promotion. This is
true regardless of the noise (λ) and the competitiveness (N ) of the environment.

Proposition 2 guides the econometrician to compare promotion outcomes for mayors with higher and
lower reported output. However, the results of Proposition 2 no longer hold when this comparison
is not conditional on a given agent’s ability, which requires additional tests.

Corollary 1. If ω = 1 and the governor bases promotions on a task other than OCP performance
that is positively correlated with ability, mayors are compensated via a piece rate on self-reported OCP
performance. In addition, unconditional on ability and conditional on performance in the promotion
task:
   (i) Self-reported OCP performance increases mayor ai ’s probability of promotion.
   (ii) Self-reported OCP performance has a larger effect (increase) on the probability of promotion
in noisier environments (smaller λ).
   (iii) Self-reported OCP performance does not have a differential effect (increase) on the probability
of promotion in more competitive environments (larger N).



                                                                                  13
   The proofs of Proposition 2 and Corollary 1 are presented in Appendix A.3.
   Given that the governor compensates mayors with a piece rate when ω = 1, it can be shown
that, in noisier environments, higher-ability mayors exert differentially higher effort compared to
lower-ability mayors. This is because, in noisier environments, the governor sets a lower piece
rate (the slope of the wage in reported output is flatter). Lower-ability mayors decrease their effort
differentially more than higher-ability mayors in response to this lower piece rate, since their marginal
cost of effort is higher. Since ability is positively correlated with the dimension on which promotion
is based, it must be that the impact of having higher ability on the probability of promotion in
noisier environments is larger. But we know that ability is also positively correlated with output.
Hence, it must be that the observed impact of increasing output on probability of promotion in
noisier environments is also larger.
   Conditional on performance in the task on which promotion is based, the impact of self-reported
OCP performance on probability of promotion cannot vary by competitiveness, since it is rewarded
with a piece rate. Thus, Corollary 1 guides the econometrician who may be concerned that she is
unable to separate variation in mayor’s self-reported OCP performance from variation in ability.

Equilibrium Properties of Promotion under Screening and Production Objectives (ω < 1)

Proposition 3. If ω < ω̃, mayors are compensated with a bonus in a tournament where the mayor
with the highest reported OCP performance who is not caught lying is promoted. Further, in the
equilibrium where all mayors misreport:
   (i) Self-reported OCP performance increases mayor ai ’s probability of promotion
   (ii) Self-reported OCP performance has a larger effect (increase) on the probability of promotion
in less noisy environments (larger λ)
   (iii) Self-reported OCP performance has a larger effect (increase) on the probability of promotion
in less competitive environments (smaller N )

   The technical details of the proof of Proposition 3 are presented in Appendix A.4.
   Result (i) is clear, since the principal has no reason to discourage higher output, beyond firing
mayors who are caught lying. Result (ii) holds because output is more informative of mayor ability
in less noisy environments. Thus, the governor has more confidence that the high production mayor
she is promoting is indeed of higher ability. Result (iii) holds because increasing output increases the
probability of achieving the maximum output by a larger amount when there are fewer competitors.
That is, there are fewer outputs a mayor has to beat in order to have the maximum output in a less
competitive environment.
   We take the contrasting predictions of Corollary 1 and Proposition 3 to the data as they allow
us to empirically differentiate between the case where promotions are driven by a meritocratic
objective, and the case where, despite the lack of a meritocratic motive, the correlation between
OCP performance and promotion is driven by an omitted variable.




                                                   14
The Predictive Power of Self-Reported versus Actual Output for Promotion when Out-
put is Non-Contractible

Our final result characterizes the degree to which mayor manipulation decreases the screening ability
of the tournament mechanism when governments wish to use OCP to learn about mayor ability.

Proposition 4. If ω < ω̃, so that the tournament compensation is optimal in the “all lie” equilibrium
with all mayors misreporting output:
    (i) The expected ability of the promoted mayor when output is not contractible is a weighted
average of the expected ability of the promoted mayor when output is contractible and the expected
ability of a randomly-drawn mayor, where the weight depends on audit strength p:

                 E non−contract [ai |i promoted] = p̃E contract [ai |i promoted] + (1 − p̃)ā



    (ii) The weaker the audit (lower p), the closer the expected ability of the promoted mayor is to a
random draw: p̃0 (p) < 0.
    (iii) When audits are completely uninformative, the expected ability of the promoted mayor is
exactly the population average: p̃(0) = 0.
    See Appendix A.4 for details.
    Typically, researchers studying audits have analyzed experiments (see, e.g., Olken 2006). In
practice, the treatments raise the audit risk from near non-existent to near certainty. Proposition 4
gives us insight into interior audit risks, which are likely to be more realistic and feasible as long-run
policies. This contribution of our model can be applied to questions beyond promotions in China.


3    Measuring Promotion and OCP Performance
The system that monitors and sets birth targets was built in the 1980s with the ultimate goal of
containing population growth by year 2000. Our study focuses on the time period 1985-2000 since
it is ideal for studying the relationship between mayoral promotions and the implementation of the
OCP, and since systematic prefecture-level data became available starting in 1985.

Sample of Mayors

We collected Chinese mayoral data by digitizing a complete list of mayors in office from 1985-2000
from two series of hard copy records: City Gazetteers, published by the gazetteer office of each
city, and the City Development Yearbook, published by the Chinese Urban Development Research
Council. The list includes the mayor’s name, as well as the year and month at the start and end of
her term. We obtained data on 967 mayors in 258 prefectures and 28 provinces between 1985 and
2000. While data on Chinese political leaders at the provincial level are more commonly accessible,
to our knowledge there are no such comprehensive data for Chinese mayors before 2000. Landry
(2008) is the only other example we know of that uses mayor data in years 1990-2000.




                                                     15
Promotion

Promotion is defined as an upward move in the political career. The most natural upward move
for a mayor is becoming the party secretary in the same or a different prefecture, which is the
definition of mayor promotion in the existing literature (Landry, 2008).28 This measure, though
convenient, ignores other possible moves above the prefecture level, including provincial governor or
vice-governor, minister of central ministries, etc. We define a mayor as being promoted if there is
an increase in her bureaucratic rank to any of the following positions at the end of her term:

   1. Prefecture: party secretary in the same or a different prefecture.

   2. Province: provincial governor or vice-governor, party secretary or vice-secretary, party com-
         mittee member, chairman or vice-chairman of the People’s Political Consultative, chairman or
         vice-chairman of the People’s Congress.29

   3. Central: minister or vice-minister of central ministries.

A mayor is not promoted if she continues as mayor, moves to positions of the same bureaucratic
rank, or exits politics. First, one could continue as mayor in the same or a different prefecture.
In our data, forty mayors served in two prefectures. If one is transferred from the first city to the
second, she is not promoted in the first city and her promotion status in the second city depends on
her move after serving the second time. Second, one could be promoted to positions in the provincial
government that have the same bureaucratic rank as mayor: director or vice-director of provincial
departments, assistant to the provincial governor, etc. Finally, while one could leave politics by
working in industry, we only observe this for three mayors in our data. See Appendix B for details
on the measurement of promotion in the data.

OCP Performance

Targets for the rate of natural increase are set every five years in Five-year Plans. The rate is the
crude birth rate minus the crude death rate. We digitized the targets for the rate of natural increase
from Provincial Five-year Plans in 1985, 1990, and 1995. For example, a province’s 1985 plan sets
the target for annual rate of natural increase in 1986-1990.
       We use two measures of the birth rate to compare the reported OCP performance with actual
performance: (1) the official rate of natural increase from published data that are reported to
provincial governments, and recorded in City Statistical Yearbooks, and (2) a retrospective birth
rate from microdata of 1990 and 2000 population censuses that are not observed by the provincial
government on a yearly basis, and the rate of natural increase is measured by the crude birth rate
  28
      In Landry (2008), promotion is defined as being promoted to the party secretary in the same prefecture or
elsewhere. This definition underestimates the likelihood of promotion because mayors could move to higher-ranked
positions at the province or central level. We use the most complete definition of promotion based on the bureaucratic
rank. In Table 1, we show that 15% of promotion of mayors in 1985-2000 was above the prefecture level.
   29
      An alternative is to define promotion to province-level positions based on administrative division, i.e., province
is a higher administrative division than prefecture. However, this is more controversial than the definition based on
bureaucratic rank. In our definition, if a mayor becomes the director of a department in the provincial government
that has the same bureaucratic rank as mayor, she is not defined as being promoted. In our data, only 40 out of the
967 mayors serve in multiple prefectures.


                                                          16
from census minus the crude death rate in City Statistical Yearbooks. A mayor’s reported OCP
performance is measured by comparing the reported rate of natural increase with the target from
the corresponding five-year plan. The lower the reported rate relative to the target, the better the
mayor’s OCP performance.30 Unfortunately, not all prefectures publish data on the rates of natural
increase consistently in 1985-2000. On average, 80% of prefectures report yearly data, except in
1988, when no prefectures published birth rate data.31 In our sample of mayors, 697 out of 967 are
matched with the reported rates.32
       We measure actual OCP performance by the gap between the target and the rate using census
data. Census data are collected independently by the City Bureau of Statistics (organized by the
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS)). They survey every household to gather birth and population
information.33
       We compute the crude birth rate retrospectively using microdata from the 1990 and 2000 cen-
suses; these data are observed by provincial government only in census years. Crude birth rates
in 1986-1989 come from the 1990 census and those in 1990-2000 come from the 2000 census. The
main concern with census data is the potential for internal migration, since prefecture of birth is not
observed for migrants in all years. Migration was tightly restricted under the Hukou system until its
relaxation in the 1990s. Figure A.1 shows the percentage of migrants in 1982-2000 from census and
population surveys. The migration rate of the entire population remained under 2% in the 1980s
and slowly increased to 4% in 1995. In our estimations, we allow for year-specific effects of these
average migration measures for years 1990-1994 and 1985-1990. The most significant increase in
migration occurred between 1995 and 2000, with the migration ratio reaching 11% in 2000. Since we
observe the prefecture of origin for migrants from 1995-2000, we use information on out-migration
and in-migration by prefecture and year when constructing birth rate measures. We find that ig-
noring migration leads to very small underestimation of birth rate by 0.2 (per 1000 population) in
1995-2000. In Appendix B, we discuss in greater detail how we measure the crude birth rate from
census data and how we account for migration.
  30
      To the best of our knowledge, prefectures face a common province-level target. Our main specification controls
for potential determinants of targets at the prefecture-level, including the percentage of childbearing-age women, the
percentage of Han population, and the percentage of rural population. In addition, in Section 4.2.3, we estimate the
effects of these determinants on province-level targets and use prefecture-level variation to compute prefecture-level
targets. Our results are robust in these specifications.
   31
      Table A.1a summarizes the number of prefectures that report birth rate data by year in our analysis sample.
   32
      Note that when prefectures do not report yearly data, these data include birth rate, economic growth, and
population statistics. The difference between our initial sample of 967 mayors and our final sample of 697 is due
to changes in administrative boundaries that prevent us from linking prefectures across Censuses. Importantly, this
change in sample size is not due to selected reporting by mayors.
   33
      The NBS organizes a quality control survey after each census to check for unreported people (for example, hidden
children). The survey sample for the 1990 census is around 170,000 people. The NBS finds 1 unreported birth per
1,000 births. It is viewed as the best data on birth and population counts. An interesting set of papers evaluates
the quality of the 1990 census data. There is no consensus about underreporting in the census: Banister (1992) and
Johansson and Nygren (1991) argue that there is no underreporting, while Zeng et al. (1993) argues the opposite.
The latter paper backs out “actual births” by counting children in the mid-1990s and accounting for deaths.They find
that births of female children are underreported in the 1990 census. We do not think this is a problem for our results,
since we find that mayors underreport even relative to a potentially underreported census, our estimates are a weak
lower bound on cheating. We also find that the extent of cheating decreases in audit years. This result would be
overturned by an underreported census only if the census is particularly underreported in audit years, which seems
very unlikely. Finally, we find that promoted mayors do no better in the census than non-promoted mayors. This
would be overturned by an unreported census only if the census over-reported births especially for promoted mayors.



                                                          17
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                         (1) Mayor                     (2) Mayor-year
                                                 Mean     Std. Dev.      Obs       Mean Std. Dev. Obs
  Promotion
  Promoted                                        0.53         0.5       697        0.15        0.35       2058
  Prefecture party secretary                      0.45         0.5       697        0.12        0.33       2058
  Province government or party leaders            0.06        0.24       697        0.02        0.13       2058
  Central ministries                              0.02        0.13       697         0          0.07       2058

  Tenure (year)                                   3.79        2.03       697        2.76        1.86       2249

  Rate of natural increase (RNI, per 1,000 population)
  Recorded rate                           7.66      3.29                 697       7.63         3.71       2058
  Rate from census                        8.28      5.52                 675       8.43         5.74       1895
  Target rate                             10.57     2.32                 697       10.53        2.51       2058

  OCP performance
  I[Reported RNI is below target]                  0.8        0.31       697         0.8         0.4       2058
  Target RNI - reported RNI                       2.91        3.19       697         2.9         3.7       2058
  I[RNI from census is below target]              0.74         0.4       675        0.74        0.44       1895
  Target RNI - RNI from census                    2.27        5.16       675        2.14        5.42       1895

  Real GDP (million RMB)                         8517         11359      697        9348       12255       2058
  Log (GDP)                                      3.89          1.04      697        3.99        1.06       2058

  Prefecture-year controls
  Population (1,000)                             5383         49415      697        6132      114802       2058
  Percentage of urban population                 0.31          0.17      697        0.32        0.17       2058
  Investment (million RMB)                       3973          9187      697        4382       10463       2058
Notes: Please refer to Section 3 for details on data sources.


Summary Statistics

Our main analysis sample includes 697 mayors in 211 prefectures and 28 provinces.34 Table 1
reports the summary statistics at both the mayor level and mayor-year level. 53% of mayors were
promoted to a higher-ranked position, with 45% promoted to party secretary in the same or a
different prefecture, 6% to leadership at the province level, and 2% to central ministries. Among
all promotions, 15% moved above the prefecture level, suggesting a substantial underestimation of
mayor promotion by the definition in previous studies. On average, mayors spent 3.8 years in office.
Figure 3a shows the distribution of years in office. Most mayors were in office from two to five
years. The turnover rates are especially high in the second and third years. Tenure at promotion
has similar properties and is graphed in Figure 3b.35
  34
    Column 1 of Table A.1a summarizes the number of mayors by year in our analysis sample.
  35
    Our results are robust to excluding mayors that were only in service for less than three years, as we show in
Table A.24. Note that the number of prefectures in a province varies from 1 to 21. Figure A.2 plots the histogram of
the number of cities per province. We also show in Table A.15 that our results are robust to excluding mayors that
represent large cities within a province as well as provinces where population is concentrated in few cities.



                                                         18
                                                         Figure 3: Histogram of Years in Office
                             (a) Histogram of Years in Office                                            (b) Tenure at Promotion
             .25




                                                                                         .25
             .2




                                                                                         .2
    Fraction of Mayors




                                                                                Fraction of Mayors
                 .15




                                                                                            .15
      .1




                                                                                  .1
             .05




                                                                                         .05
             0




                                                                                         0
                         1           4                7          10        13                        1       4                7        10   13
                                           Years in office                                                       Tenure at Promotion



Notes: Figure 3a shows the distribution of years in office per mayor. Figure 3b shows the distribution of
tenure at promotion of mayors who were promoted.


   A key variable of interest is OCP performance, which is measured by the gap between the birth
rate target and a given measure of birth rate. The average reported rate of natural increase is 7.7
per 1,000 people, while the rate computed using census data is 8.3. Both are lower than the target
average of 10.6. On average, the reported rates are 3 births per 1,000 people below target. 80% of
mayors reported the rates lower than their assigned target. In comparison, the rates from census
data suggest that only 74% of mayors were below their specified target. In our analysis, we use
changes in targets as instruments for OCP performance. Figure 4 presents (a) the average target
across provinces, as well as (b) the number of provinces that experienced a decrease in the target
in each of the five-year plans. In addition, Table A.13 reports correlations between the targets and
province characteristics. This table shows targets are not set to favor mayors in more concentrated
provinces or those that represent a larger share of a province’s population. Moreover, Table A.13
shows that the rate of mayoral promotion does not affect how targets are set.




                                                                          19
                                                        Figure 4: Birth Rate Targets
                               (a) Birth Rate Target                         (b) Number of Provinces with a Decreased Target
             12




                                                                                                                      20
                                                                             Number of provinces with a decreased target
             11.5
    Birth rate target




                                                                                                       15
           11




                                                                                       10
             10.5
             10




                                                                                                    5
                        1985       1990          1995            2000                                                      1985     1990      1995
                                          year                                                                                    plan year



Notes: Figure 4a shows the average target for the rate of natural increase across provinces set in five-year
plans. Figure 4b presents the number of provinces that experienced a decrease in the target in each of the
five-year plans in 1985, 1990 and 1995.




    Data on annual nominal GDP at the prefecture level in 1985-2000 come from City Statistical
Yearbooks. We use the nominal GDP and national current price index (CPI) to compute real GDP.
The average real GDP in the mayor-year sample is 9348 million RMB. Landry (2008) shows a pub-
lished list of performance indicators of 104 prefectures in 2000, where GDP per capita is listed as
the measure to evaluate economic performance of mayors. Therefore, in our main specification, we
follow the official evaluation metrics and use log GDP to measure economic performance while con-
trolling for population. Finally, we compiled prefecture-year controls from City Statistical Yearbooks,
including population, percentage of urban population, and government investment.


4           Mayoral Promotion and OCP Performance
We now analyze whether reported OCP performance affects the promotion of mayors. Our first
specification tests this prediction by examining whether reported OCP performance increases a
mayor’s probability of promotion using a linear probability model:

                                                       reported
                                 P romotedicpt = β1 OCPcpt      + Xicpt γ + µi + ηcp + λt + εicpt ,                                             (2)

where i denotes the mayor, c the prefecture, p the province, and t the year. µi are mayor fixed
effects, λt are year fixed effects, and we also include prefecture fixed effects, ηcp , as some mayors
served two different prefectures. The dependent variable, P romotedicpt , is a binary outcome that
is equal to 1 if mayor i in prefecture c of province p is promoted in year t and 0 otherwise. Xicpt
is a vector of time-varying attributes of mayor i or prefecture c in year t, including the mayor’s
tenure, and prefecture-year log of real GDP, log of population, percentage of urban population, log
                                                              Census in this regression. Finally,
of investment, and migration controls. We also control for OCPcpt
we allow for errors to be correlated at the province level.

                                                                        20
       The key regressor of interest is reported OCP performance. Superior performance in imple-
menting the OCP corresponds to a lower reported rate of natural increase compared to the target:
   reported
OCPcpt      = T argetpt − Birth Ratereported
                                    cpt      . From conversations with local officials, we know that
these targets have been used as a benchmark for expectation. That is, while meeting the expec-
tation does not guarantee rewards, local officials are rewarded if they exceed the expectation. For
                        reported
this reason we allow OCPcpt      to have differential effects on promotion depending on whether the
                         reported
target was met (i.e., OCPcpt      > 0).
       The identifying assumption of Equation 2 is that OCP performance is uncorrelated to other
factors that may drive mayor promotion. We address this concern in three ways. First, the panel
nature of our data allows us to include mayor fixed effects, µi , which control for time-invariant
ability that may affect the initial placement or political connections to province-level officials. Sec-
ond, in Section 4.1 we use predictions from our model that characterize the comparative statics
of OCP performance across provinces with different degrees of noisiness and competitiveness. As
a third strategy, in Section 4.2 we use an instrumental variables approach that elicits variation in
OCP performance using changes in targets from five-year plans. This strategy exploits variation in
reported OCP performance that is uncorrelated with either changes in connections or other changes
in unobserved margins.36 In addition, we perform a battery of robustness checks in Section 4.2.
       We begin by showing the correlation of reported OCP performance and promotion in Figure
5. The x-axis represents the residualized OCP performance and the y-axis represents residualized
promotion probability, where we control for person, city, and year fixed-effects. Panel (a) of Figure
5 shows the relation in the sub-sample where the reported rate of natural increase is above target
(negative OCP performance); we do not observe any correlation between reported OCP performance
and promotion. Panel (b) of Figure 5 plots the relation when the reported rate is equal to or below
target (non-negative OCP performance). In this case, OCP performance is positively correlated with
probability of promotion. Note that while beating the OCP target increases a mayor’s probability of
promotion regardless of GDP performance, these findings also show that OCP performance matters
for promotion beyond simply meeting the target.37
       Table 2 reports estimates of Equation 2. We start by showing in column (1) that reported OCP
has no effect on promotion when we look at the full sample of mayors. As we show in Figure 5,
the effect of reported OCP on promotion depends on whether or not a mayor is below the target.
In columns (2)-(5), we focus our regression analysis in the sub-sample with non-negative OCP
performance.38 Consistent with the graphical presentation, estimates from column (2) through (5)
all show that mayors with better reported OCP performance are more likely to be promoted. In this
and other tables, we focus on the results from the richest specification in column (5). Decreasing the
rate of natural increase by 1 per 1000 increases the chance of promotion by 1.7 percentage points, or
around 13% of the probability of promotion. To gauge this magnitude, consider that the interquartile
  36
     In particular, this strategy assuages concerns that time-varying political connections (as in Jia 2014) confound
the effect of OCP performance on promotion.
  37
     Evaluation costs often cause principals to set targets to weed out non-contenders, such as admissions committees
which ignore students with low GRE scores or hiring committees which ignore candidates with low GPAs.
  38
     This restriction is consistent with the model in Section 2.1. In particular, recall that the lowest-performing mayors
are not likely to misreport. Moreover, they are not likely to be relevant for promotion decisions. In our data, there is
always at least one mayor that reaches the target for every province in every five-year-plan period.



                                                           21
                                                          Figure 5: OCP Performance and Promotion

                                                              (a) Above Target                                                          (b) Below Target




                                      .1




                                                                                                                 .1
                                               .05




                                                                                                                          .05
                        Residualized Promotion




                                                                                                   Residualized Promotion
                                   0




                                                                                                              0
                                      -.05




                                                                                                                 -.05
                                      -.1




                                                                                                                 -.1
                                                     -4       -2         0         2      4                                     -4      -2         0         2      4
                                                           Residualized OCP Performance                                              Residualized OCP Performance



Notes: In Figure 5, the x-axis represents the residualized OCP performance and the y-axis represents the
residualized promotion probability where we control for person, city, and year fixed-effects. OCP perfor-
mance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate of natural increase.
Panel (a) shows the relation in the sub-sample where the reported rate is above target (negative OCP perfor-
mance). Panel (b) plots the relation when the reported rate is equal to or below target (non-negative OCP
performance). Column (6) of Table 2 reports results from a regression used to plot this figure.


range of OCP performance, conditional on the regression model, is 1.2. Thus, if a mayor’s OCP
performance increases from the 25th- to the 75th-percentile of the distribution, her probability of
promotion increases by 16%. To compare with GDP, we also show the estimate of log GDP and
find that increasing GDP by 1% increases the chance of promotion by 17.2 basis points. These
estimates suggest an economically large effect of OCP performance compared to economic growth,
since decreasing the rate of natural increase by 1 per 1000 is equivalent in its effect on promotion to
a 10% increase in GDP. Finally, we also fit a spline in column (6) where OCP performance reported
is interacted with indicators of being below the target and being above the target, respectively,
controlling for the full set of controls. We find similar results that non-negative OCP performance
is positively correlated with promotion.
   Relative to our model, these results are consistent with Chinese governors having strong tastes
for meritocracy (i.e., ω ≤ ω̃ < 1) since, in this case, Proposition 3 predicts that OCP performance
should be predictive of promotion (β1 > 0). However, one concern is that governors promote mayors
on an unobserved measure of performance that is correlated with OCP performance. As discussed
in Corollary 1, even if mayors have no taste for meritocracy (ω = 1), we might find that β1 > 0. We
distinguish between these two cases by testing additional predictions across provinces with different
informational and competitive environments.




                                                                                              22
         Table 2: OLS Regression of Promotion on Reported and Actual OCP Performance

                                                                            Promotion = 1
                                                       (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)           (5)       (6)
 OCP Performance Reported                             0.002
                                                     (0.004)

 OCP Performance from Census                          0.000
                                                     (0.002)

 OCP Performance Reported X Below Target                       0.011∗∗    0.016∗     0.016∗      0.017∗    0.017∗
                                                               (0.006)    (0.009)    (0.010)     (0.010)   (0.009)

 OCP Performance from Census X Below Target                     0.000      -0.002     -0.002      -0.002    -0.002
                                                               (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.004)

 OCP Performance Reported X Above Target                                                                    0.005
                                                                                                           (0.013)

 OCP Performance from Census X Above Target                                                                 -0.007
                                                                                                           (0.009)

 Log GDP                                              -0.011    -0.010    0.146∗∗∗   0.146∗∗∗   0.172∗∗∗    -0.134
                                                     (0.009)   (0.011)    (0.056)     (0.057)    (0.054)   (0.396)
 Observations                                          1,832    1,483       1,483      1,483      1,483      1,544
 R2                                                    0.06      0.07       0.58        0.58       0.58      0.49
 Test β Reported > β Census (p-val)                     0.37     0.08       0.07        0.08       0.07      0.06
 Full Sample                                             Y                                                     Y
 Sample of Mayors Below Target                                    Y          Y          Y          Y
 Year FE                                                Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
 Person FE                                                                   Y          Y          Y          Y
 City FE                                                                                Y          Y          Y
 Prefecture-year controls                                                                          Y          Y
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate
of natural increase. OCP performance from census is birth rate target minus birth rate from census data.
Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include
log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors are clus-
tered at the province level and are bootstrapped. Table A.18 explores additional specifications of this regres-
sion. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                      23
4.1   Testing Model Implications for the Promotion Rule
According to Proposition 3, if governors have strong tastes for meritocracy, captured by small ω
                                                                       reported
(i.e., 0 ≤ ω < ω̃ ≤ 1), we should expect to find smaller effects of OCPcpt      on promotion when
performance is noisier, and when more mayors are competing for promotion. In contrast, Corollary
1 shows that if ω = 1 and OCP performance is correlated with the unobserved metric used in
                                                         reported
promotion, we should expect to find larger effects of OCPcpt      on promotion when performance
                                                                    reported
is noisier, but that competition should not change the effect of OCPcpt      on promotion. To test
these predictions, we augment the linear probability model in Equation 2:

                         reported         reported
   P romotedicpt = β1 OCPcpt      + β2 OCPcpt      ∗ N oisep + Xicpt γ + µi + ηcp + λt + εicpt (3)
                         reported         reported
   P romotedicpt = β1 OCPcpt      + β3 OCPcpt      ∗ Compp + Xicpt γ + µi + ηcp + λt + εicpt . (4)

   From these equations, a meritocratic promotion rule would imply β1 > 0, β2 < 0, and β3 < 0. In
contrast, if ω = 1 and OCP performance is correlated with the unobserved metric used in promotion,
we would expect to find β1 > 0, β2 > 0, and β3 = 0.
   In order to implement the test in Equation 3, we use two measures of the noisiness of OCP
performance as a signal of effort and ability. The first measure is the standard deviation of gross
migration (in-migration and out-migration), and the second one is the standard deviation of the
rates of natural increase by province in the census data. Intuitively, a province with more gross
migration or a province with a more variable rate will make it harder for a province-level official to
disentangle the noise from the true performance. As these measures have no cardinal interpretation,
we normalize them to have mean zero and standard deviation of one. We also use the average of
these measures as a third measure.
   Table 3 presents estimates of Equation 3. Column (1) reports our preferred estimate from
Table 2 for comparison. Column (2) reports a negative coefficient for the interaction of reported
OCP performance and the standard deviation of migration, indicating that the marginal effect of
increased OCP performance on promotion is decreasing in this measure of noisiness. In columns (3)
and (4), we replace the migration measure with the standard deviation of the census birth rate and
with the average of the two measures, respectively, and find strikingly similar results. Table 3 also
presents estimates of marginal effects at different points in the distribution of our noise measures as
well as the p-value of a one-sided test of the hypothesis that β2 > 0. We find consistent results in
all specifications with marginal effects that are decreasing and statistically significant at the 25th-
and 50th-percentiles.
   Figure 6a plots estimates of marginal effects normalized by the average probability of promotion
using estimates from column (4) for different quantiles of the distribution of average noise, with
larger quantiles indicating a noisier signal. The y-axis is the predicted percentage change in the
probability of promotion of increasing OCP performance by 1 per 1000. In the visual presentation,
the effect of OCP performance on promotion continuously decreases as the signal becomes noisier.
In provinces where the signal is the noisiest, the effect of OCP performance on promotion is null.
By contrast, in provinces in the 25th-percentile of the distribution of noisiness, increasing OCP
performance by 1 per 1000 leads to a 23% increase in the probability of promotion.


                                                  24
   Table 3: Heterogeneous Effects of Reported OCP Performance on Promotion by Signal Noise

                                                             (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
      OCP Performance                                      0.017∗     0.019∗∗     0.018∗∗     0.019∗∗
                                                           (0.010)    (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.008)

      OCP Performance X Noise (SD Migration)                          -0.015∗
                                                                      (0.008)

      OCP Performance X Noise (SD Birth Rate)                                      -0.011
                                                                                  (0.010)

      OCP Performance X Noise (Both)                                                          -0.022∗
                                                                                              (0.011)

      Log GDP                                              0.172∗∗∗   0.180∗∗∗    0.164∗∗∗   0.170∗∗∗
                                                           (0.056)    (0.054)     (0.053)    (0.054)
      Observations                                          1,483       1,483       1,483      1,483
      R2                                                    0.584       0.588       0.586      0.588
      Mean of Dependent Variable                            0.132       0.132       0.132      0.132
      Year FE                                                 Y           Y           Y          Y
      Person FE                                               Y           Y           Y          Y
      City FE                                                 Y           Y           Y          Y
      Prefecture-year controls                                Y           Y           Y          Y
      Marginal Effect at 25th pctil                                    .03∗∗∗      .026∗∗    .031∗∗∗
      Marginal Effect at 25th pctil (SE)                                (.01)      (.012)      (.01)
      Marginal Effect at 50th pctil                                    .021∗∗       .015∗     .019∗∗
      Marginal Effect at 50th pctil (SE)                               (.008)      (.009)     (.008)
      Marginal Effect at 75th pctil                                      .001        .012       .005
      Marginal Effect at 75th pctil (SE)                               (.014)       (.01)     (.011)
      One-Sided Test of Interaction (p-val)                             0.031       0.124      0.025
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate of
natural increase. Noise (SD Migration) is SD of gross migration (number of in-migrants + number of out-
migrants) at the province-level. Noise (SD Birth Rate) is SD of retrospective birth rate in the census data at
the province-level. Both noisiness measures are standardized. Noise (Both) is the average of SD Migration
and SD Birth Rate. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year
controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard
errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at
5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                      25
       We use two measures of competitiveness at the province level in order to implement the test in
Equation 4. The first is the proportion of mayors that are never promoted in each province during
our fifteen years of data, which is equivalent to one minus the promotion rate. The second measure
is the average tenure of positions above the bureaucratic rank of mayors. In provinces with longer
tenure at these upper-level positions (and thus less turnover), mayors have fewer opportunities of
being promoted and must work harder at proving themselves worthy of promotion.39 As in the case
of our measures of noisiness, we normalize the measures of competitiveness and also consider the
average of the two measures.
       Table 4 presents estimates of Equation 4 using a similar layout to Table 3. Columns (2)-(4)
report negative coefficients for the interactions of OCP performance with our different measures
of competitiveness. The one-sided tests reject the hypotheses that β3 > 0. Similarly, we find
decreasing marginal effects that are statistically significant at lower quantiles of the competitiveness
measures. Figure 6b uses the results in column (4) to plot estimates of the percentage increase in
the probability of promotion from lowering the rate of natural increase by 1 per 1000 at different
quantiles of average competitiveness and finds a quantitatively similar pattern to that of Figure 6a.
Overall, we find that, in provinces where promotions are more competitive, the marginal effect of
reported OCP performance on promotion is smaller, that is, β3 < 0.
       One potential concern is that our measures of noise and competitiveness are strongly correlated
such that Tables 3 and 4 are not providing independent evidence. Table A.2 explores this possibility
and shows that our noisiness measures are not statistically related to the competitiveness measures.
Indeed, at most 4% of the variation in competitiveness can be explained by the noise measures, and
vice versa. Table A.2 also shows that our measures of noise and competitiveness are not clustered in
any one region and reports correlations with other demographic characteristics. Specifically, while
the SD of Birth Rate is negatively correlated with urbanization and education, the SD of Migration
and the competitiveness measures are not correlated with province-level demographic characteristics.
In addition, Table A.3 estimates β2 and β3 jointly and finds similar results to Tables 3 and 4. Figure
6c reports marginal effects as a function of both noise and competitiveness. To ease interpretation,
we only report effects that are statistically significant at the 10% level.
       To summarize, we test the predictions of our model for how OCP performance should affect
promotion across provinces with different levels of competition and noise in the output variable.
We find that β1 > 0, β2 < 0, and β3 < 0, which is consistent with a meritocratic promotion rule,
and which rules out the case where a positive effect of OCP performance on promotion is due to
an omitted variable. These results show that provincial governors are instructed by the central
government to value OCP performance both because population control is inherently valued and
because doing so may select high-ability mayors for promotions.40
  39
      In order to implement this strategy, we digitized hard-copy records on the term information of all province-level
officials ranked higher than mayors. The average tenure of provincial officials ranges from 3 to 6 years across provinces.
The distribution of average tenure across provinces is presented in Figure A.3.
   40
      These results also discipline alternative models. For instance, while we assume that ω is fixed across provinces,
one could alternatively consider province-varying tastes for meritocracy. However, in order for this story to match our
empirical results, it would have to be the case that very competitive provinces and provinces where output is a noisier
measure of effort and ability are precisely the provinces that have low tastes for meritocracy, which seems unlikely.


                                                           26
                                                                        Figure 6: Heterogeneous Effects of OCP on Promotion
                                                     (a) OCP Promotion and Outcome Noise                                                                                                                                       (b) OCP Promotion and Agent Competition




                                                                                                                                                                                 Percent Increase in Chance of Promotion (%)
   Percent Increase in Chance of Promotion (%)
                                       40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                  30




                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                0




                                                                                                                                                                                             0
        -10




                                                                                                                                                                                      -10
                                                 0    10    20       30     40     50    60     70     80                                                 90      100                                                          0   10      20    30      40   50     60    70     80                                    90    100
                                                                 Percentile of Noise (Average of Both)                                                                                                                                    Percentile of Competition (Average of Both)

                                                      Estimated Marginal Effect                                                      95% Confidence Interval                                                                       Estimated Marginal Effect                                            95% Confidence Interval



                                                                                  (c) Marginal Effects of OCP Promotion by Noise and Com-
                                                                                  petition
                                                                                    Standardized Noise (Average of Both Measures)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Percent Increase in Chance of Promotion (%)
                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     25
                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                               -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                    -1.5       -1       -.5         0         .5        1
                                                                                                                                      Standardized Competition (Average of Both Measures)
                                                                                                                                                           OCP                OCPXNoise                                                 OCPXComp
                                                                                                                                    Regression Estimates: β   =.021(.008)***,β                                      =-.019(.01)***,β           =-.02(.008)**.




Notes: In Figure 6a, the x-axis represents different percentiles of the distribution of the average noisiness
measure; the higher the percentile, the noisier the signal. The y-axis is the predicted percentage change
in the probability of promotion of increasing OCP performance by 1 per 1000. The figure is plotted using
estimates in column (4) of Table 3. In Figure 6b, the x-axis represents different percentiles of the distribution
of the average competitiveness measure; the higher the percentile, the more competitive the tournament.
The figure is plotted using estimates in column (4) of Table 4. Figure 6c plots marginal effects of increasing
OCP performance by 1 per 1000 on the probability of promotion using estimates from Table A.3. For ease
of interpretation, the figure only displays effects that are statistically significant at the 10% level.




4.2                                              Robustness
We explore the sensitivity of our results to a host of potential problems, including time-varying
political connections as a source for endogeneity, targets that may vary at the prefecture-level, mea-
surement error in OCP performance, as well as alternative specifications of our estimating equation.


                                                                                                                                                                 27
Table 4: Heterogeneous Effects of Reported OCP Performance on Promotion by Competitiveness

                                                                        (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
 OCP Performance Reported                                             0.017∗     0.018∗∗     0.018∗∗     0.019∗∗
                                                                      (0.010)    (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.008)

 OCP Performance Reported X Competitiveness (Tenure)                              -0.012
                                                                                 (0.007)

 OCP Performance Reported X Competitiveness (1-Pr Rate)                                     -0.018∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.006)

 OCP Performance Reported X Competitiveness (Average)                                                   -0.022∗∗∗
                                                                                                         (0.008)

 Log GDP                                                             0.172∗∗∗    0.175∗∗∗    0.171∗∗∗    0.174∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.056)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.056)
 Observations                                                         1,483        1,483       1,483       1,483
 R2                                                                   0.584        0.586       0.589       0.589
 Mean of Dependent Variable                                           0.132        0.132       0.132       0.132
 Year FE                                                                Y            Y            Y           Y
 Person FE                                                              Y            Y            Y           Y
 City FE                                                                Y            Y            Y           Y
 Prefecture-year controls                                               Y            Y            Y           Y
 Marginal Effect at 25th pctil                                                    .023∗∗∗     .034∗∗∗     .038∗∗∗
 Marginal Effect at 25th pctil (SE)                                                (.008)      (.011)       (.01)
 Marginal Effect at 50th pctil                                                     .02∗∗∗      .015∗        .014
 Marginal Effect at 50th pctil (SE)                                                (.008)      (.009)      (.009)
 Marginal Effect at 75th pctil                                                      .008        .007        .003
 Marginal Effect at 75th pctil (SE)                                                (.012)       (.01)      (.011)
 One-Sided Test of Interaction (p-val)                                             0.057       0.003       0.004
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate
of natural increase. Competitiveness (Tenure) is measured by the average tenure of upper-level officials
at the province level. Competitiveness (1-Pr Rate) is (1-promotion rate by province). Both competitive-
ness measures are standardized. Competitiveness (Both) is the average of Competitiveness (Tenure) and
Competitiveness (1-Pr Rate). Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions.
Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government invest-
ment). Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level;
** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                    28
4.2.1      Alternative measures of economic performance

Our measure of economic performance follows the official evaluation metrics for mayors in Landry
(2008). We also check the robustness of our comparative statics by controlling for alternative mea-
sures of economic performance. We first control for GDP growth rate, which is commonly used in
the literature on the promotion of provincial leaders, and then control for less-manipulable measures
such as electricity usage and railway cargo volume. In Table A.6, we find that the heterogeneous
effects of reported OCP performance on promotion by signal noise are robust to including any of
these alternative economic measures. Similarly, Table A.7 shows that the heterogeneous effects of
reported OCP performance on promotion by competitiveness are also robust to including alternative
economic measures.

4.2.2      An Instrumental Variable for Reported OCP Performance

We now turn to an instrumental variables approach, which alleviates concerns that time-varying
unobservable factors, such as expanding political networks, are biasing our results. Our strategy
leverages the fact that the targets are set at the province level by the central government in five-year
plans. Changes in these targets generate “surprise changes” in reported OCP performance among
mayors in office. For example, if there is a decrease in the target, it is harder for mayors to get
closer to the target and thus achieve a better OCP performance. We use decreases in the target to
instrument for reported OCP performance.41 Figure 4a shows the average target from 1985 to 2000.
The targets were changed twice during these fifteen years; the 1990 plan saw an average increase
from 1986-90 to 1991-95 and the 1995 plan saw an average decrease from 1991-95 to 1996-2000. For
a given plan, however, there was substantial variation in whether a province experienced an increase
or a decrease in target. Figure 4b shows that 13 provinces saw a decrease in the target in the 1985
plan, while 21 provinces saw a decrease in the 1995 plan. The exclusion restriction is that target
changes that occur as part of the five-year plans are not otherwise correlated with unobserved mayor
characteristics that also affect promotion.



       Table 5 presents results from this strategy.42 Column (1) presents the first-stage estimate,
which displays a strong and positive correlation between decreases in the targets and reported OCP
performance; the F-value of the first-stage coefficient is 21. Table A.8 shows that the instrument is
not correlated with log GDP and shows that the first stage is robust across different specifications,
including ones that do not control for log GDP. We also find in Table A.9 that the instrument is
uncorrelated with other measures of economic performance, including GDP growth rate, electricity
usage and railway cargo volume. Column (3) presents the 2SLS estimate, which is slightly larger
  41
     We use negative changes in targets to avoid analyzing cases where mayors are promoted by “getting lucky” through
a relaxation of standards. In unreported results, we find a similar pattern when we use all changes in targets as the
instrument. In order to increase the precision of the estimate, we also control for interactions between our instrument
and our measures of noise and competitiveness. These controls leverage the model’s insights that the strength of the
incentive depends on the competitiveness and the noisiness of the environment.
  42
     Note that the sample is smaller than that in column (4) of Table 2 because the target data are unavailable in a
few years in a few provinces.



                                                          29
     Table 5: Instrumental Variable Regression of Promotion on Reported OCP Performance

                                            OCP Performance Reported            Promotion = 1
                                                       (1)                      (2)       (3)
                                                  First Stage                   OLS      2SLS
         Change in Birth Rate Target                0.563∗∗∗
                                                     (0.124)

         OCP Performance Reported                                              0.017∗     0.028∗
                                                                               (0.010)    (0.017)

         Log GDP                                         0.279                0.183∗∗∗    0.179∗∗∗
                                                        (0.511)               (0.056)     (0.051)
         Observations                                    1,519                 1,371       1,519
         R2                                              0.80                   0.47        0.58
         First-Stage F-Stat                                                                20.65
         Year FE                                           Y                     Y           Y
         Person FE                                         Y                     Y           Y
         City FE                                           Y                     Y           Y
         Prefecture-year controls                          Y                     Y           Y
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate of
natural increase. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year
controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard
errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. Table A.10 tests potential violations of the
exclusion restriction. Tables A.11 and A.12 explore heterogeneous effects by noisiness and competitiveness
using this IV strategy. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.


than the OLS estimate in column (2). Decreasing the rate of natural increase by 1 per 1000 increases
the chance of promotion by 2.8 percentage points, which represents a 21% increase in the probability
of promotion. This estimate has a similar economic magnitude, falls within the range of estimates
in the previous section, and is not statistically different from the OLS estimate. However, one
interpretation of a larger effect is that well-connected candidates for promotion might be assigned
to “problem places” with larger challenges. An alternative interpretation is that the 2SLS estimate
might reduce measurement error in OCP performance, leading to a larger estimate. As is often
the case with IV estimates, these interpretations are at best speculative given the loss in statistical
precision.
   While the exclusion restriction is fundamentally untestable, we provide corroborating evidence of
its plausibility. First, one concern is that province targets are set to favor a particular mayor within a
province. While this does not seem feasible given that most provinces have five or more prefectures,
we nevertheless analyze the potential for this concern. For example, if politically-connected mayors
performed worse in birth control than unconnected ones, the target might be raised to help connected
mayors improve their performance. Although an increase in target could favor every mayor within a
province, only those staying in office after the change experience the benefit. We test this possibility
in Table A.10, Panel A. We split the sample into two parts: column (1) uses the sub-sample in
provinces and years with an increase in the target, and column (2) uses the sub-sample in provinces
and years with a decrease in the target. In both sub-samples, we fail to find evidence that the



                                                     30
OCP performance prior to a target change is correlated with whether they stay in office after the
change. A second concern is that if connected mayors anticipate a change in the target, there could
be selection on whether they are promoted prior to the change. We test this hypothesis in Panel B
and we do not find a statistically significant correlation between future changes in the targets and
promotion, suggesting that the target is not changed to favor some (connected) mayors. Finally, one
might be concerned that mayors respond to a decrease in target by reporting lower rates of natural
increase. Panel C indicates that changes in the target do not significantly change the difference
between the rate from census data and the reported rate, which rules out this last concern.
      We also test whether 2SLS estimates of the effect of OCP performance on promotion differ by
noisiness and competitiveness. In Table A.11, we include the interaction of OCP performance with
our noisiness measures, which we instrument with interacted versions of decreases in targets. Con-
sistent with the results in Table 3, the OCP performance has a smaller effect on promotion in noisier
environments. In Table A.12, we estimate the average effect of OCP performance on promotion
allowing for heterogeneous effects across regions with low versus high competitiveness.43 We in-
strument for low competition interacted with OCP performance using low competition interacted
with the decrease in target, and for high competition interacted with OCP performance using high
competition interacted with the decrease in target. The 2SLS results are consistent with the baseline
results that the promotion incentive is smaller in more competitive environments.

4.2.3      Using Estimated Prefecture-Level Targets

To the best of our knowledge, mayors are evaluated using province-level targets. However, a poten-
tial concern is that the relevant target for mayors’ evaluations is subcontracted to prefecture-level
governments. If this were the case, measurement error in OCP performance using province-level
targets might affect our estimates. We address this concern by estimating an allocation rule of
targets across provinces and using this rule to predict targets at the prefecture level. Table A.13
reports the estimated allocation rule at the province level. We find that higher targets are allocated
to provinces with a higher number of women of reproductive age (15-45) and a higher fraction of
rural women. Using these estimates and the same demographic measures at the prefecture level, we
predict a prefecture-level target.
      Table A.14 shows that our main results are robust to using our estimated province-level targets.
Column (1) shows that controlling for the prefecture-level demographic variables used in Table
A.13 results in similar average estimates to those in Table 2. Columns (2)-(4) consider different
linear combinations of the province- and prefecture-level measures, which result in statistically and
economically similar estimates. Further, columns (5)-(7) use the average of these measures in the
comparative static analysis, which result in similar interactions with our measures of noise and
competitiveness, confirming the role of meritocracy in the promotion rule.
      Another potential concern is that some provinces are dominated by a few mayors and that
the targets are set in order to favor them. To address this concern, we create two measures of
mayor dominance: (1) the share of a province’s population represented by a given mayor and (2)
the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) for each province. On average, mayors represent 16% of a
 43
      We define low competitiveness as the lower tercile of the distribution.


                                                           31
province’s population. Similarly, the average HHI is 21%, which implies that, on average, provinces
are divided into 5 equally-populated areas. In Table A.15, we show that excluding mayors that
account for more than 25% of a province’s population or relatively more concentrated provinces
(those with HHI>33%) does not affect the results of Table 2. These results show that most provinces
are not dominated by a few or even a single mayor. Therefore, it is unlikely that the concerns of
potentially dominant mayors could sway the setting of targets.

4.2.4    Measurement Error

We now perform a set of analyses where we leverage our two measures of targets (province- and
prefecture-level) to assuage concerns of potential measurement error. Following the repeated mea-
sures literature (see, e.g., Bound et al. 2001), we use one measure as an instrument for the other.
Tables A.16 and A.17 present results from both iterations of this procedure. In both cases, we find
very similar estimates of the main effect of OCP performance on the probability of promotion as well
as similar comparative static results that support our conclusion that β1 > 0, β2 < 0, and β3 < 0.

4.2.5    Alternative Specifications

We also explore whether lagged OCP performances in the past four years affect our contemporaneous
estimate in Table A.18 and find that our main result is robust to including lagged OCP performance
in the regression. Additionally, Table A.3 shows that our results are robust to using different levels
of clustering, Table A.5 shows that our results are robust to including interactions between OCP
performance and log GDP, and Table A.4 shows that we obtain very similar results when we include
province-by-5-year-plan fixed effects and province-by-year fixed effects.


5     Empirical Evidence of Manipulation and Screening Efficacy
The previous section shows that reported OCP performance has a positive and substantively large
effect on the probability that a given mayor is promoted. Moreover, tests of comparative statics
further support the view that the promotion rule is consistent with a meritocratic objective. However,
it is still an open question whether such a tournament mechanism with non-contractible output is
able to screen successfully for high-ability mayors, and whether the population audits have an effect
on misreporting behavior.

5.1     Effects of Audits on Output and Data Manipulation
In this section we analyze the misreporting behavior of mayors. As we discuss in Section 3, we find
significant disparities between the reported OCP performance and the Census OCP. While this is
consistent with strategic misreporting, it could also be the case that this difference is influenced by
measurement error. In order to show that mayors engage in strategic misreporting, we focus on how
misreporting changes in years when mayors have a lower incentive to misreport. As discussed in Sec-
tion 1.3, the central government uses population census and national fertility surveys to investigate
the actual rates and the credibility of reported rates, which are organized at the province level. The


                                                  32
audit year is the year before the census or fertility survey when the actual rates are fully observed.
Equation 5 tests whether the difference between reported rates and the rates using the census data
is smaller one year prior to the census or national fertility survey (i.e. the audit year):


            Birth Ratecensus
                      cpt    − Birth Ratereported
                                         cpt      = δAuditt + f (t) + Xicpt γ + µi + ηcp + εicpt ,               (5)

where the binary variable Auditt is equal to 1 in years 1987, 1989, 1991, 1994, and 1996. We include
a flexible year trend f (t). If the difference indeed suggests data manipulation, we should observe that
δ < 0. If this is the case, we further examine whether the decrease in the difference from these two
data sources comes from higher reported rates, suggesting less manipulation, or from lower actual
rates in census, indicating actual improvement in OCP enforcement.
       Table 6 presents estimates of Equation 5. In column (1), we find that the difference between
reported rates and actual rates from the census is smaller in audit years. This is consistent with the
view that birth rates are manipulated in non-audit years. We further examine whether the decrease
in the difference from these two data sources comes from higher reported rates, suggesting less
manipulation, or lower actual rates, indicating actual improvement in OCP enforcement. Columns
(2) and (3) suggest that most of the decrease is attributable to mayors exerting more effort to lower
the actual rate. Finally, if lower birth rates and higher GDP growth rate are substitutes, we would
expect that, in audit years when mayors reported higher rates of natural increase (thus doing worse
on the OCP dimension), mayors might work harder to improve GDP or report higher GDP numbers.
We find that this is indeed the case in column (4).44


                                      Table 6: Effects of Population Audits

                                                 (1)                 (2)            (3)            (4)
                                         Census - Reported       Reported        Census         Log GDP
                                            Birth Rates          Birth Rate     Birth Rate
           Audit Year                        -0.325∗∗               0.039        -0.286∗         0.174∗∗∗
                                              (0.164)             (0.132)        (0.164)         (0.014)
           Observations                        1,524                1,524          1,524          1,524
           R2                                   0.84                 0.81          0.92            0.98
           Cubic Year Trend                       Y                   Y              Y              Y
           Person FE                              Y                   Y              Y              Y
           City FE                                Y                   Y              Y              Y
           Prefecture-year controls               Y                   Y              Y              Y
Notes: Misreporting is measured as the difference: Census - Reported Birth Rates. Audit years include the
year before the census year in 1990 and 1995, and the year before the national fertility survey in 1988, 1992,
and 1997. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls
include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors
are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level;
*** significant at 1% level.




       We can use the estimates in Tables 2 and 6 to provide an assessment of the relative costs of
  44
       Note that the misreporting of mayors above the target does not respond to audits, as we show in Table A.23.


                                                          33
increasing monitoring. First, we compute the government’s perceived benefit from reducing the
birth rate. Given our estimates from Table 2, the government is willing to trade-off 10% in GDP
growth for a 1 in 1000 birth rate reduction. Second, we compute the benefits of an additional audit.
Following Table 6, we find that an audit resulted in -0.29 fewer births per 1000 people. This implies
that the government’s willingness to pay for an audit is approximately 2.9% of local GDP. We view
this back-of-the-envelope calculation as suggestive of two insights. First, given the high willingness
to pay for an audit, this implies that the government faces significant costs from not being able to
perfectly verify OCP performance. Second, given that the government only conducted audits in five
of the fifteen years in our dataset, we infer that conducting additional audits (to increase the degree
of verifiability) was simply too expensive for the government.

5.2      Screening Ability in the Presence of Misreporting
Our model predicts that when mayors manipulate reported birth rates, the expected ability of the
promoted mayor will be lower than when output is contractible. In the extreme case where output is
completely non-verifiable, the ability of the promoted mayor will approach the population average.
We test this hypothesis in Equation 6:

                                            census
                      P romotedicpt = β4 OCPcpt    + Xicpt γ + µi + ηcp + λt + εicpt ,                            (6)

where the key regressor of interest is the OCP performance measure from census data, measured as
   census = T arget − Birth Ratecensus . In the case where output is non-verifiable, our theory
OCPcpt             pt           cpt
predicts that β4 ≈ 0.
       Table 2 presents estimates of β4 , where we control for the same controls as Equation 2 as well
          reported
as for OCPcpt      . From column (1) through column (6), results from all specifications suggest
that actual OCP performance is not significantly predictive of promotion. These findings imply
that promoted mayors are not significantly more able to lower the actual rate than mayors who
are not promoted. This shows that meritocracies may not screen high ability agents when output
is imperfectly verifiable. In addition to showing that β4 ≈ 0, we also test whether the effect of
   reported                                               census , that is, that β > β . We report
OCPcpt      is statistically larger than the effect of OCPcpt                     1   4
p-values from this test in the bottom of Table 2. The hypothesis that β1 < β4 is rejected with
p-values between 0.06-0.08.
       Table 2 uses the best information available in the census to account for migration. In Table
A.19, we explore the potential for migration to explain our null results by studying the effect of
removing migration controls.45 Similarly, in Table A.20 we follow the robustness checks described
in Section 4.2. In both cases, we find that migration controls, controlling for alternative measures
of economic performance, 2SLS estimates, prefecture-level targets, and corrections for measurement
error deliver economically small and statistically insignificant correlations between promotion and
actual performance. This suggests that the lack of correlation between actual OCP performance
  45
    This analysis investigates the potential measurement error from not directly observing migration before 1995 (when
the migration rate was below 4%). We repeat the specification in column (4) of Table 2, with various incomplete
controls for migration and using the same sub-sample, and report the results in column (1) through column (3) in
Table A.19; the main estimate is not sensitive to including these controls.



                                                         34
and promotion is not a statistical anomaly, but rather a result of the impaired capacity of the tour-
nament mechanism to screen for ability when output is non-contractible and reported performance
is manipulated.


6    Conclusion
This paper analyzes the role of meritocracy in determining the promotion of mayors in China. We
document that, despite potential for corruption through political connections, promotion rules are
partly driven by perceived performance in implementing the OCP. Moreover, we show that the
relationship between performance and promotion is determined by a desire to screen high-ability
mayors for higher office. While we confirm that observed promotion decisions are consistent with
a meritocratic objective, the efficacy of this screening mechanism is weakened by mayors’ ability to
manipulate reported outcomes. Empirically, we find that mayors manipulate less in audit years (that
is, when monitoring is increased), which is consistent with the importance of OCP as a performance
metric. Nonetheless, we find that audits are not able to resolve the fundamental problem of non-
contractible output.
    The combination of theory and empirical analysis makes our findings particularly compelling
and demonstrates the importance of interpreting empirical results through the lens of a rigorous
model of incentives. Without guidance from our model, the applied econometrician could arrive
at the mistaken conclusion that meritocracy was not a driving force in the Chinese government, as
promoted mayors do not appear to be of higher ability than mayors who are not promoted. However,
by testing more subtle predictions of our model, we are able to separate the desire to implement the
OCP from the meritocratic objective, a distinction which previous studies of promotion based on
other measures of performance were not able to address.
    While our study focuses foremost on the implementation of the OCP, it also yields interesting
lessons for the literature studying the relation between economic growth and cadre promotion. Our
model suggests that promotions are less likely to stem from a meritocratic motive in cases where the
government places a relatively higher value on output production. For instance, it may be the case
that economic growth is valued much more as a production objective than as a screening mechanism.
From the perspective of the OCP, a similar logic implies that the government may place a lower
importance on this policy than was previously thought. Instead, the enduring permanence of the
OCP may be due to the fact that the government believed this task helped improve the screening
of mayors. This discussion highlights two facts that are evinced by our study. First, identifying the
role of meritocracy in selection requires an understanding of the trade-offs faced by the principal
across different incentive forms. Second, the reason why performance in policy implementation is
linked to promotion is important for understanding the provenance of those policies as well as the
potential for their reform.
    We conclude by noting that, while critics of the implementation of the OCP point toward local
government promotion incentives as a cause for human rights abuses, including forced abortions
and sterilizations (see, e.g., Wong 2012), the alternative piece rate compensation mechanism would
likely lead to more such cases as effort from lower-ability mayors would likely increase. Moreover,


                                                 35
one consequence of the non-contractibility and manipulation of the rates of natural increase is that
marginal incentives may have little or no effect on actual birth rates, even though the policy on the
whole may lead to human rights abuses.




                                                 36
References
Acemoglu, D. (2005). Politics and economics in weak and strong states. Journal of Monetary Economics 52,
  1199–226.

Baker, G., M. Gibbs, and B. Holmstrom (1994). The Internal Economics of the Firm: Evidence from
  Personnel Data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (4), 881–919.

Banerjee, A., P. Gertler, and M. Ghatak (2002). Empowerment and Efficiency: Tenancy Reform in West
  Bengal. Journal of Political Economy.

Banister, J. (1992). China: Recent Mortality Levels and Trends. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of
  the Population Association of America, 30 April-2 May, Denver, Colorado.

Bell, D. (2015). The China Model: Political Meritocracy and the limits of democracy. Princeton University
  Press.

Bell, D. and E. Li (2012, November 11). In defence of how China picks its leaders. The Financial Times.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2001). Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones Without Principals
  Are. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3), 901–932.

Besley, T. (2005, September). Political selection. Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (3), 43–60.

Besley, T. J., K. B. Burchardi, and M. Ghatak (2012). Incentives and the De Soto Effect. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 127 (1), 237–282.

Besley, T. J. and T. Persson (2010). State capacity, conflict and development. Econometrica 78 (1-34).

Birney, M. (2014). Decentralization and veiled corruption under China’s rule of mandates. World Develop-
  ment 53, 55–67.

Bobonis, G., L. R. C. Fuertes, and R. Schwabe (2013). Monitoring Corruptible Politicians. American
  Economic Review, forthcoming.

Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Mathiowetz (2001). Measurement error in survey data. In The Handbook of
  Econometrics.

Chay, K. Y., P. J. McEwan, and M. Urquiola (2005). The Central Role of Noise in Evaluating Interventions
  That Use Test Scores to Rank Schools. American Economic Review 95 (4), 1237–1258.

Chen, Y.-Y., G. Z. Jin, N. Kumar, and G. Shi (2012). Gaming in Air Pollution Data? Lessons from China.
  The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 13 (3).

Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison (1999). Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 14 (2), 389–432.

Chiappori, P. and B. Salanie (2000). Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance Markets. Journal of
  Political Economy 108, 56–78.

Choukhmane, T., N. Coeurdacier, and K. Jin (2014). The One Child Policy and Household Saving. mimeo.

Cullen, J. B. and R. Reback (2006). Tinkering toward accolades: School gaming under a performance
  accountability system. In T. Gronberg and D. Jansen (Eds.), Improving School Accountability: Check-Ups
  or Choice, Advances in Applied Microeconomics 14, pp. 1–34. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

                                                    37
Ebenstein, A. (2010). The “Missing Girls” of China and the Unintended Consequences of the One Child
  Policy. The Journal of Human Resources 45 (1), 87–115.

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2008). Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil’s Publicly Released
  Audits on Electoral Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 703–745.

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2011). Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from the Audits of Local
  Governments. American Economic Review 101 (4), 1274–1311.

Fisman, R. and Y. Wang (2015). The Economics of Death Ceilings. Working Paper.

Fisman, R. and S.-J. Wei (2004). Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence From ‘Missing Imports’ in China.
  Journal of Political Economy 112 (2), 471–96.

Ghanem, D. and J. Zhang (2014). Effortless Perfection: Do Chinese Cities Manipulate Air Pollution Data?
  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 68, 203–225.

Hardee-Cleaveland, K. and J. Banister (1988). Fertility Policy and Implementation in China, 1986-88. Pop-
  ulation and Development Review 14 (2), 245–286.

Holmstrom, B. (1999). Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective. Review of Economic Stud-
  ies 66 (1), 169–182.

Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom (1991). Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts, asset owner-
  ship, and job design. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 7, 24–52.

Jacob, B. and S. Levitt (2003). Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and Predictors of Teacher
  Cheating. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 843–877.

Jia, R.-X. (2014). Pollution for Promotion. mimeo.

Jia, R.-X., M. Kudamatsu, and D. Seim (2015). Political Selection in China: Complementary Role of
   Connections and Performance. Journal of the European Economic Association 13 (4), 631–668.

Johansson, S. and O. Nygren (1991). The Missing Girls of China: A New Demographic Account. Population
  and Development Review 17 (1), 35–51.

Kane, T., D. G. D. Staiger, and H. Ladd (2002). Volatility in school test scores: Implications for test-based
  accountability systems. Brookings Papers on Education Policy, 235–283.

Laffont, J.-J. (2001). Incentives and Political Economy. Clarendon Lectures in Economics. Oxford University
  Press.

Landry, P. (2008). Decentralized Authoritarianism in China: The Communist Party’s Control of Local Elites
  in the Post-Mao Era. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

Lazear, E. and S. Rosen (1981). Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts. Journal of Political
  Economy 89 (5), 841–864.

Li, H.-B. and L.-A. Zhou (2005). Political Turnover and Economic Performance: The Incentive Role of
   Personnel Control in China. Journal of Public Economics 89 (9-10), 1743–62.

Maskin, E., Y.-Y. Qian, and C.-G. Xu (2000). Incentives, Information, and Organizational Form. Review of
 Economic Studies 67 (2), 359–78.

                                                     38
Olken, B. (2006). Monitoring Corruptible Politicians: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.
  Journal of Political Economy 115 (2), 200–249.

Oyer, P. and S. Schaefer (2011). Personnel Economics: Hiring and Incentives. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card
  (Eds.), The Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4b, pp. 1769–1823.

Persson, P. and E. Zhuravskaya (2015). The Limits of Career Concerns in Federalism: Evidence from China.
  Journal of the European Economics Association, forthcoming.

Prendergast, C. (1999). The Provision of Incentives in Firms. Journal of Economic Literature 37, 7–63.

Qian, N. (2009, May). Quantity-Quality and the One Child Policy: The Only-Child Disadvantage in School
  Enrollment in Rural China. Working Paper 14973, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Rasul, I. and D. Rogger (2016, January). Management of bureaucrats and public service delivery: Evidence
  from the nigerian civil service. Technical Report No. DP11078., CEPR Discussion Paper.

Rochet, J.-C. and L. Stole (2003). The Economics of Multidimensional Screening. In M. Dewatripont and
  L. Hansen (Eds.), Advances in Economic Theory, 7th World Congress. Cambridge University Press.

Rockoff, J., D. Staiger, T. Kane, and E. Taylor (2012). Information and Employee Evaluation: Evidence
  from a Randomized Intervention in Public Schools. American Economic Review 102 (7), 3184–3213.

Scharping, T. (2003). Birth Control in China 1949-2000: Population Policy and Demographic Development.
  London and New York: Routledge-Curzon.

Shih, V., C. Adolph, and M.-X. Liu (2012). Getting Ahead in the Communist Party: Explaining the
  Advancement of Central Committee Members in China. American Political Science Review 106, 166–
  87.

Wei, S.-J. and X. Zhang (2011). The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising Sex Ratios and
 Saving Rates in China. The Journal of Political Economy 119 (3), 511–564.

Wong, E. (2012, July, 22). Reports of Forced Abortions Fuel Push to End Chinese Law. The New York
 Times.

Xu, C.-G. (2011). The Fundamental Institutions of China’s Reforms and Development. Journal of Economic
  Literature 49 (4), 1076–1151.

Zeng, Y., P. Tu, B. Gu, Y. Xu, B. Li, and Y. Li (1993). Causes and implications of the recent increase in the
  reported sex ratio at birth in china. Population and Development Review 19 (2), 283–302.

Zheng, S., M. E. Kahn, W. Sun, and D. Luo (2014). Incentives for china’s urban mayors to mitigate pollution
  externalities: The role of the central government and public environmentalism. Regional Science and Urban
  Economics 47, 61 – 71. SI: Tribute to John Quigley.

Zitzewitz, E. (2012). Forensic Economics. Journal of Economic Literature 50 (3), 731–769.




                                                     39
                           Online Appendices Not For Publication

A     Appendix - Theory
A.1     The probability that ai produces the maximum output
Recall that the expected value of the maximal order statistic for N iid draws from an exponential
distribution with parameter λ is:
                                                                    
                                                           1        1 1
                                            E[ε(N ) ] = 1 + + ... +     .
                                                           2        N λ

Since agent ai only knows the average ability of the agent population, her belief about the probability
that her output yi is the maximal output is:
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
                                                          1      X                 1           1        1
      Pr(yi is max |e1 , ..., eN ) = Pr yi ≥                           yj + 1 +     + ... +
                                                        N −1                       2         N −1       λ
                                                                 j6=i
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                 
                                                          1      X                   1          1   1
                                           = Pr εi ≥                   ej − ei + 1 + + ... +          ,
                                                        N −1                         2        N −1 λ
                                                                 j6=i

         1     P
where   N −1       j6=i ej + E[ε(N −1) ]   is the expected value of the sample maximum of the realized outputs
of the other (N-1) agents: ŷi = ei + ε̂i .
    Recall that if ε ∼ exp(λ), then the cdf is Fε (x) = 1 − e−λx , x > 0. Thus, this probability is:
                                                                                         
                                                                                      
                                                   1               X     1         1     1
    Pr(yi is max |e1 , ..., eN ) = 1 − Fexp(λ)            ej − ei + 1 + + ... +
                                                 N −1                    2       N −1 λ
                                                      j6=i
                                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                 1   X                 1         1     1 
                                 = exp −λ             ej − ei + 1 + + ... +               .
                                               N −1                    2       N −1 λ
                                                                 j6=i


A.2     Meritocracy and the Compensation Scheme (Proof of Proposition 1)
We establish the relationship between the principal’s value of meritocracy and the compensation
scheme by comparing the maximal social welfare achieved under a tournament to the maximal
social welfare achieved under a piece rate for each possible value of ω ∈ [0, 1], where a smaller ω
represents a more meritocratic objective. The compensation scheme which maximizes social welfare
for a given value of ω is the scheme chosen by the principal, because utility is perfectly-transferable
in our model and any equilibrium is Pareto-efficient. In other words, because the principal and the
agents “maximize the pie and then split it,” the compensation scheme which yields higher social
welfare is preferred because it generates a larger pie to split.
    We characterize the maximal social welfare that can be achieved under the piece rate and the
tournament for a given value of ω by taking the following steps. First, given any ω, we characterize
the effort exerted by an agent with ability ai who faces either a piece rate or a tournament which


                                                            40
rewards the promoted agent with a bonus. Next, we solve for the social welfare-maximizing piece
rate and bonus when the principal cares about output only for its production value (ω = 1), and
show that higher social welfare is achieved under the piece rate. Then, we solve for the social
welfare-maximizing piece rate and bonus when the principal cares about output only for its screening
value (ω = 0), and show that higher social welfare is achieved under the tournament. Finally, we
show that the maximal level of social welfare achieved under the piece rate increases continuously
and monotonically in ω, while the maximal level of social welfare achieved under the tournament
decreases continuously and monotonically in ω. By the Intermediate Value Theorem, it follows that
there exists ω̃ ∈ (0, 1) such that, when ω > ω̃ and meritocracy is relatively unimportant to the
principal, the compensation scheme is a piece rate, and when ω < ω̃ and meritocracy is relatively
important to the principal, the compensation scheme is a tournament.

Characterizing agent effort under the piece rate and the tournament, given ω ∈
[0, 1].
Suppose that the principal maximizes the following expression by setting a piece rate, s(ŷi ) = αŷi ,
to compensate agents for their reported output, as well as choosing which agent i to promote:

                                           N
                                       "          #
                                           X
                                  ωE             yi + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted].
                                           i=1

       An agent’s effort choice in the “all lie” equilibrium, where an agent who is caught lying gets fired,
solves:
                                                              
                                                          αω δ    1
                                max pF + (1 − p) αω δei +        − exp(ei ).
                                 ei                        λ      ai
       Thus, ai ’s equilibrium effort choice when facing the piece rate αω is (where the subscript indicates
that the piece rate may depend on ω):

                                        ePi,lie
                                             R
                                                = log((1 − p)δαω ) + log(ai ).

       Suppose, alternatively, that the principal compensates reported output via a tournament which
promotes one agent and rewards her with a bonus, B.46 The promoted agent who is rewarded with
a bonus, B, will optimally be the agent with highest reported output who is not caught lying.47
       An agent’s effort choice in the “all lie” equilibrium, where an agent who is caught lying gets fired,
solves:
                                                                    1
                                       max Bω Pr(yˆi > yˆ−i ) −        exp(ei ).
                                           ei                       ai
  46
     Note that we could have allowed for a more powerful tournament which includes our structure as a case (e.g.
bonuses of varying magnitudes, or a lottery over bonuses, or the possibility that no agent is promoted). However,
the main point of our model is to show that sufficient value of meritocracy causes a principal to prefer a tournament.
Thus, we consider the weakest possible tournament–otherwise, it could be that valuing meritocracy only causes a
principal to prefer the tournament if it is sufficiently (and unrealistically) powerful.
  47
     The principal has no reason to incentivize lower output, and the probability of detection increases in the magnitude
of the lie.



                                                            41
We obtain:
                                                                                              
                                                                              1    X
                    EUi−ilies
                            lies
                                 = pF + (1 − p) exp −λ                                  ej − ei  E(p, N )Bω
                                                                            N −1
                                                                                   j6=i
                                                                1
                                     +(1 − p)pN −1 Bω −            exp(ei ),
                                                                ai

where E(p, N ) denotes the expected probability ai ’s error is weakly greater than the maximal order
statistic for the error in the population of non-fired mayors:

                                (1 − p)N −1 exp(−λε̄N −1 ) + ... + (1 − p)pN −2 exp(−λε̄1 )
                                                                                           
                   E(p, N ) ≡
                                                                                          
                                                    N −1
                                                    X     1
                             = (1 − p)N −1 exp −            + ... + (1 − p)pN −2 exp(−1) .
                                                          j
                                                              j=1


       Agent ai ’s expected utility breaks down in an intuitive way:

   1. The first term addresses the case where ai gets caught lying, which happens with probability
         p. If she gets caught, she is fired and receives F < 0.

   2. The second term is the most complex: it addresses the case where ai does not get caught,
         but various subsets of the other (N − 1) lying mayors are caught. All possibilities ranging
         from “none of the other mayors is caught” to “all but one of the other mayors are caught” are
         addressed in this term.
         The key observation is that the average effort of the non-detected other mayors is always
          1 P
         N −1  j6=i ej , regardless of how many of the other mayors are not detected. This is because
         the probability of detection is always p for each lying mayor. A simple example will illustrate.
         Suppose there are four mayors, a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 . The mayor a1 calculates the average effort of the
         pool of non-fired mayors she will face, in the case that one of the other mayors is caught. This
         means that she might face {a2 , a3 }, or {a2 , a4 }, or {a3 , a4 }. But she faces each of these pools
         with equal probability. Thus, the average of the average effort in each of these pools is just
         1
         3 a2   + 13 a3 + 31 a4 –but that’s just the average ability of the three other mayors.
                                              1
         Thus, we can “factor out” e−λ[ N −1                        ] .48
                                                  P
                                                      j6=i ej −ei



   3. The third term addresses the case where our mayor ai is not caught, but all the other mayors
         are caught. Then our mayor is promoted for sure.

   4. The fourth term is the cost of effort of ai from exerting effort ei .
  48
    Recall that ε̄k is the
                         maximal order statistic for a sample of k iid draws from the error distribution, exp(λ). Recall
that ε̄k = 1 + ... + k1 λ1 .




                                                               42
Then the first-order condition characterizing optimal effort in the “pure lie” scenario is:
                                                                        
                                                        1  X
                       F OCei : (1 − p)Bω λ exp −λ         ej − ei 
                                                      N −1
                                                                                           j6=i
                                                                                                                        1
              × (1 − p)N −1 exp (−λε̄N −1 ) + ... + (1 − p)pN −2 exp (−λε̄1 ) =
                                                                            
                                                                                                                           exp(ei ).
                                                                                                                        ai

Solving yields equilibrium effort:

                                                                                                             N
                                             (N − 1)                     λ       X
                           eTi,lie   =                  log(ai ) −                 log(aj )
                                          N (1 − λ) − 1            N (1 − λ) − 1
                                                                                                            j=1
                                          + log[(1 − p)Bω λ] + log E(p, N ).

Piece rates are Optimal when ω = 1.
When ω = 1, social welfare is:

                                                    N
                                                    X                            N
                                                                                 X
                                                           E[ei + i ] −                 c(ei ).
                                                     i=1                         i=1

   Let αx ≡ αω=x . Using our expression for effort under the piece rate and our functional form for
cost of effort, we see that the piece rate α1 that maximizes social welfare solves:


                     N                                                               N
                 "                                                  #
                     X                                   N X 1
        max E              log((1 − p)δα1 ) + log(ai ) +   −    exp(log((1 − p)δα1 ) + log(ai )) .
         α1                                              λ   ai
                     i=1                                                             i=1

   This yields:
                                                                             1
                                                             α1 =                  ,
                                                                          (1 − p)δ
which implements first-best effort, eFi,ω=1
                                        B   = log(ai ). Thus, the maximal level of social welfare under
the piece rate is:

                                                                N
                                                                X                          N
                                               SW1P R       =             log(ai ) +         − N.
                                                                                           λ
                                                                    i=1

   The tournament bonus, B1 , which maximizes social welfare solves:

                                                    N                                N
                                                "                   #
                                                    X                     N X 1
                                      max E               eTi,lie       +   −    exp(eTi,lie ) ,
                                         B1                               λ   ai
                                                    i=1                              i=1

which yields:

                                                     1                                       N
                                     B1 =                                                                   λ       ,
                                              (1 − p)λE(p, N ) PN h                    ai ∗...∗ai
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                        N (1−λ)−1
                                                                               i=1    a1 ∗...∗aN

so that the maximal level of social welfare under the tournament is:

                                                                          43
                                                                                                                         
                              N
                              X                  N                                                 N
                   SW1T =                                                                                                  − N 2.
                                                                                                                         
                                    log(ai ) +     + N log                                                       λ
                                                 λ         P h
                                                             N                            ai ∗...∗ai
                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                              N (1−λ)−1
                                                                                                                          
                              i=1
                                                                                 i=1     a1 ∗...∗aN

   Observe that:

                                                                  N
                                                       h                 i       λ             < 1,
                                            PN              ai ∗...∗ai       N (1−λ)−1
                                                 i=1       a1 ∗...∗aN

where                                                 
                                             λ         −1,
                                                                                       λ=1
                                                                                                   N −1
                                                    =   ∞,                              λ=          N
                                                                                                              .
                                       N (1 − λ) − 1 
                                                        0,                              λ=0
                                                      

                                                                                 λN
                                                                             N (1−λ)−1
To see this, define a sequence {si }N
                                    i=1 , where si = ai                                        > 0 ∀i. Then the inequality we want to
show can be re-expressed as:

                                              N
                                           1 X        si
                                           N      QN       1 > 1 ⇐⇒
                                                            N
                                             i=1
                                                    i=1 si


                                                   N                         N
                                                                                        ! N1
                                                 1 X                         Y
                                                     si >                          si          .
                                                 N
                                                       i=1                   i=1

This holds by the AM-GM inequality, which states that, for any sequence of non-negative real
numbers, the arithmetic mean is greater than the geometric mean as long as all the terms are not
equal (and holds at equality iff all the terms are equal). Hence:
                                                                                               
                                                                   N                           
                                       log 
                                                          h                 i       λ
                                                                                                 < 0.
                                                                                                
                                                 PN             ai ∗...∗ai       N (1−λ)−1
                                                  i=1          a1 ∗...∗aN


   Since N 2 > N , as N > 1, it follows that:
                                                                                                                                     
           N                             N
           X                  N          X                       N                                                N
SW1P R =                                                                                                                               − N 2 = SW1T .
                                                                                                                                     
                 log(ai ) +     −N >           log(ai ) +          + N log                                                   λ
                              λ                                  λ         P h
                                                                             N                          ai ∗...∗ai
                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                          N (1−λ)−1
                                                                                                                                      
           i=1                           i=1
                                                                                               i=1     a1 ∗...∗aN


In other words, the maximal level of social welfare achieved under the piece rate surpasses the
maximal level of social welfare achieved under the tournament when ω = 1.

Tournaments are Optimal when ω = 0.
When ω = 0, social welfare is:



                                                                      44
                                                                  N
                                                                  X
                                      E[ai |i is promoted] −            c(ei ).
                                                                  i=1

Social welfare will be higher under the mechanism which generates a higher probability of promoting
the highest-ability agent a1 for a given amount of total cost of effort.
   Recall that, for any piece rate α0 , effort is:

                                     elie
                                      i,P R = log((1 − p)δα0 ) + log(ai ),


so that the probability that agent ai is promoted is:
                                                                                    
                                                                                  
                                         1  X                                   1
    P r(ai highest output) = exp −λ         log(aj ) − log(ai ) + 1 + ... +        λ .
                                       N −1                                   N −1
                                                     j6=i


(Note that this probability does not depend on the piece rate α0 , only on the abilities of the agents
in the economy and other parameters.)
   On the other hand, under the tournament mechanism, for any bonus B0 , effort is:

                                                            N
                  (N − 1)                     λ       X
      elie
       i,T =                 log(ai ) −                 log(aj ) + log[(1 − p)B0 λ] + log E(p, N ),
               N (1 − λ) − 1            N (1 − λ) − 1
                                                            j=1


   so that the probability that agent ai is promoted is:

                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                   
                                             (N − 1)  1            X                                          1
P r(ai highest output) = exp −λ                                          log(aj ) − log(ai ) + 1 + ... +
                                                                                                                       λ .
                                          N (1 − λ) − 1 N − 1                                                N −1
                                                                    j6=i


(Again, note that this probability does not depend on B0 .)
   Observe that, because N 1−1 j6=i log(aj ) − log(ai ) < 0 precisely for the above-average ability
                                 P

agents, and N 1−1 j6=i log(aj ) − log(ai ) > 0 precisely for the below-average ability agents, it is the
                 P

case that:

                     P r(ai promoted)T > P r(ai promoted)P R f or ai > avg(ai )
                     P r(ai promoted)T < P r(ai promoted)P R f or ai < avg(ai )

   Again, note that this is independent of the bonus B0 or the piece rate α0 –these probabilities
only depend on agent abilities (and other exogenously-given parameters). Thus, for every possible
piece rate α0 , there exists a bonus B0 such that total cost of effort exertion is equalized, but the
higher-ability agents have a higher probability of getting promoted, and the lower-ability agents
have a lower probability of getting promoted. Hence, the expected ability of the promoted agent
is higher under the tournament mechanism than under the piece rate mechanism given any level of
total cost of effort exertion.
   Therefore, the maximal level of social welfare achieved under the tournament surpasses the

                                                      45
maximal level of social welfare achieved under the piece rate when ω = 0.

Optimality when ω ∈ (0, 1).
Finally, we compare the maximal social welfare achieved under the piece rate and under the tour-
nament for interior ω ∈ (0, 1).
   Social welfare given a piece rate αω is:

                        N
                        X                                                                     N
                                                                                              X
                    ω         E[ePi,lie
                                     R
                                        + i ] + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted, αω ] −                 c(ePi,lie
                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                              ),
                        i=1                                                                   i=1

and, given a tournament bonus Bω , social welfare is:

                        N
                        X                                                                     N
                                                                                              X
                    ω         E[eTi,lie + i ] + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted, Bω ] −                 c(eTi,lie ).
                        i=1                                                                   i=1

   Crucially, recall that E[ai |i is promoted, αω ] does not depend on αω , and E[ai |i is promoted, Bω ]
does not depend on Bω : that is, neither the amount of the piece rate nor the amount of the bonus
enters into the expression for the expected ability of the promoted mayor. This is because both the
piece rate and the bonus enter as constants in each agent’s equilibrium effort:


                                         elie
                                          i,P R = log((1 − p)δα0 ) + log(ai ),

and:


                                                                    N
                   (N − 1)                     λ       X
       elie
        i,T =                 log(ai ) −                 log(aj ) + log[(1 − p)B0 λ] + log E(p, N ).
                N (1 − λ) − 1            N (1 − λ) − 1
                                                                 j=1


   Thus, the piece rate and the bonus shift effort levels in a constant way across agents of different
ability. Hence, the probability that an agent ai produces the maximal output does not depend on
the piece rate or the bonus–the constant terms cancel each other–and consequently the expected
ability of the promoted agent (the agent with highest reported output who is not caught lying) does
not depend on the piece rate or the bonus, either.
   This means that the piece rate αω which maximizes social welfare simply maximizes:

                                              N
                                              X                          N
                                                                         X
                                          ω         E[ePi,lie
                                                           R
                                                              + i ] −         c(ePi,lie
                                                                                      R
                                                                                         ),
                                              i=1                        i=1

while the bonus Bω which maximizes social welfare simply maximizes:

                                              N
                                              X                          N
                                                                         X
                                          ω         E[eTi,lie + i ] −         c(eTi,lie ).
                                              i=1                        i=1

   The piece rate αω generating maximal social welfare is:




                                                               46
                                                                               ω
                                                        αω = ωα1 =                   ,
                                                                            (1 − p)δ
and the bonus Bω generating maximal social welfare is:

                                                       ω                                     N
                                Bω = ωB1 =                                                                    λ       .
                                                (1 − p)λE(p, N ) PN h                    ai ∗...∗ai
                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                          N (1−λ)−1
                                                                                 i=1    a1 ∗...∗aN

     Hence, the maximal social welfare under the piece rate is:

                     N
                     X                    N
                 ω         log(ai ) + ω     + ωN log ω + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted, P R] − ωN,
                                          λ
                     i=1

and the maximal social welfare under the tournament is:

                                                                                                
    N
    X                  N                                                   N                    +(1−ω)E[ai |i is promoted, T ]−ωN 2 .
                                                                                                 
ω         log(ai )+ω     +ωN log ω+ωN log                                               λ
                       λ                  P h
                                            N                       ai ∗...∗ai
                                                                                 i
                                                                                     N (1−λ)−1
                                                                                                 
    i=1
                                                           i=1     a1 ∗...∗aN


     Then maximal social welfare under the piece rate surpasses maximal social welfare under the
tournament if:
                               hP                          i
                                 N                  N
                           ω       i=1 log(ai ) +   λ   − N + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted, P R] >
                                                                             

    ω N                       N                            N                       − N 2  + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted, T ].
      P
        i=1 log(ai ) +         λ   + N log  P      h
                                                      ai ∗...∗ai
                                                                   i       λ
                                                 N                     N (1−λ)−1
                                                 i=1 a1 ∗...∗aN



     But we know from the case ω = 1 that this condition is simply:

          ωSW1P R + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted, P R] > ωSW1T + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted, T ].

     Since we know from the case ω = 1 that SW1P R > SW1T , and we know from the case ω = 0 that
E[ai |i is promoted, P R] < E[ai |i is promoted, T ], and since the left-hand side and the right-hand
side are continuous in ω, it follows by the Intermediate Value Theorem that there exists ω̃ ∈ (0, 1)
such that, when the principal sufficiently values meritocracy (ω < ω̃), the tournament is preferred.
Otherwise, when ω > ω̃, the piece rate is preferred.

A.3        Proof of Proposition 2 and Corollary 1
Let ω = 1. We know from Proposition 1 that the equilibrium compensation scheme is a piece rate.
     Proposition 2 is straightforward. If the principal values output only for production (not for
screening), and the equilibrium compensation scheme to reward the birth rate is the piece rate, then
we should not expect OCP to impact the probability of promotion (since promotion must be based
on something that isn’t OCP).



                                                                       47
    There are two possibilities: either the dimension on which the principal promotes is not related
to ability at all, or there is a correlation. Proposition 2 addresses the former case, Corollary 1 the
latter.
    If the dimension on which the principal promotes is not related to ability, then OCP (which
is correlated with ability) should not have an impact on the probability of promotion, and this
non-effect should not vary by noisiness or competitiveness of environment.
    If the dimension on which the principal promotes is related to ability (but isn’t OCP), then if we
observe that better OCP performance corresponds with increased probability of promotion, it must
be that the non-OCP dimension on which promotion is based is positively correlated with ability.
    But then we should observe that better OCP performance has a larger positive effect on the
probability of promotion in environments that are more noisy, and the effect should not differ by
competitiveness of environment. Why is this?
    Recall that in the “all lie” equilibrium, the effort exerted by ai is (see Appendix A.2):

                                      elie
                                       i,P R = log((1 − p)δα) + log(ai )


    Note that if (1 − p)δ < 1, all agents tell the truth. A necessary condition for agents to lie is
therefore (1 − p)δ > 1 (probability of detection low enough, scope for lying high enough). This isn’t
sufficient (we also need F , the disutility from being fired, to not be too negative, and so on), but
this is the primary condition.
    Then, the principal solves:
                                                                             
                                                                1
                         max(1 − α) log[(1 − p)δα] + log(ai ) +                   (1 − p).
                          α                                     λ

This yields:
                                               
                         ∗        1
                        α :1−α 1+                   − α log[(1 − p)δα] − α log(ai ) = 0
                                  λ
We then calculate the following important comparative statics:

                        ∂α∗           α                  1
                              = −               1                       <0
                        ∂ai           ai 2 +    λ   + log[(1 − p)δαai ]
                        ∂α∗                                 α λ12
                              =   h                                                   i >0
                        ∂λ            1+   1
                                               + log[(1 − p)δαai ] +   αi
                                                                            + log(ai )
                                           λ                           αi


Thus, the incentive strength of the piece rate is lower for higher-ability mayors, and is lower in
noisier environments.
    To be specific:

   1. OCP performance and promotion: There is no reason to think that better reported or actual
      performance on OCP should affect probability of promotion.
      The principal, by assumption in the set up, does not care what the ability of the promoted
      mayor is. So, if agents are observed to be promoted, it must be on a dimension other than


                                                         48
      ability. Of course, this dimension may be positively correlated with ability. Thus, since we
      observe better OCP performance increasing the probability of promotion, if we are in this
      world, it must be that the principal is promoting based on a dimension that is positively
      correlated with ability (where higher ability also improves OCP performance).

  2. Noisiness predictions: If we think that ability is positively correlated with the dimension on
      which the principal is promoting, then, in this world, this implies that better OCP performance
      has a larger effect (increase) on probability of promotion in environments that are more noisy.
      This is because, both in the “all lie” and the “all true” equilibrium:
                                               "                                  #
                                ∂elie
                                  i         1                    1
                                        =       1−      1
                                ∂ai         ai     2+   λ   + log[(1 − p)δαai ]
                                               "                        #
                              ∂etrue
                                i           1                1
                                        =       1−      1
                               ∂ai          ai     2+   λ   + log[αai ]


      But note that both of these expressions are larger when λ1 , the variance of the error, is larger.
      That is, higher ability has a larger positive impact on effort and thus OCP performance when
      the environment is noisier.
      This contradicts our observation that better OCP performance has a larger effect (increase)
      on probability of promotion in environments that are less noisy.

  3. Competition predictions: In this world, there should be no difference in the effect of decreasing
      the birth rate on the probability of promotion in more versus less competitive environments,
      since ei and the piece rate α depend only on own ability, and not the abilities of any other
      mayor in your region, or on the number of mayors in your region.
      This contradicts our empirical observation that the impact of better OCP performance on the
      probability of promotion does depend on competitiveness.

A.4    Proof of Proposition 3
Now, suppose ω is small enough–the principal cares sufficiently about the ability of the agent she
promotes, and she no longer directly observes ability–so that the principal prefers to use the tour-
nament mechanism (the lower ω is, that is, the more that the principal values output as a screening
device to identify the highest-ability mayor, the more likely the principal is to prefer the tournament
mechanism).
   Then, by introspection, there are potentially three types of pure strategy equilibria:

  1. “Pure lie”: all the mayors misreport

  2. “Pure truth”: all the mayors report truthfully

  3. “Partial truth”: some mayors misreport, and some mayors report truthfully




                                                  49
Again, we focus on the first equilibrium (“pure lie”), since we observe that everyone misreports in the
data. (See Appendix A.6 for a discussion of the other equilibrium possibilities, and the sustainability
of the “pure lie” equilibrium we focus on.)
   Recall that we have already characterized how a given mayor ai responds optimally depending
on the effort exerted by the other (N − 1) mayors (in Appendix A.2), which we need to characterize
the conditions under which each of these types is supported as an equilibrium (if ever).

                                                                                        N
                                              (N − 1)                     λ       X
              ei (i lies, others lie) =                  log(ai ) −                 log(aj )
                                           N (1 − λ) − 1            N (1 − λ) − 1
                                                                                       j=1
                                           + log[(1 − p)Bλ] + log E(p, N )

The principal solves:
                                                                                                    !
                      N         (N −1)                     λ        PN
                     X
                              N (1−λ)−1   log(ai ) −   N (1−λ)−1     j=1 log(aj ) + log[(1 − p)Bλ]
              max ω                                                                                  
               B
                        j=1                               + log E(p, N )
              +(1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted] − B.

The FOC is:
                                                   N
                                   F OCB : ω             (1 − p)λ − 1 = 0,
                                               (1 − p)Bλ
since E[ai |i is promoted] does not depend on B. This implies B ∗ = ωN .
   Then, given the bonus B ∗ , what is the probability that ai is promoted in this “pure lie” equilib-
rium, given ei (i lies, others lie)?
                                                             N −1
                                                                    −1
                                                a N (1−λ)−1 E(p, N )
                Pr(ai is promoted, cheating) =  i                 λ     + pN −1 (1 − p)
                                                PN              N (1−λ)−1
                                                   j=1 log aj


Compare this to the probability that ai is promoted in the model where output is contractible and
there is thus no possibility of cheating.
                                                          λ         P           
                                                                            −1 1
                                                      ai(1−λ) exp − N    j=1 j
                     Pr(ai is promoted, no cheating) =                  λ
                                                          PN             N (1−λ)
                                                             j=1 log aj


   (See Appendix A.5 for the analysis of this case when output is contractible and there is thus no
cheating.)
   Note that the important differences are:
   (1) there is an extra element in the “pure lie” probability ai gets promoted which does not depend
on ability at all: pN −1 (1 − p)
   (2) there is subsequently less weight in the “pure lie” scenario on the ability term. This is captured
by the expected maximal order statistic (because our lying mayor ai is not always competing against
all the other mayors, because some of them will get caught): E(p, λ, N ) < exp (−λε̄N −1 ).


                                                        50
   The main takeaway is that, when output is not contractible and we are in the “pure lie” cheating
equilibrium, the probability that any mayor ai is promoted depends less on her ability ai than in the
no cheating scenario.
   This is driven home when we look at:
                                                                  N
                                                                  X
                                 E[ai |i is promoted] =                 Pr(ai |i is promoted)ai .
                                                                  j=1


Then:
                                                                         N −1
                                                          PN      N (1−λ)−1
                                                                                −1                            N
                                                            j=1 aj              E(p, N )                     X
                   cheat                                                                        N −1
              E            [ai |i is promoted] =            P                     λ       +p       (1 − p)     aj
                                                                N               N (1−λ)−1
                                                                                                             j=1
                                                          N     j=1   log a j
                                                                    λ          P             
                                                          PN      (1−λ)                N −1 1
                                                                a
                                                            j=1 j       exp     −      j=1 j
            E no   cheat
                           [ai |i is promoted] =               P                  λ
                                                                     N              N (1−λ)
                                                             N       j=1 log aj


   This just emphasizes the key difference in effectiveness of the promotion mechanism at identifying
the highest-ability mayor : in the cheating equilibrium, the expected ability of the promoted mayor
includes an extra term which is not present in the benchmark model: pN −1 (1 − p) N
                                                                                     P
                                                                                       j=1 aj . This is
the average ability in expectation, which is proportional to the population average:

                                                                 N            N
                                                N −1
                                                                 X          1 X
                                            p          (1 − p)         aj ∝     aj .
                                                                            N
                                                                 j=1             j=1


Note that
                                                                        1
                                                pN −1 (1 − p) <           , p ∈ [0, 1].
                                                                        N
                                          N −1
The LHS is maximized at p =                N      (first order condition is necessary and sufficient since LHS is
                                N −2                                            N −1
concave in p as long as          N     < p, which holds since p∗ =               N ).     Then
                                                                N −1
                                                       N −1               1  1
                                                                            < ,
                                                        N                 N  N

                       N −1
which holds since       N      < 1.
   That is, the promotion mechanism in the cheating scenario is closer to simply choosing a mayor at
random. Moreover, note that the promotion mechanism performs the worst (most closely resembles
random promotion) for intermediate audit probabilities p: if p = 0, so people’s lies are completely
undetectable as long as they stay within δ of their true output, then even though everyone is lying, the
highest-ability guys are still exerting the most effort and so their reported lie will still be reasonably
likely to be the highest. If p = 1, then people are detected for sure if they lie and we are in the
truthful equilibrium. It is when p is low and intermediate that individuals distort the most.
   We find that the following important comparative statics are reflected in our data:



                                                                  51
  1. Increasing effort increases ai ’s probability of promotion:

                                                                     ∂ Pr(ai is promoted,cheating)
                      ∂ Pr(ai is promoted, cheating)                              ∂ai
                                                               =                   ∂ei
                                    ∂ei                                           ∂ai
                                                               > 0


  2. Increasing effort has a larger positive impact on ai ’s probability of promotion in less noisy
     environments (larger λ):
                                       ∂ ∂ Pr(ai   is promoted,cheating)
                                                         ∂ei
                                                                             >0
                                                       ∂λ
  3. Increasing effort has a smaller positive impact on ai ’s probability of promotion in more com-
     petitive environments (larger N ):

                                       ∂ ∂ Pr(ai   is promoted,cheating)
                                                         ∂ei
                                                                             <0
                                                      ∂N

Comparative statics - the details

  1. Increasing effort increases ai ’s probability of promotion.
     Denote:                                                                     
                                                      N
                                                      X
                                        N −1                              λ
                       A(N ) ≡                    −1    log(aj ) −               
                                     N (1 − λ) − 1                  N (1 − λ) − 1
                                                               j=1



                                                    ∂ Pr(ai is promoted,cheating)
        ∂ Pr(ai is promoted, cheating)                           ∂ai
                                            =                     ∂ei
                      ∂ei                                        ∂ai
                                                                             λ          N −1
                                                   P                             −1          −2
                                                        N                N (1−λ)−1
                                                        j=1 log aj             ajN (1−λ)−1 E(p, N )A(N )
                                            =                        P            2λ
                                                                       N            N (1−λ)−1
                                                                       j=1 log aj
                                                        N −1
                                                                −2
                                                   ajN (1−λ)−1 E(p, N )A(N )
                                            =      P               1+       λ
                                                         N                N (1−λ)−1
                                                         j=1 log aj
                                                        N −1
                                                               −2             h
                                                                                     −1)λ
                                                                                          i
                                                   ajN (1−λ)−1 E(p, N ) N(N       (1−λ)−1
                                            >           P               1+       λ
                                                             N                N (1−λ)−1
                                                             j=1 log a j

                                            > 0

                                                             (N −1)λ
     where the last inequality holds since A(N ) >          N (1−λ)−1     > 0. (Recall that ai > 1 for all i, so
     that log(ai ) > 0 for all i.)

  2. Increasing effort has a larger positive impact on ai ’s probability of promotion in less noisy




                                                      52
  environments (larger λ):
                                                   N −1
                                                           −2         (N −1)
   ∂ ∂ Pr(ai   is promoted,cheating)         ajN (1−λ)−1log(aj ) [NN(1−λ)−1]  2 E(p, N )A(N )
                     ∂ei
                                        =                                2λ                     +
                   ∂λ                                  P
                                                          N              N (1−λ)−1
                                                          j=1  log  a j
                                                 N −1
                                                       −2            h
                                                                           (N −1) PN                                      (N −1)
                                                                                                                                     i
                                            ajN (1−λ)−1 E(p, N ) [NN(1−λ)−1]       2    j=1 log aj −                  [N (1−λ)−1]2
                                          +                       P                2λ
                                                                        N            N (1−λ)−1
                                                                        j=1 log aj


  Then this expression is positive since each term is positive:

   (a) We know that A(N ) > 0 from the lower bound established in (1). And, ai > 1 for all i,
       so that log(ai ) > 0 for all i. Thus, the first term is positive.
                                                                   P                 
            (N −1) PN                   (N −1)          (N −1)
   (b) [NN(1−λ)−1] 2  j=1 log a j − [N (1−λ)−1] 2 = [N (1−λ)−1] 2  N  N
                                                                      j=1 log a j − 1   > 0, so the sec-
         ond term is positive.

3. Increasing effort has a smaller positive impact on ai ’s probability of promotion in more com-
  petitive environments (larger N ).
  There is a question of what ability to assume that the additional (N + 1)st mayor has. We
  characterize an upper bound (below) of the effect of increasing effort on ai ’s probability of
  promotion when competition increases by supposing that N
                                                           P              PN +1
                                                             j=1 log aj =   j=1 log aj (this is
  an upper bound because this is the weakest possible way in which competition can increase–the
  additional mayor is of the lowest ability), and we show that this upper bound is negative.
                 P              P
  Denote log ā = log aj , ā =    aj .
                                                                                          N −1
                                                                            λ
                                                                     1+ N (1−λ)−1                   −2
               ∂ ∂ Pr(ai   is promoted,cheating)
                                 ∂ei                      − log ā                    ajN (1−λ)−1        E(p, N )A(N )
                                                   =                                               
                              ∂N                                                              λ
                                                                                     2 1+ N (1−λ)−1
                                                                            log ā
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                              λ
                                                          × [log(aj ) − log(log(aj ))]
                                                                                       [N (1 − λ) − 1]2
                                                                            N −1
                                                           ∂E(p,N ) N (1−λ)−1 −2
                                                                   aj            E(p, N )A(N )
                                                          + ∂N           
                                                                                 λ
                                                                                       
                                                                        2 1+ N (1−λ)−1
                                                                        log ā
                                                                                                    N −1
                                                                                                          −2
                                                                        λ
                                                                  [N (1−λ)−1]2
                                                                                     (ā − 1) ajN (1−λ)−1        E(p, N )
                                                          −                             
                                                                                                λ
                                                                                                      
                                                                                       2 1+ N (1−λ)−1
                                                                             log ā
                                                   < 0


  where the negative relationship holds because each term is negative:

   (a) The first term is negative because log(aj ) > log(log(aj )) (ai > 1 for all i).
                                                               ∂E(p,N )
   (b) The second term is negative because                       ∂N       < 0: the maximal order statistic for the
         error is larger in larger samples, so the probability that a given ai ’s error draw is weakly

                                                              53
           larger than the maximal order statistic is smaller in larger samples.
                    P
       (c) ā > 1 ⇔ aj > 1 since ai > 1 for all i.

A.5    Model with Contractible Output (no cheating)
The optimization program is:

                                                  N
                                              "          #
                                                  X
                         max ωE                         yi + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted] − B         s.t.
                              B
                                                  i=1
                                                                               1
               ei ∈ arg max B Pr(yi is max |ẽi , e−i ) −                         exp (ẽi ) ∀i ∈ {1, ..., N }.
                                    ẽi                                        ai

   Thus, this probability is:
                                                                                      
                                                        N                         
                                                     1 X                 1       1   1
        Pr(yi is max |e1 , ..., eN ) = 1 − Fexp(λ)        ej − ei + 1 + + ... +       
                                                     N                   2       N λ
                                                       j=1
                                                                                   
                                                      N                         
                                                   1 X                 1       1   1
                                     = exp −λ         ej − ei + 1 + + ... +        
                                                   N                   2       N λ
                                                                         j=1


   We use this to characterize the optimal effort of each agent ai . Recall (IC)i , the incentive
compatibility constraint of agent ai :

                                                                                    1
                                  ei ∈ B Pr(yi is max |e1 , ..., eN ) −                exp(ei )
                                                                                   ai
                                                    ∂ Pr(yi is max |e1 , ..., eN )    1
                       F OCei             :       B                                − exp(ei ) = 0.
                                                               ∂ei                    ai

                                                                                                     ∂ Pr(yi is max |e1 ,...,eN )
The F OC is necessary and sufficient because c(ei ; ai ) is convex in ei and                                    ∂ei                 is
concave in ei (as will shortly be seen), so strict concavity of the agent’s objective function is assured.
   Hence, we can characterize the first-order conditions which characterize optimal effort choice by
each agent:
                                                                              
                                                  N                       
               1                    1             1 X              1        1 1 
      F OCei :    exp(ei ) = Bλ 1 −     exp −λ      ej − ei + 1 + + ... +        .
               ai                   N             N                2        N λ
                                                                           j=1


Taking logs and rearranging yields:

                                     N                                                    
                                   1 X                                    1       1        1
    F OCei : (1 − λ) ei + λ            ej = log(ai ) + log (Bλ) + log 1 −    − 1 + + ... +     .
                                   N                                      N       2        N
                                          j=1


Sum over all the FOCs:
                N             N                                         
                X             X                                        1
                      e∗j =          log(aj ) + N log (Bλ) + N log 1 −     − (1 + ... + N ) .
                                                                       N
                j=1           j=1




                                                                    54
Then use this characterization of total effort to solve for individual effort, using the individual
F OCei :

                                           N                                               
                 1                  λ    1 X                               1       1        1
      e∗i   =         log(ai ) −             log(ai ) + log (Bλ) + log 1 −    − 1 + + ... +     .
              (1 − λ)            (1 − λ) N                                 N       2        N
                                                      i=1

Then we can use this to solve for the optimal bonus B ∗ set by the principal:
                                                  
                                             XN
                                     max ωE    yj  + (1 − ω)E[ai |i is promoted] − B.
                                      B
                                                 j=1


       But note that E[ai |i is promoted] does not depend on B: that is, the bonus that the principal
sets does not influence the screening quality of the “promote the mayor with the highest output” rule.
In other words, a higher bonus B is not differentially better or worse than a lower B at screening
for ability. The quality of screening (how close E[ai |yi is max] is to a1 , which is the ideal case)
depends only on the exogenously-given distribution of the abilities in the economy, {a1 , ..., aN }, and
how noisy output is given effort. That is, if variance is high (lots of noise), the quality of screening
will be lower (because less weight will be placed on a1 given that y1 is the maximum output vs.
when the principal can be very sure that high effort corresponds to high output (low noise)). This
quality depends only on parameters:

                                      N
                                      X
E[ai |i is promoted] =                       ai Pr(i has max yi )
                                       i=1
                                                                                                          
                                      N                             N
                                      X                      1    1 X             1            1          1
                                 =           aj exp −λ              log(aj ) −     log(ai ) + (1 + ... + ) .
                                                          (1 − λ) N              1−λ           λ          N
                                      j=1                                    j=1


       Thus, the principal’s problem can be re-expressed as:

                           N
                       "                                                                           #
                           X                                       1                                          N
              max ωE             log(ai ) + N log (Bλ) + N log 1 −                     − (1 + ... + N ) + ω     −B .
                B                                                  N                                          λ
                           i=1

The first-order condition for the principal is:

                                                                         N
                                                            F OCB : ω      = 1,
                                                                         B

so that
                                                            B ∗ (N, ω) = ωN.

The equilibrium effort exerted by an agent with ability ai is:

                                    N                                                   
           1                 λ    1 X                                   1       1        1
e∗i   =         log(ai )−             log(ai )+log(ωN )+log (λ)+log 1 −    − 1 + + ... +     .
        (1 − λ)           (1 − λ) N                                     N       2        N
                                                i=1

Important comparative statics are:


                                                                    55
1. The partial derivative of equilibrium effort in ability:

                                         ∂e∗i
                                                                 
                                                  1 1           λ
                                              =              1−     >0
                                         ∂ai    1 − λ ai        N

   Essentially, equilibrium effort monotonically increases in ability as long as λ ∈ (0, 1) (looking
   at the expression for e∗i , one can see that for λ > 1, the expression for equilibrium effort
   becomes negative). But recall that we have imposed the parametric assumption λ ∈ (0, 1).
                                                                         1   PN                   1     PN +1
2. The partial derivative of equilibrium effort in N (assume that        N    i=1 log(ai )   =   N +1    i=1    log(ai ) ≡
   ā, so that in expectation the (N + 1)st agent has average ability–this is the most logical way
   to analyze the effect of increased competition):

                                      ∂e∗i    1       1      1
                                           =    +          +    >0
                                      ∂N     2N   N (N − 1) N 2

   Individual effort increases as competition increases.
   Note that if we are considering the addition of an (N + 1)st agent with a specific ability–say,
   an agent with very high ability–than the lowest-ability agents may decrease their effort in
   equilibrium, because the average ability rises: N 1+1 N
                                                        P +1            1 PN
                                                         i=1 log(ai ) > N  i=1 log(ai ), and this
   increase depresses the effort of the lowest-ability agents by the most. It is possible that the
   added agent has such high ability that all of the original N agents decrease their effort levels.
   Similarly, if the (N + 1)st added agent is known to have very low ability, so low that he lowers
   the average ability of the new population, and all of the original N agents increase their effort.

3. Individual effort is:
                                       N                                                   
              1                 λ    1 X                                   1       1        1
   e∗i   =         log(ai )−             log(ai )+log(ωN )+log (λ)+log 1 −    − 1 + + ... +
           (1 − λ)           (1 − λ) N                                     N       2        N
                                         i=1


   Then:
                                                                         N
                           ∂e∗i           1                     1      1 X              1
                                  =           2
                                                log(a i ) −         2        log(ai ) +
                           ∂λ         (1 − λ)               (1 − λ) N i=1               λ
                                                                  N
                                                "                            #
                                          1                   1 X                1
                                  =           2
                                                  log(ai ) −         log(ai ) +
                                      (1 − λ)                N                   λ
                                                                 i=1


                                                   1
   Higher λ implies lower variance (V (ε) =        λ2
                                                      ).   Thus, for the high-ability agents, that is, those
   agents who have above average ability, the less variance there is, the more effort they exert.
   On the other hand, for the low-ability agents, that is, those agents who have substantially
   below-average ability, the less variance there is, the less effort they exert.




                                                     56
4. Average effort is:

                          N
                        1 X ∗
           ē =             ei
                        N
                            i=1
                             N                                                            
                        1   X                                             1       1        1
                  =               log(ai ) + log(ωN ) + log (λ) + log 1 −    − 1 + + ... +
                        N                                                 N       2        N
                            i=1


   Then:

                                                           ∂ē         1
                                                                     =
                                                           ∂λ          λ
                                                                     > 0


   Thus, the lower the variance of the noise factor, the higher the average effort exerted in
   equilibrium.

5. The equilibrium bonus is:
                                                                B = ωN

   It’s straightforward to observe that B is increasing in ω and in N .

6. The probability that agent ai is promoted is:
                                                    h        PN                                              i
                                                         1                    1                1       1 1
                                                  −λ N (1−λ)  i=1 log(ai )− (1−λ) log(ai )+(1+ 2 +...+ N ) λ
                      Pr(i is promoted) = e


   Then:
                                                           h                                                        i
   ∂ Pr(i is promoted)                  λ 1           1           1
                                                           −λ N (1−λ)
                                                                      PN               1                1       1 1
                                                                       i=1 log(ai )− (1−λ) log(ai )+(1+ 2 +...+ N ) λ
                                    =              1−     e
            ∂ai                       1 − λ ai        N
                                    > 0


   since N > 1.

7. The marginal impact of increased effort from agent ai on the probability that ai gets promoted
   is smaller when output is a noisier signal of effort and ability, that is, the variance of the noise
   factor is high. (The same is true of the average of the marginal impacts.)
   Then:
                                                                     PN
               max |ei ,e−i )                               1    1                    1
                                                                                         log ai +(1+ 21 +...+ N
                                                                                                              1 1
   ∂ ∂ Pr(yi                                  1
                                                      e−λ[ 1−λ N            log ai − 1−λ                        )λ]
                                                  
               ∂ei                   ∂λ 1 −   N
                                                                      i=1
                                =
               ∂λ                                                           ∂λ
                                                                                          N
                                  "                                                                                 !#
                                       1         1                                1    1 X                1
                                =   1−     +λ 1−                                      2N     log ai +          log ai
                                       N         N                            (1 − λ)    i=1
                                                                                                      (1 − λ)2
                                × exp (−λ[...]) > 0.

                                                                                   1
   Recall that higher λ means less noise, since V ar(ε) =                          λ.   Hence, as output becomes a more

                                                                57
  and more precise signal of effort/ability, the marginal impact of increasing effort on prob. of
  promotion increases.
  In other words, we should observe a gap between actual and target OCP being more predictive
  of promotion in low-variance vs. high-variance places.
  Clearly, this property also holds for the average marginal impact of increasing effort on prob-
  ability of promotion:
                                      P ∂ Pr(yi   max |ei ,e−i )
                               ∂ N1               ∂ei
                                                                   > 0
                                        ∂λ
                                 ∂ Pr(yi max |ei , e−i )
                           since                                   > 0 for each i
                                         ∂ei

8. The marginal impact of increased effort from agent ai on the probability that ai gets promoted
  is smaller when there is more competition. (The same is true of the average of the marginal
  impacts.)
  Assume that there are N mayors who are candidates for promotion, and we add an (N + 1)th
  mayor. We ask: is the marginal impact of increasing effort on the probability of promotion
  less for each of the i mayors when there is more competition?
  Assume that the (N +1)th mayor exerts average effort, which is the rational assumption to make
  ex ante when the ability of the (N +1)th mayor is not known. Thus, N1     ei = N 1+1 ei+1 ≡ ē.
                                                                         P            P

                                                                                                  
  ∂ Pr(yi max |ei , e−i )           ∂ Pr(yi max |ei , e−i )                              1         1 1
                          (N + 1) −                         (N ) = λ exp −λ ē − ei + 1 + + ... +
          ∂ei                                ∂ei                                         2        N λ
                                                                                  
                    1                 λ                                1        1     1   1
     × exp −                 −1 −          exp −λ ē − ei + 1 + + ... +           +
                N +1                N +1                               2        N   N +1 λ
                                                                       
                              λ                             1         1 1
                            + exp −λ ē − ei + 1 + + ... +
                              N                             2         N λ
                                                                                         
                                1        1       1      1                     1             1     1
  < exp −λ ē − ei + 1 + + ... +            +                  λ    exp −           −1 −       +
                                2        N    N +1 λ                        N +1         N +1 N

  where the upper bound follows from
                                                                    
                      1        1     1  1                         1        1 1
  exp −λ ē − ei + 1 + + ... +   +          < exp −λ ē − ei + 1 + + ... +       .
                      2        N   N +1 λ                         2        N λ

  But:
                                                                           
                      1                 1     1  1               1             1    1
  exp −λ ē − ei + 1 + + ... +            +         λ   exp −          −1 −       +     =
                      2                 N   N +1 λ             N +1          N +1 N
                                                                         
                      1                 1     1  1         1               1
  exp −λ ē − ei + 1 + + ... +            +         λ            + exp −        −1 <0
                      2                 N   N +1 λ     N (N + 1)         N +1




                                                    58
      since
                                                              
                                                      1           1
                                                        + exp −       − 1 < 0 : (N = 2)
                                                      6           3
                                            h                         i
                                          ∂ N (N1+1) + exp − N 1+1 − 1
                                                                          > 0
                                                        ∂N
                                                                   
                                              1               1
                                     lim           + exp −            −1 = 0
                                    N →∞ N (N + 1)          N +1

      Hence, the more competitive the region, the less predictive better performance in output
      production should be of promotion.
      The same property holds for the average, since it holds for each individual marginal impact.

A.6    Equilibrium Possibilities Other Than “All Lie”
Suppose that ai anticipates that all the other mayors will lie. What is her expected utility from
exerting some effort ei and reporting truthfully?
   In this case, ai solves:
                                                                     
                                             1     X                                                   1
                max exp −λ                              δej − ei  E(p, λ, N )B + pN −1 B −            exp(ei )
                  ei                       N −1                                                        ai
                                                   j6=i


   Then the first-order condition is:

                                                                                                     λ    X
                F OCei : (1 − λ)ei = log(ai ) + log(Bλ) + log E(p, λ, N ) −                                 δej
                                                                                                  (N − 1)
                                                                                                           j6=i


   Thus, the equilibrium effort exerted by ai when she anticipates that the other agents will all
exert {ej }j6=i and misreport, but she tells the truth, is:
                                                                                         
                                       1                                         λ X
                 eothers
                  i truth
                          lie
                                    =      log(ai λ) + log(B) + log(E(p, N )) −       δej 
                                      1−λ                                       N −1
                                                                                                        j6=i

   Recall that the effort she exerts when she also chooses to misreport is:
                                                                                                                        
                                   1                                               λ                          X
              eothers
               i lie
                        lie
                              =       log(ai λ(1 − p)) + log(B) + log(E(p, N )) −                                     δej 
                                  1−λ                                             N −1
                                                                                                               j6=i

   Note that eothers
              i lie
                              lie   < eothers lie
                                       i truth , since the only difference is the (1 − p) < 1 in the first term of
the expression characterizing a0i s effort when she also misreports.
   Then, her expected utility when she chooses to be truthful and her expected utility when she
also chooses to misreport are described by:

                                           λ   1   P                  λ        λ        1     1
               EUiothers
                   truth
                         lie
                             = e− 1−λ N −1             j6=i   δej
                                                                    ai1−λ λ 1−λ E(p, N ) 1−λ B 1−λ (1 − λ) + pN −1 B



                                                                          59
                              λ   1     P               λ    λ            1     1
      EUiothers
          lie
                  lie
                        = e− 1−λ N −1       j6=i ej   ai1−λ λ 1−λ E(p, N ) 1−λ B 1−λ (1 − λ) + (1 − p)pN −1 B + pF

   An “all lie” equilibrium is therefore maintained when EUiothers
                                                             lie
                                                                                     lie   > EUiothers
                                                                                                 truth
                                                                                                       lie for every i:



            h         1      λ   1 P               λ   1 P
                                                                   i λ       λ            1     1
 pN B − pF < (1 − p) 1−λ e− 1−λ N −1 j6=i ej − e− 1−λ N −1 j6=i δej ai1−λ λ 1−λ E(p, N ) 1−λ B 1−λ (1 − λ)
                                                                                                                          (7)
   Observe that the bracketed term is positive when small lies are hard to detect (probability of
detecting a small lie is low and/or misreports have to be pretty large to be detected for sure). When
the bracketed term is positive, the right-hand side is increasing in ai , and the lowest-ability agents
are the first to prefer to tell the truth. The intuition is that the lowest-ability agents would have to
lie a lot in order to have a shot at winning the tournament, whereas higher-ability agents only need
small lies. However, large lies are detected for sure, while small lies are hard to detect. Thus, the
lowest-ability agents tell the truth while the higher-ability agents misreport. An “all lie” equilibrium
is maintained if and only if even the lowest-ability agent prefers to tell the truth.
   By examining the condition in Equation 7, we infer conditions that make an “all lie” equilibrium
more likely. We can easily see that as the probability of detection decreases (p decreases), the bonus
B increases, the noise level increases (λ decreases), and F becomes less harsh (recall that F , the
disutility from being fired, is negative), the “all lie” equilibrium becomes more likely.
   Thus, when all or most agents lie in equilibrium, any truth-telling agents are the lowest-ability
(and lowest-performing) ones.




                                                                  60
B     Data Appendix
B.1     Promotion data
To construct a comprehensive database on the promotion of mayors, we have gone through extensive
searches for records of Chinese officials at and above the prefecture level. We first match the name
list of mayors with the name lists of the potential positions they could be promoted to. We collected
the following complete lists of officials in office during 1985-2000:

    1. List of prefecture party secretaries: from the History of Party Organizations published by each
       provincial party office;

    2. List of provincial governor or vice-governor, Party secretary or vice-secretary, Party committee
       member, chairman or vice-chairman of the People’s Political Consultative, chairman or vice-
       chairman of the People’s Congress: from the History of Party Organizations by province and
       Who is Who in China.

    3. List of ministers or vice-ministers of central ministries: from Who is Who in China.

The matching algorithm is straightforward. There is no instance where two mayors have the same
Chinese name. We use the unique Chinese name and the term year to match. If a mayor’s name
is matched with the name of an official in any of these higher ranked positions listed above, after
his/her term as mayor, he/she is promoted.
    We have also searched for resumes of mayors. We double checked the completeness of our
matching from their working experiences. If one is not promoted, we learn from the resume where
they move to next. Data on the demographic characteristics of mayors are also compiled from their
resumes, such as age, gender, education, province and prefecture of birth, etc.

B.2     Measuring the rate of natural increase from census data
We compute crude birth rate from census data and calculate the rate of natural increase by the crude
birth rate minus the crude death rate from City Statistical Yearbooks. First, in the 2000 Census,
migrants who moved in 1995-2000 reported the prefecture they moved from. We use the information
on out-migration and in-migration by prefecture and year in constructing birth rate measures in
1995-2000. We find that ignoring migration leads to underestimation of birth rate in 1995-2000. The
average rate of natural increase from 1995-2000 accounting for migration is 4.8 (per 1000 population),
while it is 4.3 without considering migration. Second, in 1985-1994 when we do not observe migration
by prefecture and year, the migration rate was below 4%. The potential underestimation without
accounting for precise migration information would be much lower. Nevertheless, we include a set of
controls on migration in these earlier years in our estimation. Specifically, we control for interactions
of average migration measures in 1990-1994 and 1985-1990 and time fixed effects. See the details of
the measurement below.




                                                   61
Crude birth rates in 1995-2000 from the 2000 Census

Migration rate in 1995-2000 is relatively high in the period 1985-2000, rising from 4% in 1995 to
11% in 2000. For these five years, we observe the prefecture-by-year migration information in the
2000 Census that we use to construct birth rate. We use the following formula to compute birth
rate:


                                                 Births1cpt + Births2cpt
Bratecpt =                                                                                            ,
               P opulationcpt+1 − (Births1cpt+1 + Births2cpt+1 ) + Outmigrantscpt+1 − Inmigrantscpt+1

where c denotes the prefecture, p the province, and t the year. Bratecpt is the ratio of the number of
births in prefecture c of province p in year t to the end-of-year population in the same prefecture. In
the numerator, Births1pct is the number of births in prefecture c in year t who are in prefecture c in
2000, and Births2pct is number of people born in prefecture c in year t who moved out of prefecture
c. The sum of Births1pct and Births2pct is the total number of births in prefecture c in year t. In the
denominator, the end-of-year population in prefecture c in year t is computed by the population in
year t + 1 minus the number of births in t + 1, plus migrants who moved out of prefecture c in year
t + 1, and minus migrants who moved into prefecture c in year t + 1. P opulationcpt+1 is computed
retrospectively. Starting with the number of population in 2000, we compute population in 1999
based on the denominator, and then population in 1998, and so on.

Crude birth rates in 1990-1994 from the 2000 Census and in 1985-1989 from the 1990
Census

Migration rate before 1995 is below 4%. For 1985-1994, migration information in the census is
limited. The 2000 Census did not have the prefecture-by-year migration information for migrants
who moved to the current prefecture before 1995, and it is the same for migrants in the 1990 Census.
In 1985-1994, we are not able to use the exact migration information in computing birth rate. See
the formula for 1985-1994 below:

                                                     Births1cpt
                              Bratecpt =                                   .
                                           P opulationcpt+1 − Births1cpt+1
   Nevertheless, we use available information from census to control for migration in our estimation.
In the 2000 Census, migrants who moved to the current prefecture before 1995 reported the province
they moved from. In the 1990 Census, migrants reported the province they moved from since 1985.
We construct two sets of aggregate migration measures at the prefecture level:
   1) The number of out-migrants by the province they moved out in 1990-1994 and in 1985-1989,
respectively
   2) The number of in-migrants by the current province in 1990-1994 and 1985-1989, respectively
   To control for migration in these years, we include interactions of each aggregate measure of
migration at the province level interacted with time dummy, for example, the number of out-migrants
in province p in 1990-1994 interacted with a dummy indicating the time period 1990-1994.



                                                    62
C     Additional Figures

                                               Figure A.1: Percentage of Migrants in 1982-2000




                              .15
                   Percentage of Migrants
                    .05       0      .1




                                            1980         1985          1990         1995         2000
                                                                       Year

Notes: Data are from population censuses 1990 and 2000. The figure is plotted using the entire population.
Migration is defined as not residing in one’s prefecture of birth at the time of the census.




                                                                     63
                          Figure A.2: Number of Prefectures Per Province




              .2
              .15
          Fraction
            .1.05
              0




                     0             5                  10                15               20
                                       Number of prefectures per province

Notes: Provinces in our mayor data that have 1 prefectures include province-level prefectures (Beijing,
Shanghai, Tianjin and Chongqing), and Hainan and Xinjiang province.




                                                   64
               Figure A.3: Competitiveness Measure: Average Tenure of Upper-Level Officials


        .2
        .15
    Fraction
      .1.05
        0




                    3                    4                        5                6
                          Average tenure of upper-level officials by province

Notes: Data are from digitized term information of all province-level officials ranked higher than mayors.
The competitiveness measure is across provinces.




D         Additional Tables




                                                       65
                                       Table A.1: Additional Summary Statistics
                                      (a) Number of Prefectures with Mayor Data and with
                                      Birth Rate Data

                                        Year          Number of prefectures
                                                (1) Mayor data (2) Birth rate data
                                        1986         194               151
                                        1987         193               150
                                        1988         207                0
                                        1989         217               162
                                        1990         223               164
                                        1991         221               165
                                        1992         225               164
                                        1993         225               163
                                        1994         229               171
                                        1995         231               174
                                        1996         228               170




66
                                        1997         240               175
                                        1998         249               177
                                        1999         246               201
                                        2000         210               171

                           (b) Correlation Matrix of Recorded Rate and Measures of Economic Growth

                     Recorded Rate   Log Pop    Log Inv   Urb Rate     Log Elect   Log Railway       Log GDP   GDP Growth
     Recorded Rate          1
     Log Pop             -0.167         1
     Log Inv             -0.417       0.564        1
     Urb Rate           -0.0766      -0.471     0.0851         1
     Log Elect           -0.229       0.352      0.688       0.392         1
     Log Railway        -0.0347       0.202      0.199       0.232      0.456            1
     Log GDP             -0.265       0.782      0.771     -0.0797       0.647         0.242             1
     GDP Growth          0.0740      0.0609     -0.118      -0.112      -0.127        -0.0497         0.0293       1
                Table A.2: Relation Between Measures of Noise and Competitiveness

                                           (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)
                                        SD Birth     SD Migration      Mean of     Average       1-Pr     Mean of
                                          Rate                           SDs       Tenure        Rate     Compete
 Average Tenure                           0.037           0.118         0.078
                                         (0.166)         (0.152)       (0.109)

 1-Promotion Rate                          0.192          0.139          0.166
                                          (0.223)        (0.204)        (0.146)

 SD Birth Rate                                                                       0.059      0.218       0.138
                                                                                    (0.342)    (0.251)     (0.200)

 SD Migration                                                                        0.267      0.175       0.221
                                                                                    (0.371)    (0.272)     (0.217)

 Fraction of rural population            7.707∗∗          -1.638         3.034       6.832      -5.764      0.534
                                         (3.259)         (2.986)        (2.140)     (4.873)    (3.574)     (2.850)

 Fraction of ethnic minorities             -1.945         -0.902        -1.424∗      0.418      1.927       1.173
                                          (1.233)        (1.130)        (0.810)     (1.824)    (1.338)     (1.067)

 Ln(number of women aged 15-45)            0.005         0.011∗∗∗      0.008∗∗∗      -0.005    -0.009∗     -0.007∗
                                          (0.004)        (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.006)    (0.005)     (0.004)

 Fraction completed high school          28.369∗∗         8.482        18.426∗∗      2.185     -23.595∗    -10.705
                                         (10.586)        (9.699)        (6.952)    (16.861)    (12.366)    (9.861)

 Fraction completed college             -47.542∗∗         -30.252      -38.897∗∗    16.953      12.135      14.544
                                         (22.075)        (20.226)       (14.498)   (37.508)    (27.510)    (21.936)

 East regions                              -0.039         -0.061         -0.050      0.181      0.547       0.364
                                          (0.530)        (0.485)        (0.348)     (0.738)    (0.542)     (0.432)

 Central regions                           -0.074         -0.717         -0.395      -0.321     0.082       -0.119
                                          (0.478)        (0.438)        (0.314)     (0.737)    (0.541)     (0.431)
 Observations                                27             27             27          27         27          27
 R2                                         0.67           0.73           0.81        0.33       0.64        0.59
Notes: Mean of Noise is the average of standardized versions of SD Migration and SD Birth Rate. Mean
of Compete is the average of standardized versions of Competitiveness (Tenure) and Competitiveness (1-Pr
Rate). Please refer to Section 4 for details regarding these measures. This table shows that our measures of
Noise and Competitiveness are not statistically related to each other. Each observation is at the province-
level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                    67
Table A.3: Robustness of Heterogeneous Effects of OCP Performance by Noise and Competitiveness
to Different Levels of Clustering

                                                                     (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)
  OCP Performance                                                 0.021∗∗∗       0.021∗∗        0.021∗∗      0.021∗∗
                                                                   (0.007)       (0.009)        (0.008)      (0.009)

  OCP Performance Reported X Noise (Average)                      -0.019∗∗       -0.019∗∗       -0.019∗      -0.019∗
                                                                   (0.008)        (0.009)       (0.010)      (0.011)

  OCP Performance Reported X Competitiveness (Average)           -0.020∗∗∗      -0.020∗∗∗       -0.020∗∗     -0.020∗∗
                                                                  (0.007)        (0.008)         (0.008)      (0.009)

  Log GDP                                                         0.172∗∗        0.172∗∗        0.172∗∗∗     0.172∗
                                                                   (0.073)       (0.067)         (0.052)     (0.089)
  Observations                                                       1,483        1,483           1,483       1,483
  R2                                                                 0.592        0.592           0.592       0.592
  Mean of Dependent Variable                                         0.132
  Marginal Effect at 25th pctil                                    .048∗∗∗       .048∗∗∗        .048∗∗∗     .048∗∗∗
  Marginal Effect at 25th pctil (SE)                                (.012)        (.013)         (.012)      (.015)
  Marginal Effect at 50th pctil                                     .016∗∗        .016∗          .016∗       .016∗
  Marginal Effect at 50th pctil (SE)                                (.007)        (.009)         (.009)      (.009)
  Marginal Effect at 75th pctil                                      -.006         -.006          -.006       -.006
  Marginal Effect at 75th pctil (SE)                                (.008)        (.011)         (.013)      (.012)
  Year FE                                                              Y             Y              Y           Y
  Person FE                                                            Y             Y              Y           Y
  City FE                                                              Y             Y              Y           Y
  Prefecture-year controls                                             Y             Y              Y           Y
  Clustering Level                                                Province      Province       Province    Prefecture
                                                                   X Year     X 5 Year Plan
   Number of Clusters                                                 297            78            27           194
   Bootstrap                                                                                        Y
Notes: OCP performance reported is the birth rate target minus the reported birth rate. Noise (Average)
is the average of SD Migration and SD Birth Rate. Competitiveness (Average) is the average of Competi-
tiveness (Tenure) and Competitiveness (1-Pr Rate). Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included
in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and
log(government investment). Marginal effects are computed at percentiles of both variables. Figure 6c plots
marginal effects of increasing OCP performance on the chance on promotion using estimates from this table.
Standard errors are clustered at different levels in each column. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at
5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                      68
Table A.4: Robustness of Heterogeneous Effects of OCP Performance by Noise and Competitiveness
to Province-by-Time Period Fixed Effects

                                                                            (1)          (2)        (3)
     OCP Performance                                                      0.021∗∗     0.024∗∗∗    0.028∗∗
                                                                          (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.011)

     OCP Performance Reported X Noise (Average)                           -0.019∗     -0.022∗∗     -0.022
                                                                          (0.010)      (0.009)    (0.016)

     OCP Performance Reported X Competitiveness (Average)                 -0.020∗∗    -0.020∗∗     -0.020
                                                                           (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.014)

     Log GDP                                                              0.172∗∗∗    0.138∗∗∗     0.195∗
                                                                          (0.052)     (0.047)     (0.110)
    Observations                                                            1,483       1,483       1,483
    R2                                                                      0.592       0.599       0.713
    Mean of Dependent Variable                                              0.132       0.132       0.132
    Marginal Effect at 25th pctil                                          .048∗∗∗     .052∗∗∗    .057∗∗∗
    Marginal Effect at 25th pctil (SE)                                      (.012)      (.014)     (.017)
    Marginal Effect at 50th pctil                                           .016∗        .02∗∗     .024∗∗
    Marginal Effect at 50th pctil (SE)                                      (.009)      (.009)     (.011)
    Marginal Effect at 75th pctil                                            -.006       -.005      -.001
    Marginal Effect at 75th pctil (SE)                                      (.013)       (.01)     (.015)
    Year FE                                                                    Y
    Person FE                                                                  Y Y          Y
    City FE                                                                    Y Y          Y
    Prefecture-year controls                                                   Y Y          Y
    Province-5-year FE                                                           Y
    Province-year FE                                                                        Y
Notes: OCP performance reported is the birth rate target minus the reported birth rate. Noise (Average)
is the average of SD Migration and SD Birth Rate. Competitiveness (Average) is the average of Competi-
tiveness (Tenure) and Competitiveness (1-Pr Rate). Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included
in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and
log(government investment). Marginal effects are computed at percentiles of both variables. Standard errors
are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level;
*** significant at 1% level.




                                                       69
Table A.5: Robustness of Heterogeneous Effects of OCP Performance by Noise and Competitiveness
to Interactions with Log GDP

                                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)
  OCP Performance                                                 0.017∗      0.041     0.017      0.039      0.018
                                                                  (0.010)    (0.031)   (0.030)    (0.028)    (0.026)

  Log GDP                                                         0.172∗∗∗   0.204∗∗   0.167∗∗   0.200∗∗∗    0.169∗∗
                                                                  (0.056)    (0.081)   (0.074)   (0.077)     (0.071)

  OCP Performance Reported X Log GDP                                          -0.006    0.000      -0.005     0.001
                                                                             (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.006)

  OCP Performance Reported X Noise (Average)                                           -0.023∗               -0.020∗
                                                                                       (0.012)               (0.011)

  OCP Performance Reported X Competitiveness (Average)                                          -0.022∗∗∗ -0.020∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.009)      (0.008)
   Observations                                                     1,483     1,483     1,483     1,483        1,483
   R 2                                                              0.584     0.585     0.588     0.590        0.592
   Mean of Dependent Variable                                       0.132     0.132     0.132     0.132        0.132
   Marginal Effect at 25th pctil                                                         .029      .05∗        .046∗
   Marginal Effect at 25th pctil (SE)                                                  (.029)     (.028)       (.025)
   Marginal Effect at 50th pctil                                                         .017      .038          .014
   Marginal Effect at 50th pctil (SE)                                                  (.031)     (.028)       (.026)
   Marginal Effect at 75th pctil                                                         .003      .025         -.009
   Marginal Effect at 75th pctil (SE)                                                  (.034)     (.029)        (.03)
   Year FE                                                            Y         Y         Y         Y             Y
   Person FE                                                          Y         Y         Y         Y             Y
   City FE                                                            Y         Y         Y         Y             Y
   Prefecture-year controls                                           Y         Y         Y         Y             Y
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate
of natural increase. Noise (Average) is the average of SD Migration and SD Birth Rate. Competitiveness
(Average) is the average of Competitiveness (Tenure) and Competitiveness (1-Pr Rate). Tenure fixed effects
and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population),
percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Marginal effects are computed at percentiles
of both variables. Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at
10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                     70
Table A.6: Heterogeneous by Signal Noise Controlling for Alternative Measures of Economic Per-
formance

                                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)
           OCP Performance                                          0.018∗∗    0.015∗      0.016
                                                                    (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.010)

           OCP Performance Reported X Noise (Average)               -0.021∗∗   -0.022∗    -0.023∗
                                                                     (0.009)   (0.012)    (0.013)
           Observations                                                1,357     1,361      1,136
           R2                                                          0.590     0.619      0.661
           Mean of Dependent Variable                                  0.132     0.130      0.140
           Marginal Effect at 25th pctil                             .029∗∗∗    .027∗∗     .029∗∗
           Marginal Effect at 25th pctil (SE)                         (.009)    (.011)     (.012)
           Marginal Effect at 50th pctil                              .017∗∗     .015∗       .016
           Marginal Effect at 50th pctil (SE)                         (.007)    (.009)      (.01)
           Marginal Effect at 75th pctil                                .005      .001       .001
           Marginal Effect at 75th pctil (SE)                         (.009)    (.011)     (.013)
           GDP growth rate                                               Y
           Log electricity usage                                                  Y
           Log railway cargo volume                                                          Y
           Year FE                                                     Y          Y          Y
           Person FE                                                   Y          Y          Y
           City FE                                                     Y          Y          Y
           Prefecture-year controls                                    Y          Y          Y
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate of nat-
ural increase. Noise (Average of Both) is the average of SD Migration and SD Birth Rate. Tenure fixed effects
and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), per-
centage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors are clustered at the province
level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                      71
Table A.7: Heterogeneous by Competitiveness Controlling for Alternative Measures of Economic
Performance

                                                                        (1)        (2)          (3)
   OCP Performance                                                    0.017∗∗    0.015∗        0.016
                                                                      (0.007)    (0.008)      (0.010)

   OCP Performance Reported X Competitiveness (Average)              -0.020∗∗   -0.026∗∗∗    -0.026∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.010)
   Observations                                                         1,357     1,361        1,136
   R2                                                                   0.590     0.621        0.663
   Mean of Dependent Variable                                           0.132     0.130        0.140
   Marginal Effect at 25th pctil                                      .028∗∗∗    .029∗∗∗       .03∗∗∗
   Marginal Effect at 25th pctil (SE)                                  (.008)     (.009)       (.011)
   Marginal Effect at 50th pctil                                       .017∗∗     .015∗         .016
   Marginal Effect at 50th pctil (SE)                                  (.007)     (.008)        (.01)
   Marginal Effect at 75th pctil                                         .005      -.001        -.001
   Marginal Effect at 75th pctil (SE)                                  (.009)     (.011)       (.011)
   GDP growth rate                                                        Y
   Log electricity usage                                                            Y
   Log railway cargo volume                                                                      Y
   Year FE                                                               Y          Y            Y
   Person FE                                                             Y          Y            Y
   City FE                                                               Y          Y            Y
   Prefecture-year controls                                              Y          Y            Y
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate
of natural increase. Competitiveness (Average of Both) is the average of Competitiveness (Tenure) and
Competitiveness (1-Pr Rate). Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions.
Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government invest-
ment). Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level;
** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                    72
        Table A.8: First Stage and Reduced-Form Effects of Changes in Birth Rate Target
                      (a) Changes in Birth Rate Target are Not Correlated with Log GDP

                                                                      Log GDP
                                                       (1)          (2)      (3)       (4)
                   Change in birth rate target       -0.024       -0.003   -0.003    -0.004
                                                    (0.043)      (0.011) (0.010)    (0.006)
                   Observations                       1,519        1,519   1,519     1,519
                   R2                                 0.48         0.99     0.99      0.99
                   Year FE                              Y            Y        Y         Y
                   Person FE                                         Y        Y         Y
                   City FE                                                    Y         Y
                   Prefecture-year controls                                             Y

                             (b) First Stage is Robust to Controlling for Log GDP

                                                              OCP Performance
                                               (1)         (2)      (3)      (4)             (5)
           Change in birth rate target      0.323∗∗∗    0.455∗∗∗ 0.455∗∗∗ 0.449∗∗∗        0.448∗∗∗
                                            (0.085)     (0.085)   (0.086)  (0.082)        (0.086)

           Log GDP                           -0.041          0.291     0.291     0.228
                                            (0.234)         (0.295)   (0.271)   (0.385)
           Observations                      1,519           1,519     1,519     1,519        1,519
           R2                                 0.31            0.79      0.79      0.79         0.79
           Year FE                             Y               Y         Y         Y            Y
           Person FE                                           Y         Y         Y            Y
           City FE                                                       Y         Y            Y
           Prefecture-year controls                                                Y            Y

Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate of
natural increase. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year
controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard
errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at
5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                       73
        Table A.9: Instrument Variable and Alternative Measures of Economic Performance

                                         (1)                          (2)                       (3)
                                   GDP growth rate          Log electricity usage   Log railway cargo volume
 Change in birth rate target           0.035                        -0.002                   -0.028∗
                                      (0.027)                      (0.005)                   (0.017)
 Observations                          1,398                        1,402                     1,184
 R2                                     0.59                         0.98                      0.92
 Year FE                                  Y                            Y                         Y
 Person FE                                Y                            Y                         Y
 City FE                                  Y                            Y                         Y
 Prefecture-year controls                 Y                            Y                         Y
Notes: Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls
include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors
are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level;
*** significant at 1% level.




                                                       74
                             Table A.10: Test of IV Identifying Assumptions

 Panel A                                          Stay in position after the change in target = 1
                                                         (1)                            (2)
                                            Increase in birth rate target Decrease in birth rate target
 OCP Performance Reported                               0.013                          0.004
                                                       (0.011)                        (0.010)

 Log GDP                                                 0.039                            0.082∗∗∗
                                                        (0.034)                           (0.030)
 Observations                                             338                               397
 R2                                                      0.05                               0.07

 Panel B                                                             Promotion= 1
 Future Change in birth rate target                                      -0.014
                                                                        (0.016)

 Log GDP                                                                 0.173∗
                                                                         (0.091)
 Observations                                                              931
 R2                                                                       0.60

 Panel C                                            Birth rate from Census - Reported birth rate
 Change in birth rate target                                              0.010
                                                                         (0.042)

 Log GDP                                                                  -0.192
                                                                         (0.442)
 Observations                                                             1,406
 R2                                                                        0.85
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate
of natural increase. OCP performance from census is birth rate target minus birth rate from census data.
In Panel A, column (1) uses the sub-sample in provinces and years with an increase in birth rate target,
and column (2) uses the sub-sample in provinces and years with an decrease in birth rate target. In Panel
B, we use the sample of 1986-1995, during which the next change in birth rate target is observed in the
data. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls
include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors
are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level;
*** significant at 1% level.




                                                       75
                       Table A.11: 2SLS Estimates: Heterogeneity by Noisiness

                                                             (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                             IV         IV         IV         IV
      OCP Performance                                      0.028∗      0.009     0.039∗∗     0.044
                                                           (0.017)    (0.028)    (0.015)    (0.027)

      OCP Performance X Noise (SD Migration)                           0.032
                                                                      (0.025)

      OCP Performance X Noise (SD Birth Rate)                                     -0.059
                                                                                 (0.047)

      OCP Performance X Noise (Average of Both)                                              -0.039
                                                                                            (0.029)

      Log GDP                                              0.179∗∗∗   0.162∗∗    0.143∗∗    0.177∗∗∗
                                                           (0.051)    (0.066)    (0.062)    (0.044)
      Observations                                          1,519       1,519      1,519     1,519
      R2                                                    0.575       0.547      0.564     0.577
      Mean of Dependent Variable                            0.145       0.145      0.145     0.145
      Marginal Effect at 25th pctil                                     -.016     .075∗∗      .063
      Marginal Effect at 25th pctil (SE)                               (.045)     (.035)     (.039)
      Marginal Effect at 50th pctil                                      .004       .025      .043
      Marginal Effect at 50th pctil (SE)                               (.031)     (.017)     (.027)
      Marginal Effect at 75th pctil                                    .046∗∗       .007      .019
      Marginal Effect at 75th pctil (SE)                               (.018)     (.028)     (.015)
      Year FE                                                 Y           Y          Y         Y
      Person FE                                               Y           Y          Y         Y
      City FE                                                 Y           Y          Y         Y
      Prefecture-year controls                                Y           Y          Y         Y
Notes: OCP Performance and OCP Performance*Noise (SD Migration) are instrumented with decreases in
birth rate target and decreases in target*SD Migration. OCP Performance and OCP Performance*Noise
(SD Birth Rate) are instrumented with decreases in birth rate target and decreases in target*SD Birth Rate.
OCP Performance and OCP Performance*Noise (Both) are instrumented with decreases in birth rate target
and decreases in target*average of two noisiness measures. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are
included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population
and log(government investment). Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                     76
                                 Table A.12: Heterogeneity by Competitiveness
                                                    (a) OLS Estimates
                                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                    OCP Performance                                   0.014
                                                                     (0.010)

                    OCP Performance X Low Competition (Tenure)                  0.033∗∗∗
                                                                                 (0.011)

                    OCP Performance X High Competition (Tenure)                  0.004
                                                                                (0.011)

                    OCP Performance X Low Competition (1-Pr Rate)                          0.032∗∗
                                                                                           (0.016)

                    OCP Performance X High Competition (1-Pr Rate)                          0.009
                                                                                           (0.011)

                    OCP Performance X Low Competition (Both)                                           0.031
                                                                                                      (0.059)

                    OCP Performance X High Competition (Both)                                          0.011
                                                                                                      (0.011)

                    Log GDP                                          0.201∗∗∗   0.201∗∗∗   0.199∗∗∗   0.200∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.058)    (0.056)    (0.056)    (0.059)
                    N                                                  1,597      1,597      1,597      1,597
                    R2                                                 0.57       0.57       0.57       0.57
                    Year FE                                              Y          Y          Y          Y
                    Person FE                                            Y          Y          Y          Y
                    City FE                                              Y          Y          Y          Y
                    Prefecture-year controls                             Y          Y          Y          Y


                                                   (b) 2SLS Estimates
                                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                    OCP Performance                                  0.028∗
                                                                     (0.017)

                    OCP Performance X Low Competition (Tenure)                  0.049∗∗
                                                                                (0.025)

                    OCP Performance X High Competition (Tenure)                  0.004
                                                                                (0.042)

                    OCP Performance X Low Competition (1-Pr Rate)                          0.104∗∗∗
                                                                                            (0.030)

                    OCP Performance X High Competition (1-Pr Rate)                          -0.036
                                                                                           (0.028)

                    OCP Performance X Low Competition (Both)                                          0.057∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.019)

                    OCP Performance X High Competition (Both)                                          0.002
                                                                                                      (0.025)

                    Log GDP                                          0.179∗∗∗   0.167∗∗∗   0.158∗∗    0.175∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.051)    (0.055)   (0.065)     (0.057)
                    N                                                  1,519      1,519     1,519       1,519
                    Year FE                                              Y          Y         Y           Y
                    Person FE                                            Y          Y         Y           Y
                    City FE                                              Y          Y         Y           Y
                    Prefecture-year controls                             Y          Y         Y           Y


Notes: In this table, OCP Performance is interacted with indicator variables for High and Low levels of competition
using the tenure, 1-promotion rate, as well as a joint, or “both” measure. Low competitiveness is defined as being in
the lowest tercile of the distribution for the tenure and 1-promotion rate measures, while the “both” measure assigns a
province to the low competition group if the province qualifies as low competition under either of the two definitions.
In each case, we instrument for OCP Performance X Low Competition and OCP Performance X High Competition
using interactions of decreases in targets with the indicators for High and Low competition. Tenure fixed effects
and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage
of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are
bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.


                                                               77
                Table A.13: Determinants of the Province-Level Birth Rate Target

                                                              Birth Rate Target (Province-Year)
                                                 (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)           (6)
  Ln(number of women aged 15-45)              12.693∗∗∗   13.946 ∗∗∗ 12.266 ∗∗∗  13.837 ∗∗∗ 6.713∗         4.818
                                               (3.145)     (3.089)    (3.162)     (3.175)   (3.480)       (3.509)

  Fraction of rural women                                 29.275∗∗               28.338∗∗   22.594∗     19.506
                                                          (12.035)               (13.313)   (13.104)   (13.183)

  Fraction of women in ethnic minority                                20.381       3.289     14.875     21.416
                                                                     (18.050)    (19.371)   (18.349)   (18.199)

  Fraction of promoted mayors in the future                                                  7.299         7.743
                                                                                            (5.562)       (5.456)

  Herfindahl-Hirschman Index                                                                               -5.365
                                                                                                          (6.383)

  Share of Province Population                                                                             0.973
                                                                                                          (6.730)
   Observations                                       107   107        107          107       78             78
   R2                                                 0.70 0.73        0.71        0.73      0.85           0.87
   Year FE                                             Y     Y          Y            Y         Y             Y
   Province FE                                         Y     Y          Y            Y         Y             Y
Notes: Data on the number of women aged 15-45, the fraction of rural women, and the fraction of women
in ethnic minority are from the 1982, 1990 and 2000 population censuses. * significant at 10% level; **
significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                  78
                              Table A.14: Effects of OCP Performance on Promotion Using Predicted Prefecture-Level Targets

                                                          (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)          (9)           (10)
      OCP Performance                                   0.017∗
                                                        (0.010)

      OCP Performance: 0.25Pref+0.75*Prov                          0.019∗
                                                                   (0.011)

      OCP Performance: 0.5Pref+0.5*Prov                                        0.022∗                 0.022∗      0.022∗∗    0.023∗∗     0.023∗∗     0.023∗∗     0.024∗∗
                                                                               (0.012)                (0.012)     (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.010)

      OCP Performance: 0.75Pref+0.25*Prov                                                 0.022∗
                                                                                          (0.013)

      OCP(Average) X Noise(SD Births)                                                                  -0.009
                                                                                                      (0.014)

      OCP(Average) X Noise(SD Migration)                                                                          -0.018∗
                                                                                                                  (0.011)

      OCP(Average) X Noise(Both)                                                                                              -0.024




79
                                                                                                                             (0.016)

      OCP(Average) X Competition(1-Pr Rate)                                                                                             -0.023∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                         (0.009)

      OCP(Average) X Competition(Tenure)                                                                                                              -0.014
                                                                                                                                                     (0.009)

      OCP(Average) X Competition(Both)                                                                                                                          -0.029∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                 (0.011)

      Log GDP                                          0.172∗∗∗    0.171∗∗∗   0.170∗∗∗    0.168∗∗∗   0.166∗∗∗    0.179∗∗∗    0.171∗∗∗    0.166∗∗∗    0.171∗∗∗    0.169∗∗∗
                                                       (0.056)     (0.055)    (0.054)     (0.058)    (0.054)     (0.055)     (0.050)     (0.052)     (0.054)     (0.054)
      Observations                                      1,483       1,483      1,483       1,483      1,483       1,483       1,483       1,483       1,483       1,483
      R2                                                0.584       0.584      0.584       0.584      0.585       0.588       0.587       0.589       0.586       0.589
     Notes: Different measures of OCP performance are reported using linear combinations of the province-level target and the constructed prefecture-level target
     using estimates from Table A.13. Year FE, person FE, city FE, prefecture-year controls and province-year controls are included in all regressions. Tenure
     fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and
     log(investment). We also control for potential determinants of province-level birth rate targets: ln(number of women aged 15-45), fraction of rural women
     and fraction of women in ethnic minority. Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant
     at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.
Table A.15: The Effect of Promotion on Reported OCP Performance is Robust to Mayor Dominance

                                                                Promotion = 1
                                                      (1)        (2)      (3)           (4)
             OCP Performance Reported               0.017∗     0.018 ∗  0.019∗        0.017∗
                                                    (0.010)    (0.011) (0.010)        (0.010)

             OCP Performance from Census             -0.002     -0.005     -0.005      -0.002
                                                    (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.005)

             Log GDP                               0.172∗∗∗    0.163∗∗    0.165∗∗∗   0.168∗∗∗
                                                   (0.056)     (0.063)    (0.061)    (0.056)

             Herfindahl-Hirschman Index                                                0.188
                                                                                      (0.618)

             Share of Province Population                                              -0.310
                                                                                      (0.503)
             Observations                            1,483      1,271      1,296        1,483
             R2                                      0.58        0.59       0.60         0.58
             Test β Reported > β Census (p-val)      0.08        0.04       0.04         0.08
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate of
natural increase. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year
controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard
errors are clustered at province level. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index captures the concentration of popula-
tion within a province. Column (2) excludes mayors that represent more than 25% of a province’s population
and column (3) excludes relatively more concentrated provinces (those with an HHI above 33%). * significant
at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                     80
     Table A.16: 2SLS Estimates of OCP Performance on Promotion: Using Province-Level Targets to Instrument for Prefecture-Level Performance

                                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
                    OCP Performance (Pref)                          0.020      0.025∗∗     0.022∗∗     0.022∗∗     0.024∗∗     0.021∗       0.023∗∗
                                                                   (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.013)      (0.011)

                    OCP(Pref) X Noise (SD Birth Rate)                           -0.018
                                                                               (0.012)

                    OCP(Pref) X Noise (SD Migration)                                       -0.021∗∗
                                                                                            (0.010)

                    OCP(Pref) X Noise (Both)                                                            -0.012
                                                                                                       (0.013)

                    OCP(Pref) X Competition (Tenure)                                                               -0.017∗
                                                                                                                   (0.009)




81
                    OCP(Pref) X Competition (1-Pr Rate)                                                                       -0.017∗∗∗
                                                                                                                               (0.006)

                    OCP(Pref) X Competition (Both)                                                                                         -0.027∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                            (0.010)

                    Log GDP                                        0.208∗∗∗    0.207∗∗∗   0.226∗∗∗    0.213∗∗∗    0.209∗∗∗    0.199∗∗∗     0.202∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.052)     (0.052)    (0.055)     (0.053)     (0.052)     (0.051)      (0.051)
                    Observations                                    1,597       1,597      1,597       1,597       1,597       1,597        1,597
                    R2                                              0.566       0.561      0.569       0.567       0.566       0.570        0.570
     Notes: OCP (Pref) is the predicted prefecture-level target (using estimates in Table A.13) minus reported birth rate.                        OCP (Pref) and
     OCP(Pref)*noisiness/competitiveness measures are instrumented with OCP (Prov) and OCP (Prov)*noisiness/competitiveness measures. Year FE, person
     FE, city FE, prefecture-year controls and province-year controls are included in all regressions. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all
     regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(investment). We also control for potential determinants
     of province-level birth rate targets: ln(number of women aged 15-45), fraction of rural women and fraction of women in ethnic minority. Standard errors are
     clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.
     Table A.17: 2SLS Estimates of OCP Performance on Promotion: Using Prefecture-Level Targets to Instrument for Province-Level Performance

                                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                    OCP Performance (Prov)                          0.016       0.017      0.017∗      0.016      0.018∗       0.017      0.018∗
                                                                   (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.009)    (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.010)

                    OCP(Prov) X Noise (SD Birth Rate)                           -0.001
                                                                               (0.013)

                    OCP(Prov) X Noise (SD Migration)                                      -0.019∗∗
                                                                                           (0.009)

                    OCP(Prov) X Noise (Both)                                                           -0.015
                                                                                                      (0.011)

                    OCP(Prov) X Competition (Tenure)                                                              -0.014∗
                                                                                                                  (0.008)




82
                    OCP(Prov) X Competition (1-Pr Rate)                                                                      -0.017∗∗
                                                                                                                              (0.007)

                    OCP(Prov) X Competition (Both)                                                                                       -0.024∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                          (0.009)

                    Log GDP                                        0.213∗∗∗   0.212∗∗∗    0.224∗∗∗    0.219∗∗∗   0.218∗∗∗    0.208∗∗∗    0.214∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.051)    (0.048)     (0.048)     (0.052)    (0.050)     (0.050)     (0.050)
                    Observations                                    1,597      1,597       1,597       1,597      1,597       1,597       1,597
                    R2                                              0.567      0.568       0.572       0.569      0.570       0.570       0.571
     Notes: OCP (Prov) and OCP(Prov)*noisiness/competitiveness measures are instrumented with OCP (Pref) and OCP (Pref)*noisiness/competitiveness
     measures. Year FE, person FE, city FE, prefecture-year controls and province-year controls are included in all regressions. Tenure fixed effects and migration
     controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(investment). We also control
     for potential determinants of province-level birth rate targets: ln(number of women aged 15-45), fraction of rural women and fraction of women in ethnic
     minority. Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at
     1% level.
                        Table A.18: Lagged OCP Performance and Promotion

                                                                   Promotion = 1
                                                         (1)        (2)      (3)            (4)
         OCP Performance Reported                      0.017∗     0.017 ∗  0.018∗         0.018∗
                                                       (0.010)    (0.010)  (0.009)        (0.010)

         OCP Performance Reported Lagged 1              0.002      0.002       0.003       0.003
                                                       (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)

         OCP Performance Reported Lagged 2                         0.001       0.001       0.001
                                                                  (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)

         OCP Performance Reported Lagged 3                                    0.005∗∗     0.005∗∗
                                                                              (0.002)     (0.002)

         OCP Performance Reported Lagged 4                                                 -0.001
                                                                                          (0.003)

         Log GDP                                      0.168∗∗∗    0.167∗∗∗    0.170∗∗∗   0.170∗∗∗
                                                      (0.057)     (0.055)     (0.054)    (0.057)
         Observations                                  1,482       1,481       1,480      1,480
         R2                                             0.58        0.58        0.59       0.59
         Year FE                                         Y           Y           Y          Y
         Person FE                                       Y           Y           Y          Y
         City FE                                         Y           Y           Y          Y
         Prefecture-year controls                        Y           Y           Y          Y
Notes: OCP performance reported is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the reported rate of
natural increase. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year
controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard
errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at
5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                     83
                                 Table A.19: When Migration is Not Fully Considered in OCP Performance and Promotion

                                                                                                        Promotion = 1
                                                                                   (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)
                     OCP Performance from Census(without migration)               0.004       0.006               -0.002       -0.001
                                                                                 (0.005)     (0.004)             (0.005)      (0.005)

                     OCP Performance from Census (with migration)                                        0.006                            -0.002
                                                                                                        (0.004)                          (0.005)

                     Log GDP                                                     0.158∗∗∗   0.172∗∗∗    0.172∗∗∗   0.123∗     0.133∗∗   0.134∗∗
                                                                                 (0.055)    (0.055)     (0.054)    (0.066)    (0.066)   (0.063)




84
                     Observations                                                 1,524      1,483       1,483      1,895      1,832     1,832
                     R2                                                           0.585      0.581       0.581      0.535      0.533     0.533
                     Migration 1985-94*Time FE                                                 Y           Y                     Y         Y
                     Year FE                                                        Y          Y           Y          Y          Y         Y
                     Person FE                                                      Y          Y           Y          Y          Y         Y
                     City FE                                                        Y          Y           Y          Y          Y         Y
                     Prefecture-year controls                                       Y          Y           Y          Y          Y         Y
                     Province-year controls                                         Y          Y           Y          Y          Y         Y
     Notes: OCP performance from census is the target for the rate of natural increase minus the rate of natural increase using census data. Tenure fixed effects
     and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government
     investment). Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant
     at 1% level.
                                          Table A.20: Robustness of OCP Performance from Census and Promotion

                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)         (5)              (6)                     (7)                     (8)
                                                  OLS        OLS       OLS       OLS         OLS              IV                      IV                      IV
      OCP Census (Prov)                          -0.005     -0.006    -0.003                                 0.002                  -0.003
                                                (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.008)                                (0.024)                (0.006)

      Log GDP                                  0.147∗∗∗                         0.146∗∗∗   0.147∗∗∗
                                               (0.056)                          (0.056)    (0.055)

      OCP Census (Pref)                                                          -0.000                                                                      -0.004
                                                                                (0.005)                                                                     (0.005)

      OCP Census (Average)                                                                   -0.003
                                                                                            (0.005)
      Observations                               1,406      1,287     1,077      1,406       1,406          1,406                 1,406                   1,406
      R2                                         0.593      0.599     0.667      0.593        0.593         0.593                 0.593                   0.593




85
      Instrument                                                                                       Change in Target      OCP Census (Pref)       OCP Census (Prov)
      Log GDP                                      Y                               Y          Y               Y                     Y                       Y
      GDP growth rate                                         Y
      Electricity usage and railway cargo                               Y
      Person FE                                    Y                    Y          Y          Y                Y                      Y                        Y
      Year FE                                      Y          Y         Y          Y          Y                Y                      Y                        Y
      Person FE                                    Y          Y         Y          Y          Y                Y                      Y                        Y
      City FE                                      Y          Y         Y          Y          Y                Y                      Y                        Y
      Prefecture-year controls                     Y          Y         Y          Y          Y                Y                      Y                        Y
     Notes: OCP Census (Prov) is measured by the province-level target for the rate of natural increase minus the rate of natural increase using census data. OCP
     Census (Prov) is measured by the constructed prefecture-level target for the rate of natural increase minus the rate of natural increase using census data.
     OCP (Average) is the average of OCP Census (Prov) and OCP Census (Pref). In column (4), OCP Census (Prov) is instrumented with changes in target.
     In column (5), OCP Census (Prov) is instrumented with OCP Census (Pref), and in column (6), OCP Census (Pref) is instrumented with OCP (Prov).
     Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage of urban population
     and log(government investment). Standard errors are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5%
     level; *** significant at 1% level.
                 Table A.21: Effect of Being Above Target on Level of Misreporting

                                                         Misreporting
                                           (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)
                      Above Target      -1.284∗∗∗    -2.394∗∗∗ -2.394∗∗∗       -2.415∗∗∗
                                         (0.339)      (0.384)    (0.390)        (0.377)

                      Log GDP             -0.406       -0.552       -0.552       -0.867
                                         (0.368)      (0.584)      (0.599)      (0.674)
                      Observations        1,832         1,832       1,832        1,832
                      R2                   0.36          0.82        0.82         0.82
Notes: Misreporting is measured as the difference: Census - Reported Birth Rates. Tenure fixed effects and
migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population), percentage
of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors are clustered at the province level and
are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.



               Table A.22: Effect of Being Above Target on Likelihood of Misreporting

                                                       Misreporting = 1
                                           (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)
                      Above Target      -0.130∗∗∗    -0.153 ∗∗∗ -0.153∗∗∗      -0.157∗∗∗
                                         (0.034)      (0.033)    (0.034)        (0.033)

                      Log GDP             -0.014       -0.070       -0.070      -0.129∗
                                         (0.033)      (0.066)      (0.064)      (0.075)
                      Observations        1,972         1,972       1,972        1,972
                      R2                   0.29          0.67        0.67         0.67
Notes: We define incidence of misreporting as an indicator for Census > Reported Birth Rates. Tenure fixed
effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls include log(population),
percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors are clustered at the
province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at
1% level.



                  Table A.23: Effects of Population Audits for Mayors Above Target

                                       (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)
                                   Misreporting     Reported        Census        Log GDP
                                                    Birth Rate     Birth Rate
                 Audit Year            -0.134        -0.908∗         -1.043        0.232∗∗∗
                                      (1.158)        (0.498)        (1.116)        (0.049)
                 Observations           371             371            371           371
                 R2                     0.90           0.89           0.94           0.99
Notes: Misreporting is measured as the difference: Census - Reported Birth Rates. Audit years include the
year before the census year in 1990 and 1995, and the year before the national fertility survey in 1988, 1992,
and 1997. Tenure fixed effects and migration controls are included in all regressions. Prefecture-year controls
include log(population), percentage of urban population and log(government investment). Standard errors
are clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level;
*** significant at 1% level.



                                                       86
Table A.24: OCP Performance and Promotion in a Sub-sample of Mayors in Position for More Than
Two Years

                                                               Promotion = 1
                                                      (1)       (2)     (3)           (4)
              OCP Performance Reported               0.005    0.016 ∗ 0.016∗        0.016∗
                                                    (0.006)   (0.009) (0.009)       (0.009)

              OCP Performance from Census            0.002     -0.004     -0.004     -0.003
                                                    (0.003)   (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.005)

              Log GDP                                -0.011   0.148∗∗    0.148∗∗   0.180∗∗∗
                                                    (0.012)   (0.066)    (0.069)   (0.066)
              Observations                           1,304     1,304      1,304     1,304
              R2                                      0.09      0.49       0.49      0.50
              Test β Reported > β Census (p-val)      0.34      0.06       0.06      0.06
              Year FE                                  Y         Y          Y         Y
              Person FE                                          Y          Y         Y
              City FE                                                       Y         Y
              Prefecture-year controls                                                Y
Notes: This table uses a sub-sample of mayors in position for more than two years. Standard errors are
clustered at the province level and are bootstrapped. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level;
*** significant at 1% level.




                                                     87
