NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO DID THE ETHANOL TAX CREDIT BENEFIT? AN EVENT ANALYSIS OF
SUBSIDY INCIDENCE
David A. Bielen
Richard G. Newell
William A. Pizer
Working Paper 21968
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21968

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

The research described in this paper was supported in part by the Bipartisan Policy Center. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by David A. Bielen, Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Did the Ethanol Tax Credit Benefit? An Event Analysis of Subsidy Incidence
David A. Bielen, Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 21968
February 2016
JEL No. H22,Q11,Q41,Q42,Q48
ABSTRACT
Using commodity futures contract and spot prices, we estimate the incidence of the US ethanol subsidy
accruing to corn farmers, ethanol producers, gasoline blenders, and gasoline consumers at expiration
in 2011. We find compelling evidence that ethanol producers captured two-thirds of the subsidy, and
suggestive evidence that a small portion of this benefit accrued to corn farmers. The remaining one-third
appears to have been captured by blenders, as we find no evidence that oil refiners or gasoline consumers
captured any part of the subsidy. This paper contributes to understanding of biofuels markets and policy
and empirical estimation of economic incidence.

David A. Bielen
Duke University
Box 90467
Durham, NC 27708
dabielen@gmail.com
Richard G. Newell
Duke University
Box 90467
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu

William A. Pizer
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90312
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
billy.pizer@duke.edu

1

Introduction
“It might cost you more to fill up with gas as early as New Year’s
Day. If all other variables stay the same, gas prices should be higher
since the tax credit oil companies have received to blend ethanol with
their petroleum won’t be available.”
Jeff Scates, Illinois Corn Growers Association President
“As a result, oil companies have been able to set demand and price
levels for ethanol, keeping prices low and pocketing much, if not
all, of the VEETC as profit.”
Natural Resource Defense Council Policy Fact Sheet
“While those who support the program put forth various reasons
for their support — that ethanol will reduce greenhouse gases or
curb our reliance on foreign oil — in reality, it is merely a wealth
transfer program from the general taxpayer to corn producers.”
Washington Examiner Op-Ed Piece

The energy sector in the United States is host to a myriad of policies — regulations, taxes, and subsidies — that shift behavior away from a free-market
outcome. Such policies are often motivated by the association of different
forms of energy use with significant non-market consequences related to the
environment and energy reliability. An important question is whether the
benefits from these policies exceed the costs, requiring a careful analysis of
non-market benefits (National Research Council, 2010).
Often missing from the aggregate benefit-cost analysis are distributional
assessments of who pays or, in the case of a subsidy, who benefits. Incidence
is not obvious, as burdens and benefits can accrue to both producers and consumers depending on relative elasticities of response, and may be passed up
2

and down a particular supply chain. Moreover, for market-based policies, including taxes and subsidies, the distinct consequences for winners and losers
can be many times the aggregate net cost or benefit (Burtraw and Palmer,
2008). In many policy debates, it is these consequences for particular stakeholders that help determine both enactment and survival, regardless of the
aggregate net benefit analysis. For both equity in its own right and equity’s
link to acceptance, it is important to consider these distributional effects.
Perhaps nowhere is this more evident than ethanol, which was the object
of the single most expensive energy subsidy in recent history, the Volumetric
Ethanol Excise Tax Credit (VEETC).1 Regardless of one’s stance on whether
more ethanol is or is not desirable, or whether the subsidy was effective at
encouraging more ethanol, advocates claimed the subsidy lowered motor fuel
prices for consumers while critics claimed the subsidy simply enriched ethanol
producers. Which view does the evidence support? The answer is relevant
not only for the subsidy, but also for understanding the market structure underlying an industry that continues to be the subject of considerable policy
intervention through the federal Renewable Fuel Standard.
Policy effects are often difficult to measure because the no-policy counterfactual cannot be observed. Further complicating matters, multiple policies
often target the same objective, making it difficult to disentangle the effects
of any single policy. This is particularly evident in the case of policies that
promoted ethanol, where three different policies were in place from 2005, when
both ethanol mandates and an effective ban on MTBE as a fuel additive began, until the end of 2011, when the VEETC was ended.
Nonetheless, the sudden end to the VEETC on December 31st , 2011, offers a unique opportunity to observe the incremental consequences of a single
policy. In particular, at the time of its termination, was the ethanol subsidy
benefiting primarily ethanol producers or consumers? Was the value being
passed further up or down the supply chain? By comparing prices along the
1

The VEETC accounted for $5 billion per year, or roughly one-quarter of all energy
related, non-stimulus subsidies in 2007 and 2011 (U.S. Energy Information Administration,
2011).

3

supply chain immediately before and after the subsidy expired, we can isolate
the effect of the subsidy termination holding other influences constant, and
thereby determine the subsidy incidence.
The results suggest that most — perhaps two-thirds — of the subsidy
accrued to ethanol producers. Moreover, we find suggestive evidence that a
small portion (about 5¢ per gallon) of the benefits were passed up the supply
chain to corn farmers, although data limitations prevent us from making more
confident statements on this front. Random variation in prices for petroleum
products makes it difficult to estimate the incidence on oil refiners or gasoline
consumers precisely, but the point estimates suggest that these stakeholders
received very little, if any, benefit from the subsidy. This refutes the notion
that the subsidy largely benefited consumers. Based on the evidence, we conclude that the remaining third of the subsidy was likely being captured by fuel
blenders at the time the subsidy expired.
In order to estimate the ethanol subsidy incidence, we use several data
sources and empirical techniques. When possible, we use one-month calendar
spreads constructed from the futures markets for ethanol, corn, and gasoline blendstock (petroleum). These spreads, reflecting expected one-month
price changes, provide a means to differentiate sharply between the prices of
products that could benefit from the tax credit, and those (produced after
expiration) that could not. For commodities without exchange-traded futures
markets, specifically finished gasoline, we use standard time-series regression
techniques on spot price data to analyze whether the subsidy expiration coincided with a significant change in the gasoline blending margin around the
time of expiration.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background on the
industry structure for gasoline production and biofuels policy in the United
States. Section 3 summarizes the related literature on renewable fuel policies and event studies of policy changes. Section 4 lays out the conceptual
framework and discusses how the subsidy might manifest in commodity prices.
Section 5 presents the empirical approach and model, describes the data, and
discusses the results. Section 6 concludes.
4

2

Gasoline and biofuels policy

Gasoline production in the United States involves the convergence of two
supply chains: one for refined petroleum from crude oil and an agricultural
supply chain for ethanol from corn. The process can be described by the
schematic outlined in Figure 1 and elaborated below (including how certain
producers might be connected at the corporate level).
On the agricultural side, production begins on the farm and ends with
blending at the fuel terminal. Corn is harvested, and then shipped to ethanol
production facilities for processing.2 The amount of corn used for fuel production is significant: in 2011, which was the last year for the VEETC, ethanol
production accounted for about 40 percent of corn consumption in the United
States (Brester, 2012). The other major input to ethanol production is fuel
used to generate electricity for the plant, typically natural gas. The major
outputs of the production process are ethanol and distillers grains, which can
be sold as animal feed. Once production has occurred, the ethanol is shipped,
typically via truck or railcar, to fuel terminals to be blended into gasoline.
Meanwhile, on the petroleum side, production begins with extraction of
crude oil and other petroleum liquids and, as with ethanol, ends with blending
at the fuel terminal. Crude oil is extracted, possibly shipped, and transported
via pipeline to refineries. Refiners process crude oil into several different refined petroleum products, including petroleum blendstock, which is a precursor to finished gasoline. Reformulated blendstock for oxygenated blending
(RBOB) and conventional blendstock for oxygenated blending (CBOB) are
refined products specifically engineered to be blended with an oxygenate, such
as ethanol.3 These refined petroleum products are then transported, usually
via pipeline, to a fuel terminal.
2

Our focus for this paper is restricted to corn-derived ethanol. The use of other, more
advanced biofuel feedstocks is, for the most part, in the research or early commercialization
phase, but not yet commercially significant.
3
RBOB is used in the production of reformulated gasoline, a product blended to burn
more cleanly than conventional gasoline (produced from CBOB). The Clean Air Act requires
reformulated gasoline to be used in cities with high smog levels, since petroleum combustion
contributes to ground-level ozone formation.

5

Finished gasoline is the product of combining fuel ethanol, an oxygenate,
with gasoline blendstock. From a performance standpoint, oxygenate blending
increases the octane of the fuel, which serves the dual purpose of preventing
engine “knock” in motor vehicles and also creates a cleaner-burning fuel. However, when used in blends higher than about 5 percent, ethanol transitions from
a complement to petroleum to a substitute.
Once both products are in storage at the terminal, they are blended in
one of two ways. Either both fuels are combined in a designated blending
tank, or they are “splash” blended aboard a fuel truck.4 The proportion of
ethanol in a gallon of finished gasoline can vary: the most common forms are
a 10% ethanol blend (called E10), usable in most passenger cars, and an 85%
blend (E85), which can only be used in certain “flex fuel” vehicles.
The blended fuel, while still at the terminal, is referred to as wholesale
finished gasoline. Relative to wholesale gasoline prices, retail gasoline prices
also include the costs of transporting the fuel from the terminal to the retail
gas station (typically via a fuel truck), incorporation of federal and state fuel
taxes, and retail distribution margins.5
Although we will treat ethanol producers, oil refiners, and fuel blenders
as if they are unique entities, the corporate structures are actually quite varied
and complex. Often, companies that own oil refineries also own fuel blending operations. Moreover, some refining companies are not only blenders, but
ethanol producers as well. For particularly large companies, such as Valero,
the corporate structure can include refineries, ethanol production facilities,
blending facilities, and retail distribution operations. However, while there
is a significant amount of vertical integration in the gasoline supply chain,
there are many companies that specialize in a particular component. For most
products along the supply chain, well-defined spot and futures markets exist,
suggesting a large volume of arms-length transactions.
Against this backdrop of private enterprise, and in part underpinning it,
4

A small number of retail stations, primarily located in the Midwest, perform splash
blending at the pump.
5
For a more detailed schematic and description of the gasoline production process see
(Bullock, 2007).

6

the US federal government has long supported biofuels — particularly corn
ethanol. The justifications for supporting the domestic ethanol industry are
varied and have been consistent over time. Perhaps the most prevalent rationale is reducing U.S. dependence on imported oil. Encouraging rural development, enhancing farm incomes, and reducing air pollutant emissions are often
invoked as well. Historically, the bulk of support for ethanol was provided
in the form of subsidies and import tariffs. Over the past decade tax credits
have given way to mandates, particularly the federal Renewable Fuel Standard
(RFS).
The VEETC, and a complementary ethanol import tariff, were initially
put in place more than three decades ago, though the level of support has
varied over time. The Energy Tax Act of 1978 established a 40¢ per gallon of
ethanol tax credit for ethanol blending, regardless of where or how the ethanol
was produced.6 Shortly thereafter, an import tariff of 40¢ per gallon was established to prevent subsidization of imports and thereby protect the domestic
industry from Brazilian sugarcane-derived ethanol. Over the years, the levels
of the tax credit and the tariff were adjusted. At the time of expiration, the
tax credit was at 45¢ per gallon of ethanol and the tariff was at 54¢ per gallon.
In addition to the VEETC and import tariffs, the ethanol industry has
also benefited from mandated blending. With the passage of the Energy Policy
Act of 2005, the RFS was born. The RFS targets a minimum percentage of
ethanol in finished gasoline for all obligated parties, specifying a lower-bound
for the level of ethanol that must be blended. Compliance can be achieved by
blending ethanol or purchasing credits (called Renewable Identification Numbers, or RINs) from other obligated parties. At the time of the VEETC expiration, the price of a RIN was effectively zero, suggesting that the mandate
was not binding; that is, blending was above the lower-bound established by
the RFS (Irwin and Good, 2013).7
6

See, for example, Duffield, Xiarchos and Halbrook (2008) and De Gorter and Just (2008).
At the same time that the RFS sets a lower-bound on ethanol blending, an upper-bound
exists as well in the form of an E10 “blend wall,” which prevents the aggregate proportion
of ethanol in the gasoline supply from rising much above ten percent. Infrastructure, legal,
and regulatory limitations have limited sales of higher ethanol blends such as E15 and E85
7

7

Beyond direct subsidization and import protection, the ethanol industry
has also enjoyed increased demand for its product due to local air and water pollution policies. The Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 required that
gasoline be reformulated to reduce smog, which promoted ethanol and MTBE
use. By 2006, however, MTBE had been phased out due to concerns over
groundwater contamination, leaving ethanol as the oxygenate of choice in the
United States.
These policies, together with a significant increase in oil prices over the
prior decade, led to substantial growth in the ethanol industry. By 2011, fuel
ethanol consumption had reached 12.9 billion gallons, up from 83.1 million gallons in 1981 (Koizumi, 2014). With the advent of the RFS, critics of ethanol
policy maintained that the VEETC had become a wasteful policy, providing a
subsidy for an activity that had become mandatory. The expansion of ethanol
production also caused the total tax expenditure on the subsidy to expand to
about $5 billion per year. The subsidy was ultimately allowed to expire at the
end of 2011.
3

Previous research on biofuels policy and event studies

Over the past decade, a substantial literature has emerged that analyzes the welfare and distributional consequences of biofuel policies, primarily
through analytic and simulation models. Many of these papers, particularly
in recent years, focus on the impacts of a mandate such as the RFS, whereas
our interest is on the incidence of the VEETC. De Gorter and Just (2008)
analyze the joint impact of an import tariff and ethanol subsidy on prices and
output in the ethanol and fuel markets using an analytic model, which they
parameterize to simulate the effect of removing the policies. Taheripour and
Tyner (2007) investigate the incidence of the ethanol subsidy in an analytic
framework, testing their results over a wide-range of parameter values.
Gardner (2007) compares the impact of an ethanol subsidy to a direct
corn subsidy on farmers and ethanol producers in a stylized setting, and simand are expected to continue to do so, at least in the short run (Babcock and Pouliot, 2014;
Irwin and Good, 2015).

8

ulates the short- and long-run outcomes resulting from removal of the ethanol
subsidy. Babcock (2008) performs a similar analysis to study the distributional consequences of removing the tax credit, assuming a closed economy.
Kruse et al. (2007) and McPhail and Babcock (2008) simulate removal of the
tax credit and/or tariff in a stochastic, short-run setting. These studies generally find that the bulk of incidence accrues to ethanol producers, with varying
amounts of pass-through to corn farmers.8
Abbott (2014) also develops a simple analytic model of corn supply,
ethanol production, and gasoline blending and uses short-term data on supply, use, and prices to explain the mechanisms through which biofuels demand
influenced corn and other agricultural commodity prices over the 2005-2012
time period. Although the focus of that paper is on investigating how and
at which points in time a variety of policy-induced constraints influenced the
behavior of agricultural and biofuels markets, the author uses monthly price
data to crudely estimate that fuel blenders captured 15¢ of the 45¢ per gallon
subsidy, and that the rest was passed along to ethanol producers.
Although our empirical strategy differs substantially from the one implemented in Abbott (2014), the conclusions are similar. However, all of the
above studies focus on prospective outcomes of policy changes in a simulation framework, using assumed supply and demand elasticities. In contrast,
we use the VEETC phase-out to empirically measure incidence. Most other
econometric studies of the corn-ethanol-petroleum complex focus on testing
for long-run cointegrating relationships and price volatility transmission; they
do not focus on policy impact or incidence.9
Methodologically, this research draws from a long literature on event
studies, but with an important innovation: we look at calendar spreads in
futures markets rather than changes over time in spot prices. For example,
8

An exception is Babcock (2008), which attributes most subsidy incidence to fuel
blenders.
9
For a recent review of empirical work on the relationships between food and fuel prices,
see Serra and Zilberman (2013). According to the authors, “the literature concludes that
energy prices drive long-run agricultural price levels and that instability in energy markets
is transferred to food markets.”

9

Bushnell, Chong and Mansur (2013) use spot prices to determine the stock
market valuations of affected firms before and after a sharp devaluation in
CO2 permit prices in the EU ETS.10 Like other event studies, they then relate
this valuation to policy changes, assuming market beliefs effectively capitalize
the policy impact into firm valuation.
In this study, we similarly look at price changes to estimate changes in
profitability. However, we rely on price differences for futures contracts observed at a single point in time but that differ in terms of specifying delivery
before versus after the VEETC expiration. We use this to gauge the markets’
beliefs about the incidence of the VEETC. That is, differences in these prices
provide evidence as to which prices the market expected to change when the
VEETC expired and, in turn, who was benefiting from the subsidy. A major
advantage of this approach, relative to using spot prices, is that the information available to the market at the time of measuring the event impact
(through future price spreads) is the same. Moreover, examination of other
future contracts (beyond the relevant one-month calendar spread) shows how
prices are expected to evolve over several months before and after the expiration. In contrast, unobserved information is also changing when one uses
spot price changes over time to measure event impacts. Changes in spot prices
must be measured over a relatively short interval to reduce this problem. We
believe this approach is preferable for event studies more generally whenever
heavily traded derivative contracts exist.
4

Modeling subsidy incidence

The VEETC is a subsidy provided to fuel blenders for each gallon of
ethanol used to produce gasoline. As reviewed by Fullerton and Metcalf (2002)
in a general public finance context and noted by Bullock (2007) in the context
of ethanol, the economic incidence of a tax or subsidy is often passed along a
vertically-linked market chain, manifesting in deviations of equilibrium prices
and quantities from the non-distortionary environment. In the case of the
10

For other examples of event study approaches to evaluating impacts of environmental
policy on firm profits, see Kahn and Knittel (2006) and Linn (2006, 2010).

10

supply chain for blended ethanol depicted in Figure 1, this suggests potential
deviations in corn, ethanol, RBOB, and retail gasoline prices and quantities.
Depending on how these different prices and quantities change, the incidence
of the subsidy will differ across corn farmers, ethanol producers, fuel blenders,
oil refiners, and consumers.
Following Abbott (2014), we make several assumptions regarding behavior of supply and demand in these markets in order to estimate the subsidy
incidence. First, we assume simple linear production technologies for ethanol,
RBOB, and gasoline around the time of the subsidy expiration, with
Cethanol =0.37Pcorn + C0,ethanol ;
(1)

CRBOB =Poil + C0,RBOB ;
Cgasoline =0.1(Pethanol − Sethanol ) + 0.9PRBOB + C0,gasoline ;

where C represents the unit (per gallon) cost of production for each commodity, P represents market prices for inputs (per gallon or per bushel, for corn),
and C0 represents other per unit costs. In other words, one gallon of ethanol
requires 0.37 bushels of corn (Mosier and Ileleji, 2006), one gallon of blendstock requires one gallon of crude oil, and one gallon of gasoline blends 10%
ethanol and 90% blendstock. Sethanol is the ethanol subsidy: either 45¢ per
gallon before or zero after expiration.
Our second assumption is that consumption and production quantity
decisions are unrelated to price changes due to subsidy removal in the short
run (here, short run is the one to two-month horizon that we examine once
the subsidy is removed). Unexpected short-run deviations in supply and demand of ethanol, blendstock, and gasoline are instead met through changes in
inventories of each commodity rather than price changes. See Abbott (2014)
for evidence and discussion. Persistent price changes will ultimately influence
supply and demand decisions as stockpiles change and fixed investments can
eventually adjust.11
11

Storage capacity is typically one month’s supply and stocks are typically at 50 percent
of capacity (U.S. Energy Information Adminstration, 2015b,a).

11

With these assumptions, we can consider what the possible ranges of
price changes are for each commodity as a result of removing the subsidy and,
ultimately, potential changes in welfare accruing to each stakeholder group.
This information is summarized in Table 1 and discussed below.
First, we consider the effect of subsidy removal on ethanol production
and further upstream along the agricultural branch in Rows 1 and 2. Subsidy expiration means that each gallon of ethanol blended effectively costs
blenders 45¢ more per gallon due to foregone subsidy receipts. If all of the
incidence had been passed up the ethanol/agricultural supply chain, blenders’
willingness-to-pay (WTP) for ethanol would reduce by that entire amount, and
as a result, the market price of ethanol would decrease by 45¢ per gallon. The
other extreme possibility is that none of the incidence had been passed up the
ethanol/agricultural branch, in which case the change in the price of ethanol
per gallon would be zero. Of course, the true incidence could be somewhere
in between these two extreme cases, as demonstrated by the interval in Row
1, Column 2.
Some, if not all, of the incidence passed up the agricultural branch could
go beyond ethanol producers to corn farmers, captured in Row 2. Once again,
if some of the incidence had been passed up the agricultural supply chain,
subsidy expiration means that ethanol producers receive a lower price per gallon of ethanol because of the reduced WTP for ethanol by blenders. If the
entire agricultural branch incidence accrues to corn farmers, expiration means
that ethanol producers WTP for corn would decrease by the full amount of
the ethanol price decrease. Because each bushel of corn yields 2.7 gallons of
ethanol, the resulting price decrease per bushel of corn would be 2.7 times the
change in the price of ethanol per gallon. At the opposite extreme, the agricultural branch incidence could accrue entirely to ethanol producers or further
downstream. In this case, the change in the corn price resulting from subsidy
removal will be zero. Row 2, Column 2 gives the range of price changes per
bushel of corn.
Under the assumptions outlined at the beginning of this section, the price
changes in ethanol and corn markets correspond directly to welfare changes for
12

corn farmers and ethanol producers. These welfare changes are calculated in
Column 3. For corn farmers, the change in welfare due to subsidy expiration
is given simply by the change in the price of corn. To calculate the welfare
change per gallon of ethanol, the price of corn in bushels needs to be multiplied by a conversion factor of 0.37 bushels per gallon, which is the amount
of corn required to produce a gallon of ethanol. For ethanol producers, the
change in welfare depends on price changes of both ethanol and corn. Their
per-gallon-of-ethanol welfare changes by the ethanol price decrease minus any
corresponding decrease in the corn price.
The price and welfare change analysis for oil refiners, reported in Row
3, is analogous to that of corn farmers. After the subsidy is removed, it costs
blenders 45¢ more per 10 gallons of gasoline produced since there is 1 gallon
of ethanol and 9 gallons of RBOB in every 10 gallons of E10. If refiners were
able to extract the entire subsidy, blenders’ WTP for RBOB decreases by 45¢
for 9 gallons of RBOB upon expiry, or 5¢ per gallon of RBOB. As a result, the
price of RBOB would decrease by a maximum of 5¢ per gallon upon expiration
of the subsidy. If none of the subsidy had been passed along to refiners, then
the RBOB price would not change with removal of the subsidy. If a portion
of the subsidy was passed along, then the price change would be somewhere
between zero and −5¢ per gallon of RBOB.
Because we assume that the subsidy incidence would not have been
passed further upstream to crude oil producers (due to the presence of a global
market for oil), any price decrease in RBOB directly reflects the welfare change
for oil refiners resulting from loss of the subsidy. The substantial international
integration of markets for refined petroleum products also suggests a strong
prior that RBOB prices are set internationally, rather than being influenced by
ethanol policy. The implication of that assumption would be zero flow-through
of the ethanol subsidy to RBOB refiners. While we look to the evidence rather
than imposing that assumption, our results are ultimately consistent with it.
The price and welfare change calculations for gasoline consumers and
blenders are given in the fifth and sixth rows of Table 1. Subsidy expiration makes each gallon of ethanol effectively 45¢ more expensive, and ethanol
13

makes up 10% of each gallon of finished gasoline. If the entire subsidy had
been passed downstream to consumers, then the price of gasoline would rise by
4.5¢ per gallon upon expiration of the subsidy. If none of it had been passed
downstream, then there would be no change in the retail gasoline price. In
any event, the welfare change per gallon of ethanol faced by consumers would
equal ten times the price change per gallon of gasoline.
The welfare change faced by blenders depends on the commodity price
changes immediately upstream and downstream of blending. In one extreme,
if blenders captured all of the subsidy, there would be no change in any of the
commodity price levels. Instead, upon subsidy expiration, blenders’ margins
would fall by the amount of the subsidy, 45¢ per gallon of ethanol blended. For
the other extreme, if we found that the per-gallon price changes for ethanol,
RBOB, and gasoline (appropriately weighted) add up to 45¢, this would imply
that all of the subsidy had been fully passed upstream or downstream by the
blenders.
Table 1 illustrates three fundamental principles of removing a subsidy in
the context of a market supply chain. First, prices tend to decrease upstream
of the point where the subsidy enters the market and increase downstream
upon subsidy removal. Second, assuming that quantities are fixed in the short
run, the overall change in welfare must add up to the full value of the subsidy.
Third, Table 1 also demonstrates the difference between economic incidence,
which is a calculation of the welfare distribution resulting from a tax or subsidy, and statutory incidence, which is simply an accounting of who physically
pays the tax or receives the subsidy. With the conceptual framework established in this section in mind, we proceed by outlining the empirical approach
and describing the data.
5

Empirical Methods, Data, and Results

The overall empirical strategy is to use calendar spreads in future commodity prices to estimate the price changes in Table 1. We describe this
approach in detail for ethanol and RBOB. For corn and finished wholesale

14

gasoline, we are constrained by data limitations and pursue other approaches.
We synthesize the results in an overall assessment in Section 6.
5.1

Ethanol and RBOB market incidence

The empirical approach for both ethanol and RBOB relies upon the
existence of monthly futures contract markets for each commodity. We exploit
the design of these contracts to conduct an analysis similar in concept to event
studies that typically use spot prices. Ultimately, the evidence suggests that
a significant portion of the subsidy was passed up the agricultural branch of
the supply chain: the point estimate is 30¢ per gallon of ethanol or two-thirds
of the subsidy. We find no indication that any part of the subsidy was passed
up the petroleum refining branch beyond the blenders themselves.
Each futures contract is identified by a month-year combination when the
contract comes due (the “delivery” month). These contracts begin trading on
a daily basis years before the delivery month. As an example, we might observe
that the December 2011 futures contract opens for trading in November 2009
and continues to trade until November 30th , 2011. At this point delivery
must be completed by December 3rd , 2011. For each commodity, there is a
standardized monthly contract with a regular delivery day (e.g., “the 3rd ”)
and a regular closing day for trading of the contract (e.g., “the last day of the
preceding month”).
Conceptually, we assume the price of the futures contract at a given
point in time reflects the expected spot price of the commodity at the time of
maturity.12 For example, if the contract is set to mature at time T , then the
future price at time t is given by the equation
F (t, T ) = Et [S(T )],

(2)

where F represents a future price, and S represents a spot market price. This
is an approximation, as the difference between these two expressions equals a
12

This assumption is supported by, for example, Chinn and Coibion (2014), who find
that energy commodity futures prices are generally unbiased and accurate predictors of
subsequent prices.

15

risk premium (Baumeister and Kilian, 2014). Making this approximation, we
exploit the combination of this expectation, along with the monthly structure
of the futures contract, to examine the subsidy incidence.
Consider a set date for subsidy expiration. In the case of VEETC, the
policy was allowed to expire on December 31st , 2011. Ethanol blended into
motor fuel before this date received the tax credit, and ethanol blended afterwards did not. If we assume as above that the subsidy incidence manifests in
commodity prices, then we should see price differences between the December
and January futures contracts to the extent that the subsidy was having an
effect on ethanol or RBOB prices. The difference in price is due to the fact
that the commodity in December is eligible to receive the subsidy whereas
the commodity in January is not. Because the future prices for December
and January contracts are being observed at the same point in time prior to
these dates, the difference in the future prices is not confounded by changes in
market conditions that unfold in actual calendar time.13 We are also able to
look more generally at the pattern of future prices, to see (1) how differences
persist into the future beyond January 2012, and (2) at what horizon, prior to
the expiration, differences between the December and January contract prices
begin to appear. We believe this is a major advantage relative to using spot
price changes, which are subject to ongoing incorporation of new market information.
The price difference we use for this identification strategy is known as a
one-month calendar spread. For a given point in time t, the one-month calendar spread is the difference in the price of two adjacent futures contracts
(with prices denoted by F ). If those futures contracts expire on dates T and
T − 30 (about one month difference), then mathematically the calendar spread
is given by
CS(t, T ) = F (t, T ) − F (t, T − 30),
(3)
13

The future price change could be confounded by changes in expected market conditions
other than the expiration of the VEETC, but we are not aware of any other expected policy
or market change at that time.

16

where CS denotes “calendar spread.” In the case of the VEETC, the calendar
spread of interest is the January 2012 to December 2011 spread (hereafter,
Jan12-Dec11). We refer to December’s contract as the “leading contract,”
and January’s as the “trailing contract.” For RBOB and ethanol, which are
produced upstream of the subsidy, we would expect this price spread to be
negative as a result of subsidy expiration.
We construct a time series of the Jan12-Dec11 price spread and assess
how it evolves over time. We would expect the spread to widen as the market
incorporates information that the subsidy is likely to expire. In addition, to
distinguish changes in the price spread due to policy expiration from other
unobserved factors, we estimate the degree of noise in the series in a simple
and flexible way. First, we construct calendar spreads for ethanol and RBOB
for several years both prior to and after December 2011. This approach provides a sense for how these spreads typically behave, so that we can assess
whether the subsidy expiration induced extraordinary behavior beyond what
can reasonably be attributed to typical variation. For the purpose of comparing calendar spreads, we define the object s = T − t, which represents the
number of days until maturity of the leading contract. For both commodities,
we construct separate samples of calendar spreads for each s value. We then
order the calendar spreads (excluding Jan12-Dec11) within each group, and
calculate the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles. This gives us a non-parametric version of a 95 percent confidence interval that runs from the first day in which
the spread can be calculated up to the day of maturity.
In the case of ethanol, we use the exact procedure just described. For
RBOB, the procedure is slightly more complicated. As we demonstrated in
Table 1, any price change in RBOB due to VEETC expiration will be at most
5¢ per gallon of RBOB. This is a small price change relative to common fluctuations in petroleum markets. In order to gain a more precise estimate, we
assume that any incidence accruing to oil refiners did not get passed further
upstream in the form of higher crude oil prices. Because crude oil is sold
in a global liquids market of which U.S. ethanol is about one percent, it is
reasonable to assume that the VEETC would not have any influence on oil
17

prices. This allows us to control for changes in oil prices in the RBOB analysis,
thereby removing the main source of RBOB price volatility.
We control for oil price variation by estimating the following model:
CSRBOB (t, T ) =β0 + α1 CSoil (t, T − 11) + α2 CSoil (t − 1, T − 11)
+ α3 CSoil (t − 2, T − 11) + β1 CSoil (t, T + 11)
+ β2 CSoil (t − 1, T + 11) + β3 CSoil (t − 2, T + 11) + (t, T ),
(4)
where CSx (t, T ) represents a calendar spread for commodity x on date t for
which the trailing contract matures on date T . Because oil futures contracts
mature in the middle of the month prior to the contract month, i.e., around
eleven trading days, it is not obvious whether to include the leading oil spread
or the trailing spread, where the term “leading” is again meant to express a
calendar spread that matures first. Therefore, we include both leading and
lagging calendar spreads for Brent crude oil prices as regressors.14 We also
include one- and two-day lags for both types of calendar spreads. We estimate
the model separately for each calendar spread in the sample period (i.e., the
average daily value of the Jan12-Dec11 calendar spread observed over the entire period where that calendar spread is traded), and calculate the regression
residuals. This gives us a set of residual RBOB price spreads, controlling for
oil prices, that are analogous to the ethanol price spreads discussed above. We
then use these spreads to create a quantile interval in order to gauge whether
the RBOB spread behaves atypically near the point of subsidy expiration.
Given the approaches described above, the only data we require are futures contract price data for ethanol, RBOB, and crude oil. We use daily price
14

When including the leading calendar spread as a regressor, we encounter an additional
difficulty with timing. The leading contract of the leading spread matures about half a
month prior to the leading contract of the RBOB spread. Therefore, if we use the pure
calendar spread model, the best we can do is measure the RBOB price change around
eleven trading days prior to maturity. Alternatively, we can replace the price of the leading
contract of the leading spread with the oil spot price for the last half month. We implement
both procedures, finding that there is little difference in the results.

18

data on futures contracts from January 2007 through July 2013.15 The ethanol
futures contracts are traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), while
the RBOB and Brent crude oil futures contracts are traded on the New York
Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX). All futures price series were accessed via
Bloomberg. As noted above, the delivery dates for the futures contracts vary
across commodities. For ethanol, the contracts mature on the third trading
day of the contract month. Brent contracts mature on the last business day
prior to the 15th day of the month prior to the contract month, i.e., the December Brent contract matures in mid-November. RBOB contracts mature
on the last day of the month prior to the contract month.
The raw data on ethanol futures contract prices around the VEETC expiration is shown graphically in Figure 2. The figure plots the spot price of
ethanol (dashed line) as well as the futures strip for August 2011 through April
2012 as of several different dates during that time period. Each future strip
shows the price for all future month contracts as of a given point in calendar
time, connected by a line. We see that, prior to January 2012, the ethanol
futures market became increasingly backwardated — meaning that contracts
for more distant delivery dates traded at lower prices — as the date of subsidy
expiration approached. This backwardation was especially pronounced around
the Dec11-Jan12 contract months. In contrast, from January 2012 forward,
the ethanol market traded in contango, meaning that contracts in the more
distant future traded at higher prices.
The black dots in the figure represent the prices of the December 2011
and January 2012 contracts at the time that the December 2011 contract expired (December 5th , 2011). In noting the vertical distance between the two
points, we can see how stark the price difference was between those contracts
relative to similar price spreads both before and particularly after that time
(e.g., one-month calendar spreads as the leading contract expires). Moreover,
comparing the Jan12-Dec11 spread at earlier dates suggests that the sub15

We chose to begin our exploration with 2007 data rather than 2006 (the earliest year
for which a market existed for ethanol futures) to avoid noise occurring as a result of MTBE
phaseout and participants acclimating to a new market.

19

sidy expiration might have begun being reflected in the market as early as
the beginning of September 2011 and increased as the year progressed. The
Jan12-Dec11 spread viewed in August 2011 was almost imperceptible.
The notion of a gradually increasing certainty over subsidy expiration is
reasonable, especially because of the long-term persistence of the subsidy as
well as the last minute extension that had been granted to the VEETC just one
year earlier.16 It could also be the case that the futures market had expected
the December 2011 expiration at an earlier time, but gained information over
time about the incidence of the subsidy captured by ethanol producers.
While Figure 2 suggests a reaction in ethanol futures markets to the
VEETC expiration that is larger than the six other one-month calendar spreads
just prior to maturity of the leading contract, it is hard to turn that into
a probabilistic statement. To get a better sense of how significant the size
of the Jan12-Dec11 spread was statistically, we calculate the 2.5th , median,
and 97.5th quantile of calendar spreads over the 2007-2013 sample, excluding
Jan12-Dec11. We group the calendar spreads based on time until the leading contract matures, as described above. The results are plotted in Figure 3,
along with the Jan12-Dec11 spread. The vertical axis represents price spreads,
in dollars per gallon of ethanol, while the top horizontal axis represents the
number of days until maturity of the leading month contract (since they all
mature at different dates) of the price spreads used to construct the quantile
interval. The bottom horizontal axis tracks the observed Jan12-Dec11 spread
over calendar time.
Excluding the Dec11-Jan12 spread, the ethanol price series appears to
exhibit a very slight degree of backwardation, perhaps a penny per month
for the median spread, when the leading contract is close to expiration. The
median (or 50th percentile), represented by the solid black line in the figure,
hovers at 0¢ until around 90 days until maturity, at which point it decreases
very slightly and remains slightly negative. The red lines capture the empirical
16

For this reason, one could also posit that the effect of the subsidy expiration wasn’t
fully reflected in the ethanol futures market by December contract maturity. If this is the
case, then we are underestimating the benefit of the policy to ethanol producers.

20

95th percentile of spreads, and demonstrate that the distribution of spreads is
skewed downward (negatively), a feature that appears stronger as the leading
contracts approach maturity. The Jan12-Dec11 spread, represented by the
blue line, declines steeply as the December delivery date draws near, finishing
at about −30¢ per gallon of ethanol, which is well beyond the lower bound of
the 95% quantile interval. This suggests that ethanol producers were receiving about two-thirds of the 45¢ subsidy prior to its expiration, some of which
could have in turn been passed upstream to corn farmers.
We can use the 95th quantile interval to construct a confidence interval
for the effect of subsidy expiration on calendar spread, assuming the variation
observed in the other calendar spreads is independent of any subsidy expiration effect, and therefore might be adding a certain amount of asymmetric
noise to this measurement. On the day of expiration, the 95th quantile interval
ranges from −15¢ to 5¢ per gallon, essentially around 0¢. Based on the point
estimate of −30¢ per gallon as the “subsidy expiration” effect based on the
Dec11-Jan12 calendar spread, it would be unusual (< 2.5% probability) for
a true subsidy expiration effect of anything less negative than −15¢ to have
randomly produced an observation of −30¢. Similarly, it would be unusual
(< 2.5% probability) for a true subsidy effect of anything more negative than
−35¢ to have generated a −30¢ point estimate. This yields a 95% confidence
interval, [−35¢, −15¢].
To investigate whether any incidence was passed up the petroleum branch,
we present an analogous illustration for the RBOB market in Figure 4. However, unlike ethanol, we do not construct the plots directly from the RBOB
spreads. Instead, we first estimate equation (4) to control for oil price changes,
and then perform the same analysis as we did for ethanol, but on the RBOB
regression residuals. To allow easier comparison of incidence across the various
commodities, we also convert the residuals into equivalent cents per gallon of
ethanol blended by multiplying the RBOB prices by nine, since there are nine
gallons of RBOB for every gallon of ethanol blended.
As a result, the vertical axis in Figure 4 represents RBOB price spreads
(for nine gallons of RBOB or equivalent to one gallon of blended ethanol) after
21

removing the variation in price spreads due to oil price changes. The black
line for the median price spread is around zero for all days to maturity. The
Jan12-Dec11 spread maintains a price near zero until mid-September 2011,
drops in early October, and climbs back up above zero during the month of
November. By the last trading day for the December contract, the spread is
slightly negative, finishing at about −7¢, or slightly below the median spread
of about −6¢ on the day of maturity over the entire sample period. Additionally, the quantile interval depicted by the red lines shows some downward
skewness, particularly as maturity of the lead contract approaches.17 We note
that for almost all measurements in the last 30 days of the contracts, the lower
bound of the interval exceeds the maximum incidence of 45¢ per nine gallons
of RBOB that could accrue to oil refiners: this negates our ability to find precise statistical evidence that the VEETC expiration resulted no price change
for RBOB. That is, while we cannot reject the null hypothesis that there was
no effect on RBOB prices as a result of the VEETC expiration, an estimated
95% quantile interval includes both zero and 100% incidence. Nonetheless,
the point estimate suggests very little if any impact, consistent with our prior
based on internationally integrated refined petroleum markets.
5.2

Corn market incidence

Given the evidence suggests that a significant portion of the subsidy was
passed upstream to ethanol producers, we next investigate whether some of it
was passed further upstream to corn farmers. This would be consistent with
a Ricardian view that land, as an inelastic resource, capitalizes much of the
value of agricultural products (e.g., Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw (1994)),
and recent empirical evidence that farms and farmers capture nearly 100 percent of farm subsidies (Kirwan, 2009). We find some suggestive evidence that
this occurred. However, because of data limitations due to the nature of corn
futures markets, the evidence is more suggestive than conclusive.
As with ethanol, standardized futures contracts exist for corn and are
17
For the day of maturity, this skewness is illustrated by the lower bound on the interval,
which is almost three times further away from zero than the upper bound.

22

traded through the CME, which we collected via Bloomberg for January 2007
through July 2013. These contracts mature on the business day immediately
preceding the 15th day of the contract month. Unlike ethanol and RBOB,
however, there are not corn futures contracts for every calendar month. Instead, corn futures contracts exist only for March, May, July, September, and
December. This fact, coupled with the highly seasonal nature of agricultural
commodity markets, forces us to alter the approach to calculating price changes
in the corn market.
The alternative approach is demonstrated in Figure 5. In lieu of a Jan12Dec11 spread, which cannot be constructed for the corn market, we base the
analysis on the Mar12-Dec11 spread. The rationale for using this spread is the
same as before, but this procedure could be more prone to picking up nonVEETC effects than the single month spread. In Figure 5, we plot the spreads
for all March-December spreads from March 2008 to March 2013. We focus
only on the March-December spreads due to the existence of highly seasonal effects in corn futures spreads. For example, the typical March-December spread
exhibits much different behavior than the typical September-July spread. Because of this more limited set of observations, we look at all of the available
series of spreads, rather than summarizing in a quantile interval.
The vertical axis in the figure once again represents the spread in contract
prices between adjacent contracts. For the sake of comparison, the prices have
been converted to per gallon of ethanol equivalent, assuming the 0.37 bushels
per gallon conversion discussed in the context of Equation (1). For the four
earliest contracts, plotted as solid black lines, the spreads exhibit varying degrees of contango (i.e., all spreads are positive), which is typical behavior in
grains markets. Because crops are costly to store, a premium, often called the
carry, is provided as compensation.18 When the leading contract is between
150 and 180 days to maturity, the spread tends to be about 4¢ per gallon. The
final spread at maturity over this time horizon increases slightly to about 5¢
per gallon (i.e., the average of the Mar08-Dec07, Mar09-Dec08, Mar10-Dec09,
and Mar11-Dec10 contracts).
18

For example, see Yoon and Brorsen (2002).

23

The spread of interest, Mar12-Dec11, is represented by the dashed blue
line. It exhibits similar behavior until around 30 days before maturity, at
which point it decreases sharply and eventually finishes around 0¢ per gallon,
or about 5¢ per gallon lower than is typical. The Mar13-Dec12 spread, represented by the solid green line, exhibits atypical behavior as well, trading in an
atypically low degree of contango or even backwardation for most of the last
120 days until maturity of the December 2012 contract. The atypical behavior
of the Mar13-Dec12 spread can be explained by drought conditions in 2012
that resulted in a short supply of new corn to be sold in December of that
year, causing prices for the leading contract to increase. Right before that
maturity date, however, the Mar13-Dec12 spread converges rapidly toward a
more typical carry premium. Together, the March-December spreads in this
period (excluding Mar12-Dec11) have a mean of 5¢ and a standard deviation
of 1¢. Since the Mar12-Dec11 spread finished at about 0¢ per gallon, this
suggests a point estimate of −5¢ per gallon change in the corn price due to
the subsidy expiration, with a two-standard deviation confidence interval of
[−3¢, −7¢].
The takeaway from this analysis is that there is some suggestive evidence that a portion of the subsidy incidence was being passed upstream from
ethanol producers to corn farmers, based on the corn spread for Mar12-Dec11
at maturity being about 5¢ per gallon lower than normal, but it is difficult
to make any strong statements because of the small number of comparable
contracts.
5.3

Finished gasoline market incidence

Unlike in the cases of ethanol, RBOB, and corn, there are no standardized futures contracts for finished gasoline. As a result, the preferred approach
is not feasible. As an alternative, we turn to finished gasoline spot market
prices and blender margins to provide insights. Ultimately, we find no evidence that any incidence was passed downstream through wholesale finished
gasoline prices to consumers. Instead it appears that any subsidy not passed
upstream through the ethanol supply chain was captured by blenders.
24

Having explored all of the upstream incidence, identifying the downstream effect on finished gasoline prices will simultaneously identify the net
effect on the blender margin or vice-versa. Given the estimates of ethanol
and RBOB price changes, we can see from Table 1 that the blender’s welfare
effect now depends only on the price change of finished gasoline. We focus on
estimating the change in the blender margin because the evidence suggests the
blender margin is a stationary time series, while gasoline spot prices are not.
We define the blender margin per gallon of ethanol blended to be equal to
10 times the finished gasoline price, minus the prices per gallon of ethanol and
RBOB (weighted by their volumetric contributions to 10 gallons of finished
product), plus any subsidy paid to the blender:
BM (t) = 10Pgasoline (t) − 9PRBOB (t) − Pethanol (t) + sethanol (t).

(5)

Here, sethanol (t) equals 45¢ prior to a cut-off date (chosen as December 5th ,
2011) for collecting the VEETC, and zero afterwards.19 Comparing this to
the blender welfare expression in Table 1, we can see that any change to the
blender margin in a window around the expiration of the VEETC subsidy
(along with consequent changes in gasoline, RBOB, and ethanol prices) exactly equals the welfare effect per gallon of ethanol.
We compute the blender margin using daily wholesale spot price data
on the three commodities from 2011 and 2012. The ethanol and RBOB data
are both New York Harbor spot prices acquired from Bloomberg, while the
gasoline data are reformulated E10 rack prices in New York City acquired from
Oil Price Information Service (OPIS). We chose prices in the same market in
order to estimate any effect as precisely as possible, and we chose to work with
wholesale prices for the same reason.20
19

Blenders must have purchased ethanol in advance of December 31st , 2011, in order to
blend it with gasoline on or before that date and collect the subsidy. Therefore, the cut-off
for defining sethanol (t) equal to 45¢ will be a date prior to December 31st , 2011. We choose
a cutoff of December 5th , 2011, which corresponds to the date of the “pre-expiration” price
used in our calendar spread analysis of ethanol prices. It is unclear whether ethanol sold at
later dates in December would be blended in time to qualify for the subsidy.
20
Retail and wholesale gasoline prices follow one another very closely with about a 70¢
average retail margin, which reflects transportation costs, taxes, and mark-ups (Irwin and

25

The price series over the sample period are plotted in Figure 6. Ethanol,
RBOB, and gasoline prices are identified as the green, orange, and blue lines,
respectively. The date of subsidy expiration on December 31st , 2011 is marked
by the vertical gray line. Right before this cutoff, ethanol spot prices decline sharply, consistent with the earlier results. As noted earlier, the price
of finished gasoline (as well as ethanol and RBOB) evolves according to a
random walk.21 Unsurprisingly, finished gasoline and RBOB prices move very
closely together. Meanwhile, a cointegrating regression using the three price
series, suggests the existence of one cointegrating vector (based on a formal
Johansen test for cointegration) with the following coefficients on the prices:
10Pgasoline − 8.9PRBOB − 1.1Pethanol .22 Because the estimated cointegrating
vector generates coefficients on Pethanol and PRBOB that are close to and statistically indistinguishable from the theoretical relationship in Equation (5),
we simply impose (5) to define the blender margin.
The constructed blender’s margin is plotted in Figure 7. In line with the
aforementioned statistical tests, the figure suggests that the blender’s margin
series is stationary, and a unit root null is soundly rejected. It also demonstrates that the blender’s margin fluctuated substantially during 2011 and
2012, ranging from zero to $3 per gallon of ethanol, with a standard deviation
of almost 60¢. It also does not suggest any obvious visible change in the level
of the pre- and post-expiration blender’s margin.
We use standard autoregressive modeling techniques to form a precise
estimate of the change at the time of the VEETC expiration. Specifically, we
estimate the following model:
BMt = ϕ0 + ϕs 1{t > T } +
∗

P
X

ϕi BMt−i + t ,

(6)

i=1

Good, 2011).
21
For each commodity, Phillips-Perron tests fail to reject the null hypothesis of a unit
root.
22
In order to precisely estimate the cointegrating relationship, we use price data from 2007
through 2012. The confidence intervals for the coefficients on Pethanol and PRBOB contain
1 and 9, respectively, at any reasonable level of significance.

26

where t is white noise and T ∗ = December 5th , 2011, consistent with the assumed definition of sethanol (t) above. We are interested in the change in the
unconditional mean of the blenders margin resulting from subsidy expiration.
Under this model specification, this is estimated by the following transformation of the parameters:
ϕ̂s
∆BM =
,
(7)
P
P
1−
ϕ̂i
i=1

where ∆BM is the estimated change in the blender’s margin resulting from
expiration. Under this construction of the blender’s margin variable defined
by (5), we will expect to see a change in the blender’s margin of between −45¢
(if the blender was capturing the entire subsidy) and 0¢ (if the entire subsidy
was being passed along). To maintain consistency with the earlier analysis
focused on the months just before and just after the subsidy expired, we restrict
the sample to the six months before and after the expiration breakpoint, T .
Other sample window choices yield similar results. A Box-Jenkins approach
to model specification suggests an AR-model with P = 3. Consistent with our
visual interpretation, the estimation fails to identify any significant decrease in
the blender’s margin constant, which is calculated according to Equation (7).
We find a point estimate of 14¢ with a 95% confidence interval of [36¢, 8¢].
The point estimate suggests that around two-thirds of the subsidy was passed
along through price changes, which coincides with the previous estimate of
the incidence accruing to the agricultural branch. Taking the previous results
at face value, the point estimate suggests that none of the subsidy incidence
was passed downstream to gasoline consumers. While the confidence interval
on this estimate of the blender margin is quite large, taken together with the
other estimates of price changes, it reinforces the view that the majority of
the VEETC was being captured by ethanol and/or corn producers, some was
captured by blenders, and little if any was being captured by consumers or
petroleum refiners.

27

5.4

Summary

The previous sections produced estimates of price changes in ethanol of
−30¢ (CI: [−15¢, −35¢]), price changes in RBOB of 0¢ (CI: [−50¢, 140¢]),
price changes in corn of −5¢ (CI: [−3¢, −7¢]), and changes in the ethanol
blender margin of −14¢ (CI: [−36¢, 8¢]) (all expressed per gallon of blended
ethanol). We translate these estimates into incidence by stakeholder groups
in Table 2.
For ethanol producers, we find an incidence point estimate of 25¢ per
gallon of ethanol (Row 1). This is calculated by subtracting the estimated 5¢
per gallon of ethanol price decrease for corn from the estimated 30¢ per gallon
decrease in ethanol prices.23 For corn farmers, the incidence point estimate
(5¢ per gallon of ethanol) and bounds (3¢ to 7¢) are equivalent to the price
decrease in the corn price (Row 2).
The incidence point estimate and range for oil refiners, fuel blenders,
and gasoline consumers are displayed in Rows 3, 4, and 5. Here, we round the
estimated 14¢ change in the blender’s margin as a result of subsidy expiration
to 15¢. Along with the 30¢ point estimate for ethanol producer and corn
farmers, this leaves a residual point estimate of zero for gasoline consumers
and oil refiners (consistent with our prior knowledge about internationally
integrated refined petroleum markets).24 To construct confidence intervals
for these point estimates, we rely on the confidence estimate of the effect on
ethanol prices because the direct estimates of blender margins and RBOB price
changes were uninformative. Namely, if values less than 15¢ are not included
in the estimated effect on ethanol prices, the confidence interval for incidence
23

To construct an approximate confidence interval, we shift the ethanol price confidence
interval by 5¢ and extend it by 2¢ (to account for the error in the corn price estimate). This
will be conservative, as the true confidence interval should be slightly smaller.
24
It is plausible that 1¢ went to oil refiners based on the RBOB point estimate. Or, assuming the oil refiners received no benefit from the subsidy, one could argue that 1¢ flowed
to consumers based on combining the estimated 14¢ for blenders and 30¢ for ethanol producers/corn farmers, and subtracting from 45¢. However, 1¢ is of such insignificant magnitude
and so well within the noise of the gasoline and RBOB markets that, for simplicity, we
round the fuel blender incidence to 15¢ and the oil refiner/gasoline consumer incidence to
zero.

28

on oil refiners, consumers, and blenders, cannot include values above 30¢.
We further assume subsidies have only positive welfare effects on recipients,
yielding a lower bound of zero.
6

Conclusion

At the time of its expiration, there was considerable debate about who
was benefiting from the VEETC. This paper examines this question through
a detailed, empirical analysis of price changes at the time the subsidy expired,
in an event-study framework. Where possible, we used calendar spreads of futures prices, giving us a relatively clean indication of how the market expected
prices to change for upstream commodities. Since futures price data was not
available for measuring downstream incidence on gasoline prices, we instead
directly estimated the blender’s margin using spot price data, and assessed
consumer impacts as the residual.
We found compelling evidence that an estimated two-thirds of the subsidy was passed up the agriculture chain to ethanol producers, with a lower
bound of one-third. Moreover, we found suggestive evidence that a small
portion of the subsidy (around 5¢ per gallon of ethanol blended) was further
passed upstream to corn farmers, though the data is more limited. Our direct
estimate of the blender’s take is 15¢ per gallon, with a confidence interval
that includes zero. This yields a point estimate for the consumer incidence of
essentially zero, as well as being consistent with the (noisy) estimate of little,
if any, incidence on refineries. This matches our prior that gasoline blendstock
prices are independent of ethanol policy, being determined in internationally
integrated product markets.
These results are consistent with previous work based on analytic and
simulation modeling that generally argued ethanol producers benefited the
most from VEETC, with some pass-through to corn farmers (De Gorter and
Just, 2008; Taheripour and Tyner, 2007; Gardner, 2007; Kruse et al., 2007;
McPhail and Babcock, 2008). It also provides partial support for Babcock
(2008), who attributes most subsidy incidence to blenders. Our results match

29

up closely to Abbott (2014), who found a similar 2:1 incidence split between
ethanol producers and blenders. Unlike these prior studies, however, we have
empirically estimated the incidence based on the VEETC elimination rather
than simulating the policy with assumed elasticities. The approach introduces
a new methodology for assessing the impact of policy and other market changes
through futures contracts. The findings are relevant both for understanding
the financial incidence of one of the largest energy subsidies in US history, as
well as the market structure underpinning an industry that continues to be
subject to substantial policy intervention.
References
Abbott, Philip. 2014. “Biofuels, Binding Constraints and Agricultural Commodity Price Volatility.” In The Economics of Food Price Volatility. , ed.
J.P. Chavas, D. Hummels and B.D. Wright. University of Chicago Press.
Anderson, Soren T. 2012. “The Demand for Ethanol as a Gasoline Substitute.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 63: 151–168.
Babcock, Bruce A. 2008. “Distributional Implications of U.S. Ethanol Policy.” Review of Agricultural Economics, 30(3): 533–542.
Babcock, Bruce A., and Sebastien Pouliot. 2014. “Feasibility and Cost
of Increasing US Ethanol Beyond E10.” CARD Policy Briefs (14-PB 17).
Center for Agricultural and Rural Development, Iowa State University.
Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian. 2014. “A General
Approach to Recovering Market Expectations from Future Prices
With an Application to Crude Oil.” Working Paper. http://wwwpersonal.umich.edu/l̃kilian/bk4 091314withappendix.pdf.
Brester, Gary W. 2012. “Corn.” Agricultural Marketing Resource Center,
http://www.agmrc.org/commodities products/grains oilseeds/corn grain/.

30

Bullock, David S. 2007. “Ethanol Policy and Ethanol Politics.” In CornBased Ethanol in Illinois and the U.S.. Chapter 9. University of Illinois
Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics.
Burtraw, Dallas, and Karen Palmer. 2008. “Compensation Rules for Climate Policy in the Electricity Sector.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(4): 819–847.
Bushnell, James B., Howard Chong, and Erin T. Mansur. 2013. “Profiting from Regulation: Evidence from the European Carbon Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4): 78–106.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Olivier Coibion. 2014. “The Predictive Content
of Commodity Futures.” Journal of Futures Markets, 34(7): 607–636.
De Gorter, Harry, and David R. Just. 2008. “The Economics of the U.S.
Ethanol Import Tariff with a Blend Mandate and Tax Credit.” Journal of
Agricultural & Food Industrial Organization, 6(2).
Duffield, James A., Irene M. Xiarchos, and Steve A. Halbrook. 2008.
“Ethanol Policy: Past, Present, and Future.” SDL Review, 53: 425–453.
Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2002. “Tax Incidence.” Handbook
of Public Economics, 4: 1787–1872.
Gardner, Bruce. 2007. “Fuel Ethanol Subsidies and Farm Price Support.”
Journal of Agricultural & Food Industrial Organization, 5(4).
Greene, Nathanael, and Sasha Lyutse. 2010. “Let the VEETC Expire:
Moving Beyond Corn Ethanol Means Less Waste, Less Pollution, and More
Jobs.” National Resources Defense Council Fact Sheet.
Illinois
Corn. 2011. “Ethanol Subsidy Expires Leaving Uncertainty
at
the
Pump.”
http://www.ilcorn.org/media/dailyupdate/article/2011/12/ethanol-subsidy-expires-leaving-uncertainty-atthe-pump.
31

Irwin, Scott, and Darrel Good. 2011. “Trends in Crude Oil and Gasoline Prices.” farmdoc daily, Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, October 6, 2011.
Irwin, Scott, and Darrel Good. 2013. “Exploding Ethanol RINs Prices:
What’s the Story?” farmdoc daily, Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, March 8,
2013.
Irwin, Scott, and Darrel Good. 2015. “What if the EPA Implements RFS
Mandates for Renewable Fuels at Statutory Levels?” farmdoc daily, Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, February 19, 2015.
Kahn, Shulamit, and Christopher R. Knittel. 2006. “The Impact of the
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 on Electric Utilities and Coal Mines:
Evidence from the Stock Market.” University of California Energy Institute
Working Paper CSEM WP 118.
Kirwan, Barrett E. 2009. “The Incidence of U.S. Agricultural Subsidies on
Farmland Rental Rates.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(1): 138–164.
Koizumi, Tatsuji. 2014. Biofuels and Food Security: Biofuel Impact on Food
Security in Brazil, Asia, and Major Producing Countries. Springer.
Kruse, John, Patrick Westhoff, Seth Meyer, and Wyatt Thompson.
2007. “Economic Impacts of Not Extending Biofuel Subsidies.” AgBioForum, 10(2): 94–103.
Linn, Joshua. 2006. “Stock Prices and the Cost of Environmental Regulation.” Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research (CEEPR)
06-011.
Linn, Joshua. 2010. “The Effect of Cap-and-Trade Programs on Firms’ Profits: Evidence from the Nitrogen Oxides Budget Trading Program.” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management, 59(1): 1–14.
32

McPhail, Lihong Lu, and Bruce A. Babcock. 2008. Short-Run Price
and Welfare Impacts of Federal Ethanol Policies. Center for Agricultural
and Rural Development.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994.
“The Impact of Global Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis.”
American Economic Review, 84(4): 753–771.
Mosier,
Nathan S.,
and Klein Ileleji. 2006. “How Fuel
Ethanol Is Made From Corn.” Purdue Extension ID-328,
https://www.extension.purdue.edu/extmedia/id/id-328.pdf.
National Research Council. 2010. Hidden Costs of Energy: Unpriced Consequences of Energy Production and Use. National Academies Press.
Serra, Teresa, and David Zilberman. 2013. “Biofuel-Related Price Transmission Literature: A Review.” Energy Economics, 37: 141–151.
Taheripour, Farzad, and Wallace Tyner. 2007. “Ethanol Subsidies, Who
Gets the Benefits?”
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2011. “Direct Federal
Financial Interventions and Subsidies in Energy in Fiscal Year 2010.”
http://www.eia.gov/analysis/requests/subsidy/archive/2010/pdf/subsidy.pdf.
U.S. Energy Information Adminstration. 2014. “Frequently Asked Questions.” http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=327&t=9.
U.S. Energy Information Adminstration. 2015a. “Petroleum and Other
Liquids - Data.” http://www.eia.gov/petroleum/storagecapacity/.
U.S. Energy Information Adminstration. 2015b. “Petroleum and
Other Liquids - Working and Net Available Shell Storage Capacity.”
http://www.eia.gov/petroleum/storagecapacity/.
Wolfram, Gary. 2011. “The Energy Emperor’s Ethanol Wardrobe Looks
Mighty Bare.” http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/the-energy-emperorsethanol-wardrobe-looks-mighty-bare/article/39273.
33

Yoon, Byung-Sam, and B. Wade Brorsen. 2002. “Market Inversion in
Commodity Futures Prices.” Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics,
34(3): 459–476.

34

7

Tables and Figures

Corn
farming

Ethanol
production

Blenders

Crude oil
production

Petroleum
refining

Subsidy

Figure 1: U.S. gasoline production with ethanol blending

35

Finished
gasoline

36
Figure 2: Ethanol futures strip around subsidy expiration, August 2011 - April 2012 contracts

Figure 3: Ethanol price spread for January 2012 - December 2011 versus other
one month calendar spreads, conditional on the same number of days to maturity

37

Figure 4: RBOB price spread for January 2012 - December 2011, controlling
for oil prices, versus other one month calendar spreads, conditional on the
same number of days to maturity

38

Figure 5: Corn price spreads for March - December

39

Figure 6: Daily prices for gasoline (E10), RBOB, and ethanol

40

Figure 7: Daily blender’s margin

41

Table 1: Commodity price and welfare impact of subsidy expiration, by stakeholder group

(2)
Range of possible price
changes for commodity
produced

(3)
Change in welfare based
on observed price changes
per gallon of ethanol

(1) Ethanol producers
(2) Farmers

Ethanol
Corn

∆Pethanol − 0.37∆Pcorn
0.37∆Pcorn

(3)

Oil refiners

RBOB

(4)

Blenders

(5)

Consumers

-

[−45¢, 0]
[−2.7∆Pethanol , 0] per
bushel of corn
[−5¢, 0] per gallon of
RBOB
[0, 4.5¢] per gallon of
finished gasoline
-

10∆Pgasoline − 9∆PRBOB −
∆Pethanol − 45¢
−10∆Pgasoline

-

-

−45¢

42

Stakeholders

(1)
Commodity produced

(6) Total

Gasoline

9∆PRBOB

Notes: Welfare changes are per gallon of ethanol blended. All prices are in $/per gallon (ethanol, RBOB, and
gasoline) or bushel (corn). We assume a 1:9 ratio of ethanol to RBOB in each gallon of finished gasoline and
0.37 bushels of corn in each gallon of ethanol (see (1)).

Table 2: Estimated commodity welfare impacts, by stakeholder group

Stakeholders
Ethanol producers
Farmers
Oil refiners
Blenders
Consumers

Point estimate

95% confidence interval

25¢
5¢
0¢
15¢
0¢

[8¢, 32¢]
[3¢, 7¢]†
[0¢, 45¢]‡
[0¢, 35¢]‡
[0¢, 45¢]‡

Notes: All estimates are per gallon of ethanol blended. We assume a 1:9 ratio
of ethanol to RBOB in each gallon of finished gasoline and 0.37 bushels of corn
in each gallon of ethanol.
†
Based on the standard deviation of four other comparable calendar spreads.
‡
Based on the confidence interval for the effect on ethanol prices, [−35¢, −15¢].

43

