                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      HEALTHY, HAPPY AND IDLE:
  ESTIMATING THE HEALTH CAPACITY TO WORK AT OLDER AGES IN GERMANY

                                          Hendrik Jürges
                                             Lars Thiel
                                         Axel Börsch-Supan

                                        Working Paper 21972
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21972


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016

This paper uses data from SHARE Wave 5 release 1.0.0, as of March 31st 2015 (DOI: 10.6103/SHARE.
w5.100) or SHARE Wave 4 release 1.1.1, as of March 28th 2013 (DOI: 10.6103/SHARE.w4.111)
or SHARE Waves 1 and 2 release 2.6.0, as of November 29th 2013 (DOI: 10.6103/SHARE.w1.260
and 10.6103/SHARE.w2.260) or SHARELIFE release 1.0.0, as of November 24th 2010 (DOI: 10.6103/
SHARE.w3.100). The SHARE data collection has been primarily funded by the European Commission
through the 5th Framework Programme (project QLK6-CT-2001-00360 in the thematic programme
Quality of Life), through the 6th Framework Programme (projects SHARE-I3, RII-CT-2006-062193,
COMPARE, CIT5- CT-2005-028857, and SHARELIFE, CIT4-CT-2006-028812) and through the
7th Framework Programme (SHARE-PREP, N° 211909, SHARE-LEAP, N° 227822 and SHARE
M4, N° 261982). Additional funding from the U.S. National Institute on Aging (U01 AG09740-13S2,
P01 AG005842, P01 AG08291, P30 AG12815, R21 AG025169, Y1-AG-4553-01, IAG BSR06-11
and OGHA 04-064) and the German Ministry of Education and Research as well as from various national
sources is gratefully acknowledged (see www.share-project.org for a full list of funding institutions).
The Microcensus data were provided by the Research Data Centers of the Federal Statistical Office
and the Statistical Offices of the Länder in Düsseldorf, Germany, analyzed on-site (further information:
http://www.forschungsdatenzentrum.de/en/). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Hendrik Jürges, Lars Thiel, and Axel Börsch-Supan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Healthy, Happy and Idle: Estimating the Health Capacity to Work at Older Ages in Germany
Hendrik Jürges, Lars Thiel, and Axel Börsch-Supan
NBER Working Paper No. 21972
February 2016
JEL No. H31,H55,I19,J14,J26

                                              ABSTRACT

After two decades of reforms that have tightened eligibility for early retirement and the generosity
of social security payments, the German government has begun to turn back time and re-introduce
more generous disability and early retirement benefits. Often, poor health is cited as the main reason
why workers cannot work until the regular retirement age. In this chapter, we try to answer a seemingly
simple question: what is the proportion of older individuals who could work in the labor market if
they wanted to and if they were not limited by poor health? To answer this question, we follow two
different empirical approaches with a similar logic: we estimate the link between health and labor
force participation in a population whose employment patterns are or were hardly affected by the current
(early) retirement incentives. Using these “pure health effects” on labor force participation to extrapolate
to a population that is currently strongly affected by legislation informs us how many could not work
for health reasons and how many could work. We find substantial capacity to work among the older
population. We estimate that two thirds of the population would be capable of working in the labor
market until they turn 70 if they wanted to.


Hendrik Jürges                                              Axel Börsch-Supan
University of Wuppertal                                     Munich Center for the Economics of Aging
Schumpeter School of Business and Economics                 Max Planck Institute
Rainer-Gruenter-Str. 21 [FN.01]                             for Social Law and Social Policy
42119 Wuppertal                                             Amalienstrasse 33
GERMANY                                                     80799 Munich
juerges@uni-wuppertal.de                                    GERMANY
                                                            and NBER
Lars Thiel                                                  boersch-supan@mea.mpisoc.mpg.de
University of Wuppertal
Schumpeter School of Business and Economics
Rainer-Gruenter-Str. 21 [FN.01]
42119 Wuppertal
GERMANY
thiel@wiwi.uni-wuppertal.de
1   Introduction

In this chapter, we aim to answer a seemingly simple question for Germany: what is the
proportion of older individuals who could work in the labor market if they wanted to and if they
were not limited by poor health? In other words: what is the capacity to work at older ages, also
after what is currently the statutory retirement age? The answer to this question is particularly
relevant for the future of the German pay-as-you-go pension system. Not everybody who is
retiring from work does so because he or she is too ill, physically or mentally. Many individuals
retire simply because they can, i.e., they have received the age at which they become eligible for
an early retirement benefit or a regular old-age pension. Employers often seem to encourage
early labor force exit of their older staff because they believe that the higher salaries paid to older
workers compared to younger workers not always reflect higher productivity. Extending working
lives by raising early and normal retirement ages therefore is arguably the single most effective
measure to increase the sustainability of the pension system. Each year that is worked longer
affects the system dependency ratio on two counts: it reduces the numerator (those receiving
pension benefits) and increases the denominator (those who finance pensioners’ benefits).

This simple calculus was the main reason for the German government to gradually increase in
2007 the age of retirement from 65 to 67, similar to many other countries. This increase, fully
implemented in the year 2029, will fairly exactly extend the working life in proportion to the
increase in life expectancy and therefore compensate for one important cause of population
aging, namely the increase in longevity.

While this policy is rational from a sustainability point of view, the reform was not appreciated by
the populace. The government failed to win re-election and seven years later in 2014, elements
of the reform were reversed by introducing a new early retirement option at age 63 without any
actuarial adjustment to those workers who have accumulated at least 45 years of contributions
to the public pension system. Such contributions include own contributions (payroll tax on wages
earned during dependent employment) and contributions by the government during periods of



                                                      3
education, child care and unemployment. The policy reversal was motivated by the hypothesis
that these workers have particularly poor health because they worked so long.

This motivation is in stark contrast to the substantial improvements in population health over the
past half century that are reflected in continuing increases in life-expectancy. Hence, lack of work
capacity due to poor health should not be the major obstacle to raise retirement ages. In fact,
Börsch-Supan et al. (2014) showed that those employees who are eligible for the new early
retirement option at age 63 are not more likely to have poor health at the end of their working
lives when measured by the days reported as sick leave. Rather, the contrary is the case. These
are surprising results which contradict the originally claimed purpose of the legislation, namely to
help the underprivileged who worked especially long and hard during their life and consequently
suffered from extra burdens. Börsch-Supan et al. (2015) confirm this finding with the SHARE data
also used in this paper. Most notably, the eligible workers self-reported a significantly lower
incidence of work disability.

More generally, looking at patterns of labor force participation in Germany – in particular the
large retirement hazard rates at salient ages 63 or 65 – it should be clear that retirement timing
is often not driven by bad health. For each individual, health deteriorates through a series of
health shocks, i.e., discontinuous changes in health. At some point, the health shock can be so
large that working is no longer possible. For the population as a whole these shocks aggregate to
a smooth decline in average health as people get older – so that retirement for health reasons
should also have a smooth pattern. (At the extreme we have mortality. For each individual, dying
is the ultimate health shock, but survival curves are smooth).

Even if most people do not retire for health reasons, it is not clear how far working lives could
reasonably be extended. Our paper is a first attempt to answer this question for Germany. To be
sure, this is a descriptive not a normative exercise. To estimate work capacity among the older
population, we follow two different empirical approaches with a similar logic: we estimate the
link between health and labor force participation in a population whose employment patterns
are not or hardly affected by the current retirement and social security legislation. Using these
“pure health effects” on labor force participation, we extrapolate to today’s population which is
affected by today’s legislation to learn how many could not work for health reasons and how
                                                     4
many could still work, even beyond the current normal retirement age. Independent of the
method used, we get similar results. As a lower bound for today’s elders, we show that, if
individuals were retiring exclusively for health reasons, more than half of the population could
still work until age 70.


One possible critique of our approach is that health is not equally distributed across socio-
economic groups, with poorer or less educated individuals being in worse health. Estimating
average work capacity across the entire socio-economic spectrum thus possibly overestimates
the capacity to work among those workers. Where possible, we thus add estimates separately for
different education groups, with education being one important component of socio-economic
status.


The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we describe trends in health and labor force
participation in Germany since the 1960s. In Sections 3 and 4, we use these long-term trends to
estimate the capacity to work among today’s elders compared to those up to 40 years in the past.
Using current survey data containing detailed health information, we simulate employment
among older respondents using younger individuals’ behavior as reference in Section 5. In Section
6, we provide a more detailed analysis of trends in health across education levels. Section 7
summarizes our research and discusses our findings.




2   Pension reforms and long-term trends in health and employment at older ages

In this section we provide some background to our empirical analysis by briefly describing long-
term trends in mortality, morbidity, and labor force participation at older ages in Germany.
Moreover, we relate broad trends in labor force participation to historical changes in the German
pension system.

Figure 1 shows the trend in (log) annual mortality rates in (West) Germany at ages 55-59, 60-64,
and 65-69 from 1960 to 2011. The graphs clearly show that mortality rates rise with age and that

                                                   5
mortality is higher among men than women in any given age group. Mortality rates have been
fairly stable in the 1960s, especially among men, but have fallen continuously between 1970 and
2000. For instance, mortality rates among 60-64 year old men have roughly halved from 2.7% to
1.4%. Since 2000, the mortality decline appears to have flattened among women. In fact, in the
group of 65-69 year old women, there is even a slight increase in mortality rates.

                                     --- Figure 1 about here---

Figure 2 shows trends in self-reported morbidity between 1989 and 2009. These numbers are
based on computations from the German Microcensus (an annual survey of a one percent sample
of the population) which asks a few broad health questions at irregular intervals. Specifically,
respondents are asked whether they currently suffer from any illness or condition and if yes, how
long they suffer from this condition. From the answers to these questions, we computed two
summary measures of health: the prevalence of an ongoing condition that lasted at least 1 month,
and the prevalence of long-term (>1 year) illness (cf. Kemptner et al. 2011). The data reveal similar
prevalences among women and men and a clear age gradient. Older age groups are more likely
to report suffering from long-term illness than younger age groups. Moreover, there is evidence
of a steep decline in the prevalence of long-term illness between 1989 and 1999 among both
sexes and all age groups. Parallel to flattening trends in mortality, the decline in the prevalence
of long-term illness appears to have slowed down in the 2000s.

                                     --- Figure 2 about here---

Whereas health in terms of mortality or long-term illness has generally improved over time, the
long-term trend of employment at older ages has virtually been a rollercoaster ride (see Figure 3),
especially in the group of 60-64 year old men. Long-run trends in the employment of older women
reflect secular changes in the role of women in the labor market, but the trend among men is
clearly linked to the history of pension reforms. As explained in our previous work (e.g., Jürges et
al. 2012), when the pay-as-you-go system was introduced in 1957, there was a single eligibility
age for regular old-age pensions: 65 for men and 60 for women. Earlier retirement was impossible
unless one could prove a disability. In fact, in the 1960s, disability accounted for more than half
of all entries into retirement among both men and women. This was the least generous period in

                                                     6
terms of social security eligibility. About 90% of the 55-59 year old men, almost 80% of the 60-64
year old men, and even more than 20% of the 65-69 year old men were working. Labor force
participation rates among women were generally much lower, due to historical patterns of low
female employment in general.

                                    --- Figure 3 about here---

The year 1972 marked the beginning of a long phase of ever increasing generosity of the pension
system which ended in the late 1980s. The 1972 reform introduced special provisions for early
retirement of the long-term insured by providing old age pension benefits (without actuarially
fair deductions) already at age 63, given that workers had a minimum of 35 contribution years.
Further, a special old-age pension for disabled workers to be collected at age 62 (later at age 60)
with less stringent health requirements than disability pensions was introduced. As a result, labor
force participation among 60-64 year old mean dropped quite dramatically from nearly 80% to
40%. The average retirement age dropped by more than two years, and the new retirement
pathways substituted for the disability pathway into retirement among men aged 60 and older.
Further reforms that generally increased the generosity of the system followed during the 1980s.
As a result, labor force participation among older workers was at an historical low throughout the
1990s.

In face of a looming demographic crisis, serious attempts to cut back on the generosity of the
German pension system started in 1992. Pension benefits were anchored to net rather than to
gross wages and actuarial adjustments of benefits to retirement age were introduced, albeit only
gradually from 1998 onward. In 2004, the pension benefit indexation formula was modified to
account for demographic developments. These reforms clearly left their mark on labor force
participation among older individuals. Again, it is the 60-64 age group in which the effect was
particularly salient. In this age group, participation rates have increased to more than 60% among
men and nearly 50% among women in 2013.

Whether these positive trends will continue in the future is not clear, however. On the one hand
in 2007, a gradual increase in the normal retirement age from 65 to 67 years (to be phased in
between 2012 and 2029) was enacted. Retirement ages for other variants of old-age pensions

                                                    7
were increased as well (e.g., women’s retirement ages were raised to match men’s retirement
ages). This should give a boost to employment also in the 65-69 age group. On the other hand, as
described in the introduction, Germany has entered yet another (transitory) phase of pension
reforms. In 2014, an early retirement option at age 63 without actuarial adjustment was re-
introduced for those with 45 contribution years.




3   Estimating work capacity using long-term changes in mortality

One important aim of this chapter is to provide estimates of work capacity for Germany that are
comparable with those from other countries. In this section, we use age-specific mortality as an
indicator of age-specific health or work capacity (Milligan & Wise 2012a). Mortality data provide
information on population health that are consistently defined over time and across countries.
Thus, they provide indicators of health that do not suffer from reporting bias and cross-cultural
differences in response behavior that usually affect self-assessed health measures (e.g. Jürges,
2007). On the downside, mortality is necessarily an imperfect indicator of health limitations
relevant for work capacity as it does not reflect non-lethal conditions such as back pain or
depression, which may have trends that are independent of mortality.

Bearing these limitations in mind, we estimate work capacity by looking at the relationship
between mortality rates (as an age-year specific indicator of health) and employment rates at
several points in time. Mortality rates increase and employment rates decrease with age, leading
to a negative relationship between age-specific mortality rates and age-specific labor-market
participation rates in any given year. However, as shown below, the curvature of the mortality-
employment relationship has changed greatly over time. General health as indicated by age-
specific survival rates has generally increased whereas the employment rates at the same ages
have mostly decreased except in recent years (see Figures 1 and 3).

This implies that until recently, health and employment at any given age have moved in opposite
directions over time. Given the same health status, individuals have become increasingly less
likely to work. Based on these trends over time, we conduct a counterfactual analysis to estimate
the potential ability of the current population to work at older ages. Specifically, we compare
                                                   8
current employment rates with employment rates at earlier points in time, holding the mortality
rate constant. In this way, we are able to assess the proportion of today’s individuals whose health
would allow them to work, if they worked as much as people with the same health status in the
past.

We obtained age-specific mortality rates from the Human Mortality Database (HMD). We have
computed average age-specific mortality rates at ages 45-75 for four periods: 1968-1972, 1976-
1980, 1989-1995, and 2005-2009. The choice of periods is motivated below. To these data we
merged average age-specific employment rates for the same periods, which we computed from
the (West) German Census 1970 (IPUMS data base, Minnesota Population Center 2011) and
selected years (1976, 1978, 1989, 1995, 2005, 2009) of the German Microcensus. The
Microcensus is the largest annually-conducted household survey in Germany, and it has been
carried out in West Germany since 1957 and East Germany in 1991. It covers a representative
sample of one percent of the German population. Currently, some 370,000 households
participate in the Microcensus every year. Specifically, we merged the employment rates in the
1970 Census to the average 1968 to 1972 mortality rates, the average employment rates in 1976
and 1978 to the average mortality rates in 1976 to 1980, the average employment rates in 1989-
1995 to the average mortality rates in 1989 to 1995, and the average employment rates in 2005
and 2009 to average mortality in 2005-2009.

Our choice of comparison periods is motivated by the history of the German pension system as
described in the preceding section. We begin our analysis in 1970 as a highly relevant comparison
period. It reflects the pre-reform phase that was also the least generous in terms of eligibility. The
immediate consequences of the 1972 reform on the relationship between health (mortality) and
employment are captured by the 1976-1980 period. The 1989-1995 period marks the turning
point in terms of pension system generosity and the most recent period 2005-2009 reflects the
consequences of the reductions in generosity that followed. The analysis in this section exploits
data that cover a fairly long time span. As we have shown in the preceding section, the
employment of older women has followed long-run trends that reflect secular changes in the role
of women in the labor market as much as they reflect the effect of pension reforms. Thus the
following analyses are only performed for men.

                                                      9
Our approach is illustrated in Figure 4. Using the most recent period (2005-2009) as the base
period, we compare the mortality-employment curve in that period with the mortality-
employment curve in a comparison period (here: 1970). It is instructive to compare the location
of specific ages across time in this graph. Generally, data points in 2005-2009 are located south-
west of those in 1970. This reflects smaller mortality rates and, simultaneously, smaller
employment rates. As an example, 60% of men aged 63 were working in 1970 and they had a
nearly 3% chance of dying. In 2005-2009, only about 30% were working, whereas their mortality
rate had also about halved to less than 1.5%.

We now compute the additional work capacity at some age in the base year as the vertical
distance between the two curves at that age or mortality rate, respectively. For instance, in 2005-
2009, the employment rate of 63-year-old men was equal to 31%, and their mortality rate was
1.34%. In 1970, the employment rate of men who had the same mortality rate (and who were
about 56 years old) was roughly 85%. Hence, if the same proportion of men in 2005-2009 had
worked as much as men in 1970 with the same mortality rate, the employment rate of 63-year-
old men would have been 54 percentage points higher.

                                    --- Figure 4 about here---

This calculation is repeated for every age from 55 to 69 in the base period. The results are shown
in Table 1. Given the same mortality rates, we observe that employment was substantially higher
in 1970 than in 2005-2009. At each mortality rate, the estimated additional employment capacity
is positive and increases up to the statutory retirement age (65). We may translate these figures
into additional years of work at each age. For instance, an estimated work capacity of 50 percent
implies that 63-year-old men in 2005-2009 would on average work 0.5 years more (at that age).
Aggregating over all ages from 55 through 69 gives the total number of additional years of work,
which is equal to 6.5. Thus, if men in 2005-2009 would have worked as much as men in 1970 with
the same health and if they retired at 70, they would have worked 6.5 years more on average.
Compared to actual years of employment at ages 55 to 69 in 2005-2009 (6.2 years), this amounts
to a doubling in years of work.

                                    --- Table 1 about here ---

                                                   10
It is of course debatable whether improvements in survival rates translate fully into employment
years. The question is whether the survival rates of a cohort are a good proxy for their general
health. This may depend, for instance, on whether additional life years are spent in good or poor
health. According to the morbidity-expansion hypothesis, increased life expectancy raises the
number of unhealthy years, whereas the morbidity-compression hypothesis argues that health
problems will be postponed to a shorter period at the end of life. Comparing measures of
functional health collected in the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) study in 1997 and 2010,
Trachte et al. (2014) find evidence for morbidity compression among the German older
population. We also find that self-reported morbidity and mortality have followed similar trends
over time (see Section 2), which supports the use of mortality as proxy for morbidity. However,
as we have documented in earlier research also using data from the German SOEP, secular trends
in subjective health, such as health satisfaction (available since 1984) and self-reported general
health (available since 1992) are more or less flat or rather inconsistent across age groups (see
Börsch-Supan & Jürges 2012, Figures 6 and 7). This finding is puzzling, however. First, self-rated
health in the German SOEP has been shown to be predictive of future mortality even controlling
for other health measures (Jürges 2008). Thus, both measures of health are correlated on the
individual level. Second, it is in contrast to findings for the U.S. for instance, where self-rated
health has moved in parallel to mortality over time (Milligan & Wise 2012b). We believe this
evidence suggest that aggregate measures of self-rated health are not comparable over time,
either in the German SOEP (which provides the longest time-series in self-rated health in
Germany) or among Germans in general. For this reason, our estimates of work-capacity based
on self-reported morbidity in Section 4 should be interpreted cautiously.

Another notable point is that our estimates are sensitive to the choice of the comparison year.
The year 1970 represents a peak in old-age employment rates because it is unaffected by the
major pension reforms that generally increased generosity and because the labor market was
characterized by full employment. Later years represent employment in old-age that is strongly
affected by generous early retirement schemes. Therefore employment rates in those later years
do not measure the full health-related employment potential of the older population.



                                                    11
Nevertheless, we repeated the previous calculations using the more recent comparison periods
1976-1980 and 1989-1995. We report the main results of these calculations in Figure 5.

                                     --- about here Figure 5 ---

When 1989-1995 employment and mortality rates are used, the estimate of additional work
capacity of today’s workers equals only 2.5 years. This number is positive because of lower
mortality/improved health but it is driven down by the comparatively low old-age employment
rates in the 1990s. One can interpret these 2.5 years as the health-related gain in work capacity
that could materialize even if today’s pension system was as generous as the system in the 1990s.
Using the late 1970s as reference period, the estimated additional work capacity is 5.9 years and
thus much closer to our preferred estimates.

Table 2 summarizes our work-capacity estimates using different comparison years. It also
provides an additional, yet important, interpretation of our findings. The employment rates in
1976-1980 and 1970 of men with the same mortality rates as those of men aged 65-69 in 2005-
2009 roughly equals 65% and 78%, respectively. Thus, about two-thirds of men at these ages in
2005-2009 could work if they worked as much as men with the same health status – as measured
by the probability of dying – in the past.

                                     --- Table 2 about here ---



4   Estimating work capacity using long-term changes in morbidity

We now turn to the relationship between self-reported morbidity and employment at various
points in time. The common 5-scale self-assessed health measure is unavailable in the German
Microcensus, and individual health information is not collected every year. From the available
information, we therefore constructed the two indicators of self-reported morbidity already
described in Section 2 for 1989, 1999, and 2009. We choose the most recent year (2009) as the
base year and compare the morbidity-employment curvature with the two earlier years. To obtain
more precise estimates, the original morbidity data are smoothed using a 3-year moving average
in age. Figure 6 illustrates the morbidity-employment relationship for the base year 2009 and the

                                                     12
comparison year 1989, and the two illness measures. The x-axis now represents the share of
individuals reporting the respective health problem. This graph shows that health has improved
over time. At each age, the morbidity curve in 2009 lies left to the morbidity curve in 1989. That
is, the prevalence of self-reported illnesses is on average lower in 2009 than in 1989. A remarkable
feature of the morbidity-employment curve is the almost vertical section at ages 60 to 65. Thus
whereas health does deteriorate with age before age 60 and after age 65, there is no change or
even a rebound in the time between. Individuals’ health seems to improve while employment
rates decline. One possible explanation for this finding is that retirement actually improves health,
but a deeper analysis must be left to future research.


                                     --- Figure 6 about here ---

Using again the vertical distance between the morbidity-employment curves in different periods,
we estimated an additional work capacity, depending on the illness measure, of between 4.9 and
5.5 years. Due to the inverted S-shape of the morbidity-employment curves, there can be more
than one possible employment rate at some ages/prevalences. Luckily this applies only to very
few data points at relatively high ages. In case this happened, we used the lowest employment
rate so that our estimates provide some lower bound. Nevertheless, the 5 years of additional
work capacity are substantially larger than the simulated additional 2.5 years of work calculated
based on a comparable period of time (2005-2009 vs. 1989-1995) and using mortality to
approximate health. Work-capacity estimates are again sensitive to the comparison year used.
Whereas we obtain positive values when using 1989 as the comparison year, the estimates are
practically zero when using 1999 (-0.5 and -0.2, respectively). This is not unexpected since, as we
have seen in Section 2 that self-reported health has not improved as much between 1999 and
2009 as in the decade before, and labor force participation in 1999 was still largely affected by
the generosity of the system and hence quite low.


5   Work-capacity estimates using health changes across age groups
In this section, we estimate the health-related capacity to work using the approach suggested by
Cutler et al. (2012). The basic idea is to simulate the work capacity of older individuals based on
their own health status and other characteristics using the estimated relationship between health
                                                    13
and labor force participation of younger persons. This answers the question how much older
individuals would work if they faced the same retirement incentives as younger persons (eligible
only for disability pensions) but given their worse own health level. However, rather than
assessing actual behavioral responses to, for example, stricter access to retirement pathways, we
interpret our findings as additional work capacity above and beyond the observed employment
rates.

This method basically involves two steps, a regression stage and a simulation stage. First, we
estimate the relationship between employment and health, and other characteristics, of younger
respondents. We choose individuals at ages 50-54, who are not eligible for old-age pensions but
can apply for disability insurance benefits. Second, we predict the labor force participation of
older workers based on their actual health and characteristics using the coefficients from the
regression stage. We do these calculations for individuals at ages 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, and 70-74.

We use the German subsample of the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE)
for the years 2004 to 2010. The SHARE data provide extensive health information at the individual
level covering subjective and objective measures of physical and mental health. A major
advantage of these measurements is their comparability to both the health assessments of other
SHARE countries and the U.S. Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Our estimation sample is a
combined dataset of the three panel waves (2004, 2006, and 2010), restricted to individuals aged
50-74. It approximately includes 1,600 men and 1,800 women, and the number of person-years
roughly amounts to 2,700 and 3,000, respectively. The analysis in the regression stage is based
on 399 male- and 526 female-year observations, at ages 50-54.

The dependent variable in our regression models is a dummy variable that indicates whether a
respondent currently works in the labor market, even if this is only for a few hours per week. As
with any study that estimates the employment effects of health, it is important to measure the
respondent’s health status comprehensively. Therefore, we include a rich set of health indicators,
such as self-rated health, physical limitations, limitations in activities of daily living (ADLs) and
instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), various medical conditions, weight problems, and
smoking status. Furthermore, we control for the individual’s marital status and a binary indicator


                                                     14
of educational attainment, where we distinguish between low education (basic-track secondary
school) and high education (intermediate or academic track secondary school).

Tables 3 and 4 report the summary statistics on dependent and independent variables for men
and women, respectively. As expected, employment decreases with age, showing sharp declines
in labor-force participation rates particularly among individuals at ages 60-64 and 65-69. For
example, the share of working men falls from 93% at ages 50-54 to 85% at ages 55-59, further
declines to 40% at ages 60-64, and eventually to 5% at ages 65-69. A similar pattern is observed
for women, although the employment rates are generally lower than among men. Women at ages
60-64 work substantially less than men of the same age. This can partly be explained by the
availability of an “old-age pension for women” during the observation period, which allowed
female workers to retire before age 65 if they met certain requirements. Regarding health, we
observe that the share of individuals reporting good, fair or poor health is increasing with age,
while the proportion of those in excellent or very good health declines. The same is true for most
of the remaining health outcomes: the probability of reporting health problems rises with age.
One notable exception are psychological problems. The probability of being depressed decreases
as individuals are getting older. This is consistent with the observation that subjective well-being
or mental health generally improves at an advanced age (Blanchflower & Oswald 2008).

                                 --- Tables 3 and 4 about here---

As to the measurement of health, one possible approach would be to include the full set of health
indicators as explanatory variables. However, this procedure is prone to interpretation problems
arising from multicollinearity and measurement error. For instance, in analyses not reported here,
some fairly bad health events such as suffering a stroke were actually found to increase labor
force participation. We therefore follow an alternative approach that presumably mitigates these
issues. Specifically, we primarily use the health index proposed by Poterba et al. (2013), which is
based on responses to 24 items covering the respondents’ psychological well-being, physical
health, and health-care utilization. The index is based on the first principal component extracted
from a principal component analysis using these 24 items. Table 5 displays the factor loadings of
the first principal component in the German SHARE data. All loadings are positive, implying that
larger values of the first principal component represent worse health. Functional limitations and
                                                   15
self-rated health have the greatest weight. The first principal component is then converted into
individual percentiles, so that higher values reflect better health (henceforth also denoted as PVW
index). Thus, we can interpret the estimated health parameters as changes in the probability of
working due to a percentile increase in the health index. Figure 7 displays the relationship
between the health index percentiles used in the regression and simulation analyses and age.
Here, higher values indicate better health status. We observe that health continuously declines
with age for both men and women, although women appear to be healthier than men on average.

                              --- Table 5 and Figure 7 about here ---

The PVW approach as described above implies that the same health condition has the same effect
on overall health and employment among younger and older respondents. However, there are
several reasons why this may not hold. Most importantly, the health indicators used here provide
little information on the severity of health conditions. For instance, individuals may assess their
own health relative to that of other people in the same age group (e.g. Groot, 2000). Hence a
given condition of the same “objective” severity might have a stronger effect on self-perceived
health and hence labor supply among young than among old respondents. Or suffering from the
same condition might have a stronger effect on overall health among older than among younger
people. In the first case, the PVW index would underestimate the work capacity of older workers,
and in the second case it would overestimate the work capacity. Furthermore, the PVW index
that we use here for comparability, includes self-rated health as the most important indicator.
However, health might be endogenous in employment regressions. Younger workers may have
financial incentives to report worse health to become eligible for disability benefits, or workers
may report health problems to rationalize their work behavior (e.g. Bound et al., 1999). This could
overestimate the impact of individual health on labor force participation.

To address both the measurement and endogeneity problem, we also computed for each
individual an index of self-assessed health that is a linear combination of the detailed “objective”
health measures mentioned above (we call this the SAH index). To be more precise, we estimated
an ordered probit model of self-rated health (cat.: excellent, very good, good, fair, poor) with the
remaining health measures as explanatory variables (see e.g. Jürges 2007). Each health variable
is interacted with a dummy variable indicating whether the respondent belongs to one of the
                                                16
previously defined age groups to allow for differential effects of each health indicator on overall
health. We then constructed the individual health index as the predicted linear index from the
ordered probit model. Hence, we loosen the restriction that health means the same across age
groups, and we reduce the endogeneity problem by instrumenting self-assessed health with
arguably exogenous health variables.

To be consistent with the other chapters in this volume, our analysis primarily relies on the PVW
index. We will also compare the results to the estimates obtained using both the full set of health
measures and the SAH index as a robustness check. For the regression analysis of individuals aged
50-54, we estimate linear probability models of the following form:




                                 =       +   ⋅       + ⋅             +                             (1)




        where        is a binary variable indicating whether individual       is working in wave ;
represents respondent ’s health status in ;              captures further control variables, and     is a
time-varying idiosyncratic error term. Equation (1) essentially represents a pooled panel
regression.

In the second stage, we use the regression coefficients from Equation (1) to predict the labor
force participation and work capacity at older ages:




                         =           +           ⋅   +          ⋅    +                             (2)




where         is the predicted employment probability of individual who belongs to age group ;
   and        are the respective health measures and control variables;           ,        ,         are
the estimated coefficients from the regression model in Equation (1). Our estimation of work
capacity relies on the assumption that the estimated coefficients identify the effect of poor health


                                                         17
and other covariates on the probability of working also for those belonging to older age groups if
these older age groups faced the same (early) retirement incentives as the 50-54 age group.

Table 6 shows the regression results for individuals at ages 50-54, separately for men and women.
We find that the PVW health index is positively related to the probability of working. The
estimated coefficient of the health index is equal 0.003 for both men and women. That is, moving
up the health distribution by one percentile increases the probability of employment by 0.3
percentage points. Furthermore, individuals who have higher educational attainment are also
more likely to work. Having completed an intermediate-track or academic-track secondary school
raises the employment probability by about 6 (10) percentage points among men (women),
compared to respondents with a basic-track secondary school degree. Being married is
significantly and negatively related to labor force participation only among women. We obtain
qualitatively and quantitatively similar results when we include the SAH index (details not shown).

                                    --- Table 6 about here ---

Table 7 and Figure 8 show the results of the simulation step, based on the PVW index. Table 6
shows for both men and women and each 5-year age group the actual (observed) proportion
working and the predicted proportion working. The estimated work capacity is calculated as the
difference between the predicted and observed employment rates. The predicted employment
rates for men are roughly 92% at ages 55-59, 90% at ages 60-64, 89% at ages, and 88% at ages
70-74. As expected, the predicted share of workers declines because health deteriorates with age
and worse individual health is linked with lower employment rates. However, the decline in the
projected proportion working is very small. This is also true for women, albeit their predicted
employment rates are lower at all age groups. Apparently the observed employment rates decline
more rapidly with age than the predicted employment rates. This implies that the work-capacity
estimates increase with age and become fairly large. For example, the additional work capacity
of men is roughly 7% at ages 55-59 (had they worked as much as men at ages 50-54), 50% at ages
60-64, 84% at ages 65-69, and 87% at ages 70-74. Among women, the estimated additional work
capacity follows the same pattern but is somewhat smaller. When using the SAH index, which
allows for larger effects of “nominal” health conditions on subjective health ratings, the estimate


                                                    18
of additional work capacity at older ages is reduced by a few percentage points (see Table A1 in
the Appendix).

                              --- Table 7 and Figure 8 about here ---

These numbers are similar to the mortality-based work-capacity estimates obtained in the
previous section. Referring to Table 2, the average additional employment for men at ages 60-64
and 65-69 approximately amounts to 45% and 68% (using 1970 as the comparison year),
respectively. The numbers in this section for the same age groups are equal to 50% and 84%. We
think that these results are remarkably similar, despite the fact that we are using distinct methods
and different measures of health status.

We conclude this section by allowing the relationship between health and employment, and
health-related work capacity, to differ across socioeconomic groups. Specifically, we simulate the
labor-force participation of older workers separately by educational attainment (low vs. high
education). There might be substantial education-related heterogeneity in the effect of health on
employment, and thus work capacity. For instance, better educated individuals are more likely to
work at older ages per se, due to better health. Furthermore, individuals with better education,
or higher socioeconomic status, are more likely to recover from and survive medical conditions
(e.g. Mackenbach et al., 2008). This is closely related to the observation that the better educated
are also better at adhering to medical treatments (Goldman & Smith, 2002), or are more likely to
profit from innovations in medical technology (Glied & Lleras-Muney, 2008). Generally, more
schooling may improve the capacity to cope with illness. Higher educated individuals are assumed
to make better informed decisions about their health, have greater financial resources, or choose
jobs that make it easier to adapt or accommodate to disabilities at the workplace (e.g. Lochner,
2011).

To compute work capacity by education, we rely on the regression coefficients of the model
estimated in the first step of the analysis, and compute the predicted percent working and the
additional work capacity separately by education (single regression). In addition, we re-estimate
the regression models separately by education group (regressions by education group).

                                    --- Figure 9 about here ---
                                                    19
Figure 9 displays the simulation results by education, using the PVW index and the single-
regression approach. Two patterns emerge: First, the estimated work capacity increases with age,
irrespective of education and sex. Second, we find that the low-educated have a higher work
capacity than better educated individuals at younger age groups (55-59, 60-64), whereas the high-
educated have higher work-capacity estimates at older age groups (65-69, 70-74). We obtain
similar relationships using the regression-by-education approach and alternative specifications of
individual health (see Tables A3 and A4 in the Appendix). Although we find differences across
education groups, they are quite small and do not warrant dramatically different conclusions
regarding work capacity.



6   Changes in self-reported morbidity by education level over time

In this section, we further assess the development of socioeconomic differences in health (and by
extension: work capacity) over time. Individuals with higher socioeconomic status (SES) live longer
and the social inequality in survival appears to have increased over time, also in Germany (e.g.,
Siegel et al. 2014). As discussed above, high-SES individuals may also have a higher propensity of
recovering from and surviving severe medical conditions. These factors may contribute to
socioeconomic differences in work capacity and other labor-market outcomes at older ages.

For Germany, data on mortality by SES groups over time are unavailable. We therefore study
trends in self-reported morbidity as used in the preceding sections. As an indicator of
socioeconomic status, we use years of education. Direct information on years of education as
such is not available in the Microcensus. But the data contain the highest secondary school degree
as well as completed tertiary degrees and other occupation-related credentials. Following
previous work (e.g., Jürges et al. 2011), we use this information, together with the number of
years it usually takes to obtain a certain degree, to impute an individual’s number of years in full-
time education.

As a measure of socio-economic status, education has some drawbacks when we study
developments over time or rather across cohorts. As many other countries, Germany has
experienced strong improvements in educational opportunities in the past 50 years, and the

                                                     20
proportion of workers with higher educational degrees increased substantially (Jürges et al.
2011). For instance, among men born in 1940, less than 15% had earned a high school diploma
that would allow university entrance (Abitur). In contrast, among the 1980 cohort, nearly 35% of
men earned this diploma. Obviously the Abitur must have become less selective in terms of socio-
demographic background and/or ability over time, and of course this was the goal of the
educational expansion in many developed countries in the second half of the last century.
However, this implies that the survival rates and health outcomes by education group may not be
comparable over time. As argued by Bound et al (2014), the low-educated in younger cohorts are
possibly more negatively selected than their counterparts in older cohorts. In turn, this may bias
the comparison of life expectancy and health across educational groups over time.

To address this problem, we use years-of-education quartiles rather than school-leaving
certificates or the straight number of years of education to group individuals. This approach
provides consistent rankings along socioeconomic status that can be compared over time. The
education quartile an individual belongs to is inferred from the individual’s fractional rank in the
years-of-education distribution of all individuals of the same age in the respective year. Thus, we
obtain education quartiles that reflect the distribution of education years in a given cohort. As a
consequence, we examine the health development in the same education quartile, although its
composition in terms of degrees or years of schooling may have changed across cohorts (see
Figure 10). For instance, the highest education quartile among the older cohorts consists of
university graduates as well as graduates from intermediary and high schools (academic track).
Among the younger cohorts, there are almost exclusively university and high-school graduates in
the highest quartile.

                                    --- Figure 10 about here ---

Figures 11 and 12 show the evolution of self-reported chronic morbidity (>1 year) by education
quartile, for men and women, respectively. Since the original data are rather noisy, we also
provide 3-year (age) moving averages to obtain smoother estimates of the proportion of sick
individuals at each age. As expected, the probability of illness rises with age. As already discussed
in Section 4, health deteriorates more slowly between age 60 and 65 than before or after.


                                                     21
                               --- Figures 11 and 12 about here ---

More importantly, we find health improvements over time for each education quartile. That is,
the prevalence of self-reported morbidity in more recent years usually lies below the 1989 figures
at each age. Individuals in higher education quartiles have experienced disproportionate health
improvements over time. The reduction in the probability of illness is lowest among those in the
first education quartile. For example, between 1989 and 2009 the prevalence among men falls by
1.8 percentage points in the lowest education group, and by 3.1 percentage points in the highest
education quartile.



7   Summary and Discussion

For half a century, mortality rates in Germany have declined at every age, and Germans today live
longer on average than ever before. This seems to imply that Germans have become healthier,
fitter, and increasingly capable to work in the labor market also in their 50s, 60s, or even beyond,
an assumption that is described by the popular quip “70 is the new 60”. Put differently, the
proportion of older workers who are limited by poor health continues to decrease; and extending
working lives among those who have the capacity to work is arguably the best single measure to
keep the German pay-as-you-go pension system financially afloat.

Obviously, extending working lives to a certain age is only sensible if a sizeable proportion of the
population would be able to work until that age. However, how many German workers could
actually work until 67, 70, or even 74 is an open question, which to our knowledge has not been
answered yet for Germany. The purpose of this paper was to estimate the work capacity of the
older population in Germany, i.e., the proportion of elders who could still work in the labor market
because they are not limited by poor health. For instance, we estimated the proportion of elders
today who could still work by asking how many people in the past – who had the same health
level (measured by the age-specific mortality rate) but who did not face the same early retirement
incentives – were working. Our results show that older workers could work more than 6 years
longer on average and more than two thirds of men could work until their 70th birthday.


                                                    22
As an alternative approach, we used contemporary data and looked at the labor supply of
individuals in their early 50s, who might have health problems that limit their ability to work but
whose only early retirement option are disability pensions. Using the effect of poor health on
labor force participation in this group, we simulated labor force participation in older age groups.
This yields a counterfactual employment rate that would prevail if health deteriorates with age
as it actually does but under less generous retirement incentives. Here, we found even larger
capacity to work among the older population. According to our calculations, more than 85% of
men and nearly 70% of women could still work until they turn 70.

To summarize, independent of the method used, we get large estimates for the capacity to work
beyond the current normal retirement age. A fairly safe bet would be that today, if individuals
were retiring exclusively for health reasons, more than half of the population could work until age
70. Of course, increasing labor force participation thus far may seem unrealistic given that less
than 5% of individuals of that age are working today. There are numerous reasons for retiring
early, and poor health is certainly one of them, but the point we make in this paper is that health
is probably not the main reason and the recent debate in Germany in which health is cited as an
important reason to reduce retirement ages is misguided.

This leads us to stress an important point. We aimed at estimating the strength of the effect of
poor health on retirement and wanted to know how many could work if they wanted to. Health,
however, is not the only determinant of retirement. The large uptake of the new early retirement
option at age 63 among healthy workers in Germany shows that the appreciation of leisure is at
least an equally strong determinant of retirement as health.

Our analysis of work capacity and health is first and foremost descriptive. Turning to a normative
view, we are not saying that everyone who can also should work until age 70. If worker’s valuation
of leisure increases as they become older, there is no economic reason to constrain their desire
to retire as early or as late as they see fit as long as workers and their employers are willing to
bear the financial implications. Theoretically, the German pension system already allows working
past the “normal” retirement age, with a generous six percent increase in pension benefits per
additional year worked, but very few workers make use of this option. Whether this is due to
preferences for leisure, due to employer discrimination, or simply because it is the norm to retire
                                                   23
as soon as one becomes eligible for an old-age pension, is a topic for future work. In light of the
results of the analysis in this paper, it is likely not due to poor health.




                                                       24
References

Blanchflower, D. G., & Oswald, A. J. (2008). Is well-being U-shaped over the life cycle?. Social
Science & Medicine, 66(8), 1733-1749.

Bound, J., Geronimus, A. T., Rodriguez, J. M., & Waidmann, T. (2014). The implications of
differential trends in mortality for social security policy. Michigan Retirement Research.

Bound, J., Schoenbaum, M., Stinebrickner, T. R., & Waidmann, T. (1999). The dynamic effects of
health on the labor force transitions of older workers. Labour Economics, 6(2), 179-202.

Börsch-Supan, A. & H. Jürges (2012): Disability, Pension Reform, and Early Retirement in
Germany. Ch. 6 in Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Historical Trends
in Mortality and Health, Employment, and Disability Insurance Participation and Reforms, David
A. Wise, editor (p. 277 - 300), University of Chicago Press

Börsch-Supan, Axel; Coppola, Michela; Rausch, Johannes (2014): Die Rente mit 63: Wer sind die
Begünstigten? Was sind die Auswirkungen auf die Gesetzliche Rentenversicherung? MEA-
Discussion Paper 17-2014, forthcoming in Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik.

Börsch-Supan, Axel; Benedikt Alt and Tabea Bucher-Koenen (2015): Early retirement for the
underpriviledged? Using the record-linked SHARE-RV data to evaluate the most recent German
pension reform. In Axel Börsch-Supan, Thorsten Kneip, Howard Litwin, Michał Myck and
Guglielmo Weber: SHARE: A European policy device for inclusive ageing societies, De Gruyter.

Cutler, D.M., Meara, E., & Richards-Shubik, S. (2012). Health and work capacity of older adults:
estimates and implications for social security policy. mimeo.

Glied, S., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2008). Technological innovation and inequality in health.
Demography, 45(3), 741–761.

Goldman, D. P., & Smith, J. P. (2002). Can patient self-management help explain the SES health
gradient? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(16), 10929–10934.

Groot, W. (2000). Adaptation and scale of reference bias in self-assessments of quality of life.
Journal of health economics, 19(3), 403-420.

Human Mortality Database. University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck Institute for
Demographic Research (Germany). Available at www.mortality.org.

Idler, E. L., & Benyamini, Y. (1997). Self-rated health and mortality: a review of twenty-seven
community studies. Journal of health and social behavior, 38, 21-37.

                                                  25
Jürges, H. (2007). True health vs response styles: exploring cross-country differences in self-
reported health. Health economics, 16(2), 163-178.

Jürges, H. (2008). 'Self-assessed health, reference levels and mortality', Applied Economics 40 (5),
569-582.

Jürges, H., Reinhold, S., Salm, M. (2011): Does schooling affect health behavior? Evidence from
the educational expansion in Western Germany. Economics of Education Review 30 (2011) 862–
872

Jürges, H., Thiel,L., Bucher-Koenen, T. Rausch, J. Schuth, M. and Boersch-Supan, A. (2015): Health,
Financial Incentives, and Early Retirement: Micro-Simulation Evidence for Germany. Ch. X in in
David A. Wise, editor, Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the World: Disability
Insurance Programs and Retirement. University of Chicago Press.

Kemptner, D., Jürges, H., Reinhold, S. (2011): Changes in compulsory schooling and the causal
effect of education on health: Evidence from Germany. Journal of Health Economics 30 (2011)
340–354.

Lochner, L. (2011). Nonproduction benefits of education: Crime, health, and good citizenship. In
E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin and L. Wößmann (Ed.), Handbook of the Economics of Education (pp.
183–282). North-Holland: Amsterdam.

Mackenbach, J. P., Stirbu, I., Roskam, A.-J. R., Schaap, M. M., Menvielle, G., Leinsalu, M., & Kunst,
A. E. (2008). Socioeconomic inequalities in health in 22 European countries. New England Journal
of Medicine, 358(23), 2468-2481.

Milligan, Kevin S. and David A. Wise (2012a). “Health and Work at Older Ages: Using Mortality to
Assess the Capacity to Work Across Countries,” NBER Working Paper 18229.

Milligan, Kevin S. and David A. Wise (2012b). “Introduction and Summary,” in Social Security
Programs and Retirement Around the World: Historical Trends in Mortality and Health,
Employment, and Disability Insurance Participation and Reforms, David A Wise, ed. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Minnesota Population Center (2011) Integrated public use microdata series, international:
Version 6.1 [machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota

Poterba, J. M., Venti, S. F., & Wise, D. A. (2013). Health, education, and the post-retirement
evolution of household assets (No. w18695). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Siegel, M., Vogt, V., & Sundmacher, L. (2014). From a conservative to a liberal welfare state:
Decomposing changes in income-related health inequalities in Germany, 1994–2011. Social
Science & Medicine, 108, 10-19.

                                                     26
Trachte, F., Sperlich, S., & Geyer, S. (2014). Compression or expansion of morbidity? Development
of health among the older population. Zeitschrift für Gerontologie und Geriatrie, 1-8.




                                                  27
Tables and Figures


                                                 Men                                                                      Women
                 .05




                                                                                           .05
                 .03




                                                                                           .03
   Mortality rate (log scale)




                                                                             Mortality rate (log scale)
                       .02




                                                                                                 .02
    .01




                                                                              .01
                 .005




                                                                                           .005




                                1960   1970   1980      1990   2000   2010                                1960    1970   1980   1990   2000   2010
                                                     Year                                                                    Year


                                                         55-59               60-64                                         65-69


Figure 1: Mortality rates at older ages, West Germany, 1960 to 2011 (Source: Human Mortality
Database)




                                                                                                                 28
Figure 2: Morbidity rates at older ages, Germany 1989-2009 (Source: Own computations from
Microcensus.)




                                                29
                                     Men                                                         Women
          1




                                                                       1
          .8




                                                                       .8
               .6




                                                                            .6
     Proportion




                                                                  Proportion
   .4




                                                                .4
          .2




                                                                       .2
          0




                                                                       0




                    1960   1970   1980     1990   2000   2010                    1960    1970   1980     1990   2000   2010
                                         Year                                                          Year


                                             55-59                 60-64                           65+


Figure 3: Labor force participation rates at older ages, Germany 1960 to 2013 (Source:
Microcensus)




                                                                                        30
Figure 4: Employment vs. mortality, 2005-2009 vs. 1970




                                         31
Figure 5: Estimated additional employment capacity by year of comparisons




                                         32
Figure 6: Self-reported illness vs. employment, 2009 vs. 1989.




                                           33
              70
  Health index percentile
       50     40   60




                            50   55   60          65           70   75
                                            Age

                                      Men              Women



Figure 7: Average health-index percentile by age and sex.




                                                   34
                                 Men                                          Women
       100




                                                            100
                6.9
       80




                                                            80
                                                                     4.4

                          50.1
          60




                                                               60
   Percent




                                                        Percent
                                       83.7                                 48.2
                                              87.1
               84.7
       40




                                                            40
                                                                    69.5            67.7    66.5
       20




                                                            20
                          40.3

                                                                            23.7


                                       5.4
                                               1.1                                   2.1     1.4
       0




                                                            0


               55-59     60-64     65-69      70-74                 55-59   60-64   65-69   70-74


                       Share working                  Estimated additional working capacity


Figure 8: Share of respondents working and additional work capacity, by sex and age.




                                                        35
                                                                       Men
           0 20 40 60 80 100
                                                                               6.2
                                8.0
                Percent



                                                                                       47.5
                                           52.7
                                                                                                    87.2    92.4
                                                       80.9   83.5             89.9
                               77.3
                                                                                       47.8
                                           32.8
                                                       3.7     1.1                                   7.5     1.1
                               55-59      60-64       65-69   70-74           55-59    60-64        65-69   70-74
                                            Low education                                High education



                                                                      Women
           0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                               4.3
                Percent




                                4.4
                                                                                       47.5
                                           48.7                                                     75.6
                                                       63.6   64.0             75.0                         73.8
                               62.3
                                                                                       31.0
                                           17.9
                                                       2.2     1.6                                   1.9     0.9
                               55-59      60-64       65-69   70-74           55-59    60-64        65-69   70-74
                                            Low education                                High education



                                       Share working                  Estimated additional working capacity


Figure 9: Work capacity by education (single regression).




                                                                        36
                                       Men                                                       Women
                100                                                         100




                 75                                                          75
      Percent




                                                                  Percent
                 50                                                          50




                 25                                                          25




                  0                                                           0
                      1970    1980      1990     2000      2010                   1970    1980      1990     2000      2010
                         Year the individual attained age 50                         Year the individual attained age 50


                              No degree                                     Basic-track secondary
                              Intermediate-track secondary                  Academic-track secondary/tertiary




Figure 10: Distribution of years of education completed by cohort (by year cohort attained age
50)




                                                                                   37
                      1st education quartile                         2nd education quartile
          .25




                                                         .25
          .2




                                                         .2
          .15




                                                         .15
          .1




                                                         .1
          .05




                                                         .05

                                                                                                        1989
                                                                                                        1999
          0




                                                         0




                50   55     60         65      70   75         50   55     60         65      70   75
                                 Age                                            Age
                                                                                                        2009
                      3rd education quartile                         4th education quartile             MA(3) 1989
          .25




                                                         .25




                                                                                                        MA(3) 1999
                                                                                                        MA(3) 2009
          .2




                                                         .2
          .15




                                                         .15
          .1




                                                         .1
          .05




                                                         .05
          0




                                                         0




                50   55     60         65      70   75         50   55     60         65      70   75
                                 Age                                            Age




Figure 11: Evolution of self-reported chronic illness (>1 year) by education quartile, men.




                                                                                38
          .25         1st education quartile                         2nd education quartile




                                                         .25
          .2




                                                         .2
          .15




                                                         .15
          .1




                                                         .1
          .05




                                                         .05
                                                                                                        1989
                                                                                                        1999
          0




                                                         0
                50   55     60         65      70   75         50   55     60         65      70   75
                                 Age                                            Age
                                                                                                        2009
                      3rd education quartile                         4th education quartile             MA(3) 1989
          .25




                                                         .25


                                                                                                        MA(3) 1999
                                                                                                        MA(3) 2009
          .2




                                                         .2
          .15




                                                         .15
          .1




                                                         .1
          .05




                                                         .05
          0




                                                         0




                50   55     60         65      70   75         50   55     60         65      70   75
                                 Age                                            Age




Figure 12: Evolution of self-reported chronic illness (>1 year) by education quartile, women.




                                                                                39
Table 1: Additional employment capacity in 2005-2009 using 1970 employment mortality relationship.

 Age               Mortality rate in     Employment rate       Employment rate          Additional
                   2005-2009             in 2005-2009          in 1970 at same          employment
                                                               mortality rate           capacity
 55                0.70%                 79.5%                 91.1%                    11.6%
 56                0.76%                 77.3%                 90.7%                    13.5%
 57                0.81%                 75.6%                 90.0%                    14.5%
 58                0.91%                 71.1%                 89.4%                    18.3%
 59                0.97%                 67.5%                 89.2%                    21.6%
 60                1.06%                 57.4%                 88.4%                    31.1%
 61                1.15%                 50.5%                 87.5%                    37.1%
 62                1.25%                 44.0%                 86.2%                    42.2%
 63                1.34%                 31.3%                 85.5%                    54.2%
 64                1.45%                 23.5%                 84.1%                    60.6%
 65                1.59%                 13.1%                 82.3%                    69.2%
 66                1.72%                 10.9%                 80.8%                    69.9%
 67                1.86%                 9.2%                  78.6%                    69.4%
 68                2.04%                 7.6%                  75.3%                    67.7%
 69                2.24%                 6.3%                  71.8%                    65.5%
 Total years                             6.2                                            6.5



Table 2: Additional employment capacity in 2005-2009 by comparison year and age group

 Age group               Mortality rate in       Employment rate         Employment rate        Additional work
                         2005-2009               in 2005-2009            in comparison year     capacity
                                                                         at same mortality
                                                                         rate
                                              2005-2009 vs. 1989-1995
 55-59                   0.83%                  74.2%                 84.2%                     10.0%
 60-64                   1.25%                  41.3%                 63.0%                     21.7%
 65-69                   1.89%                  9.4%                  28.7%                     19.3%
                                              2005-2009 vs. 1976-1980
 55-59                   0.83%                  74.2%                 91.9%                     17.7%
 60-64                   1.25%                  41.3%                 85.2%                     43.9%
 65-69                   1.89%                  9.4%                  65.3%                     55.9%
                                                2005-2009 vs. 1970
 55-59                   0.83%                  74.2%                 90.1%                     15.9%
 60-64                   1.25%                  41.3%                 86.4%                     45.0%
 65-69                   1.89%                  9.4%                  77.8%                     68.3%




                                                              40
Table 3: SHARE Summary statistics, men.

 Variable                      Age group
                               50-54       55-59        60-64   65-69   70-74
 Employed                      0.93        0.85         0.40    0.05    0.01
 SRH Excellent                 0.12        0.06         0.05    0.05    0.03
 SRH Very good                 0.31        0.22         0.19    0.14    0.11
 SRH Good                      0.33        0.40         0.41    0.45    0.45
 SRH Fair                      0.20        0.24         0.27    0.28    0.33
 SRH Good                      0.05        0.07         0.08    0.08    0.07
 1 physical limitation         0.14        0.18         0.19    0.18    0.25
 >1 physical limitation        0.10        0.17         0.22    0.27    0.29
 Any ADL limitations           0.03        0.07         0.08    0.10    0.12
 Any IADL limitations          0.03        0.03         0.04    0.05    0.05
 Euro-D depression score       1.39        1.42         1.53    1.42    1.57
 Heart disease                 0.06        0.09         0.12    0.14    0.20
 Lung disease                  0.04        0.04         0.06    0.07    0.06
 Stroke                        0.01        0.03         0.04    0.05    0.05
 Psychiatric disorder          0.17        0.17         0.12    0.11    0.11
 Cancer                        0.02        0.03         0.04    0.06    0.06
 Hypertension                  0.21        0.34         0.37    0.41    0.49
 Arthritis                     0.06        0.09         0.09    0.10    0.11
 Diabetes                      0.08        0.10         0.11    0.14    0.15
 Back pain                     0.45        0.51         0.52    0.52    0.55
 Underweight                   0.00        0.00         0.00    0.00    0.00
 Overweight                    0.52        0.50         0.51    0.53    0.52
 Obese                         0.16        0.19         0.19    0.19    0.18
 Current smoker                0.34        0.30         0.27    0.19    0.11
 Former smoker                 0.31        0.37         0.38    0.42    0.42
 High education                0.63        0.59         0.51    0.45    0.41
 Married                       0.77        0.84         0.83    0.85    0.89
 N                             399         484          580     646     448




                                                   41
Table 4: SHARE Summary statistics, women.

 Variable                        Age group
                                 50-54       55-59        60-64   65-69   70-74
 Employed                        0.78        0.70         0.24    0.02    0.01
 SRH Excellent                   0.10        0.07         0.04    0.03    0.02
 SRH Very good                   0.29        0.21         0.15    0.13    0.08
 SRH Good                        0.42        0.43         0.47    0.44    0.45
 SRH Fair                        0.17        0.25         0.27    0.32    0.36
 SRH Good                        0.03        0.05         0.07    0.08    0.09
 1 physical limitation           0.17        0.17         0.20    0.19    0.20
 >1 physical limitation          0.14        0.26         0.30    0.41    0.47
 Any ADL limitations             0.02        0.08         0.10    0.13    0.16
 Any IADL limitations            0.02        0.05         0.04    0.07    0.06
 Euro-D depression score         2.01        2.21         2.15    2.38    2.34
 Heart disease                   0.02        0.03         0.06    0.09    0.10
 Lung disease                    0.02        0.05         0.06    0.06    0.06
 Stroke                          0.01        0.02         0.02    0.02    0.04
 Psychiatric disorder            0.24        0.23         0.24    0.20    0.14
 Cancer                          0.04        0.06         0.06    0.06    0.08
 Hypertension                    0.20        0.30         0.39    0.44    0.50
 Arthritis                       0.07        0.15         0.14    0.18    0.16
 Diabetes                        0.03        0.07         0.09    0.15    0.17
 Back pain                       0.50        0.58         0.55    0.58    0.65
 Underweight                     0.01        0.01         0.01    0.01    0.01
 Overweight                      0.31        0.35         0.42    0.40    0.44
 Obese                           0.15        0.17         0.17    0.21    0.21
 Current smoker                  0.21        0.20         0.15    0.09    0.07
 Former smoker                   0.20        0.22         0.20    0.14    0.13
 High education                  0.62        0.57         0.44    0.34    0.25
 Married                         0.79        0.78         0.81    0.75    0.69
 N                               526         640          632     631     421




                                                     42
      Table 5: First principal component index of health based on SHARE Germany.

Health measure                                  Wave 1        Wave 2         Wave 4
Difficulty walking several blocks               0.29          0.27           0.28
Difficulty lift/carry                           0.24          0.30           0.31
Difficulty push/pull                            0.26          0.29           0.32
Difficulty with an ADL                          0.28          0.28           0.29
Difficulty climbing stairs                      0.30          0.30           0.30
Difficulty stoop/kneel/crouch                   0.30          0.30           0.28
Difficulty getting up from chair                0.29          0.30           0.28
Self-reported health fair or poor               0.30          0.28           0.28
Difficulty reach/extend arms up                 0.26          0.25           0.26
Ever experience arthritis                       0.16          0.15           0.19
Difficulty sitting two hours                    0.22          0.23           0.18
Difficulty pick up a coin                       0.14          0.18           0.17
Back problems                                   0.20          0.18           0.16
Ever experience heart problems                  0.13          0.13           0.11
Hospital stay                                   0.15          0.16           0.14
Doctor visit                                    0.10          0.09           0.07
Ever experience psychological problem           0.11          0.09           0.11
Ever experience stroke                          0.13          0.13           0.12
Ever experience high blood pressure             0.15          0.12           0.10
Ever experience lung disease                    0.10          0.07           0.07
Ever experience diabetes                        0.11          0.13           0.12
BMI at beginning of observation period          0.10          0.08           0.10
Nursing home stay                               0.11          0.08           0.07
Ever experience cancer                          0.07          0.07           0.09
N                                               2,966         2,478          1,487




                                                        43
                              Table 6: Employment regressions, PVW health index.

                                       Men 50-54                               Women 50-54
 Variable                   Coefficient          Std. error           Coefficient        Std. error
  PVW index               0.003                 0.001***           0.003              0.001***
  High education          0.062                 0.026**            0.099              0.037***
  Married                 0.008                 0.028              -0.117             0.044***
  Wave 2                  -0.011                0.025              -0.050             0.037
  Wave 4                  0.035                 0.108              -0.068             0.130
  Constant                0.706                 0.042***           0.657              0.061***
  N                       399                                      526
Significance levels: * p<0.1; **p <0.05; *** p<0.01




                                                              44
    Table 7: Simulations of work capacity, PVW health index.

Age group          # Obs             Actual             Predicted   Estimated work
                                   proportion          proportion       capacity
                                    working              working
                                        Men
  55-59             484               84.7%                91.6%        6.9%
  60-64             580               40.3%                90.4%        50.1%
  65-69             646                5.4%                89.1%        83.7%
  70-74             448                1.1%                88.2%        87.1%
                                      Women
  55-59             640               69.5%                 73.9%       4.4%
  60-64             632               23.7%                071.9%       48.2%
  65-69             631                2.1%                 69.8%       67.7%
  70-74             421                1.4%                 67.9%       66.5%




                                                      45
Appendix

Table A1: Simulations of work capacity, alternative health measures.

                            All health variables models                      SAH index models
 Age       # Obs       Actual       Predicted      Estimated        Actual      Predicted     Estimated
 group               proportion    proportion         work        proportion   proportion       work
                      working        working        capacity       working       working       capacity
                                                    Men
 55-59      484        0.847          0.927          0.080             0.847     0.910         0.063
 60-64      580        0.403          0.924          0.520             0.403     0.893         0.489
 65-69      646        0.054          0.917          0.863             0.054     0.882         0.828
 70-74      448        0.011          0.918          0.907             0.011     0.864         0.853
                                                   Women
 55-59      640        0.695          0.728          0.032             0.695     0.740         0.045
 60-64      632        0.237          0.701          0.464             0.237     0.720         0.483
 65-69      631        0.021          0.691          0.670             0.021     0.706         0.686
 70-74      421        0.014          0.664          0.649             0.014     0.688         0.674




                                                           46
Table A2: Work capacity by education, PVW health index.
 Education                      Men                                          Women
                   Actual     Predicted    Estimated             Actual      Predicted   Estimated
                proportion proportion         work             proportion   proportion      work
                  working      working      capacity            working       working     capacity
 Panel A: Single regression
                                             Age 55-59
 Low            0.773        0.853         0.080               0.623        0.668        0.044
 High           0.899        0.960         0.062               0.750        0.793        0.043
                                             Age 60-64
 Low            0.328        0.855         0.527               0.179        0.666        0.487
 High           0.478        0.953         0.475               0.310        0.785        0.475
                                             Age 65-69
 Low            0.037        0.845         0.809               0.022        0.658        0.636
 High           0.075        0.947         0.872               0.019        0.774        0.756
                                             Age 70-74
 Low            0.011        0.846         0.835               0.016        0.656        0.640
 High           0.011        0.934         0.924               0.009        0.747        0.738

 Panel B: Regression by education
                                             Age 55-59
 Low           0.773         0.910         0.138               0.623        0.695        0.072
 High          0.899         0.951         0.052               0.750        0.762        0.012
                                             Age 60-64
 Low           0.328         0.903         0.575               0.179        0.699        0.520
 High          0.478         0.947         0.469               0.310        0.745        0.435
                                             Age 65-69
 Low           0.037         0.890         0.853               0.022        0.695        0.673
 High          0.075         0.941         0.865               0.019        0.729        0.710
                                             Age 70-74
 Low           0.011         0.897         0.885               0.016        0.698        0.682
 High          0.011         0.935         0.924               0.009        0.709        0.699




                                                          47
Table A3: Work capacity by education, all health variables models.
 Education                        Men                                           Women
                    Actual      Predicted      Estimated            Actual     Predicted   Estimated
                  proportion   proportion         work           proportion   proportion     work
                   working       working        capacity           working      working     capacity
 Panel A: Single regression
                                                 Age 55-59
 Low             0.773         0.872           0.099             0.623        0.660        0.037
 High            0.899         0.966           0.067             0.750        0.779        0.029
                                                 Age 60-64
 Low             0.328         0.876           0.548             0.179        0.649        0.470
 High            0.478         0.971           0.493             0.310        0.766        0.457
                                                 Age 65-69
 Low             0.037         0.876           0.840             0.022        0.654        0.632
 High            0.075         0.966           0.891             0.019        0.762        0.743
                                                 Age 70-74
 Low             0.011         0.889           0.878             0.016        0.652        0.637
 High            0.011         0.959           0.948             0.009        0.697        0.688

 Panel B: Regression by education
                                                Age 55-59
 Low            0.773          0.922          0.149              0.623        0.668        0.044
 High           0.899          0.945          0.046              0.750        0.763        0.013
                                                Age 60-64
 Low            0.328          0.928          0.601              0.179        0.650        0.470
 High           0.478          0.941          0.463              0.310        0.754        0.444
                                                Age 65-69
 Low            0.037          0.919          0.882              0.022        0.683        0.661
 High           0.075          0.938          0.863              0.019        0.732        0.713
                                                Age 70-74
 Low            0.011          0.938          0.927              0.016        0.640        0.624
 High           0.011          0.943          0.932              0.009        0.718        0.709




                                                            48
Table A4: Work capacity by education, SAH index.
 Education                      Men                                     Women
                  Actual      Predicted    Estimated        Actual      Predicted   Estimated
               proportion proportion          work        proportion   proportion     work
                working        working      capacity       working       working     capacity
 Panel A: Single regression
                                             Age 55-59
 Low           0.773         0.844         0.072          0.623        0.671        0.048
 High          0.899         0.955         0.057          0.750        0.793        0.043
                                             Age 60-64
 Low           0.328         0.844         0.517          0.179        0.672        0.492
 High          0.478         0.940         0.463          0.310        0.781        0.472
                                             Age 65-69
 Low           0.037         0.838         0.801          0.022        0.670        0.648
 High          0.075         0.935         0.860          0.019        0.778        0.759
                                             Age 70-74
 Low           0.011         0.829         0.818          0.016        0.666        0.650
 High          0.011         0.914         0.903          0.009        0.753        0.743

 Panel B: Regression by education
                                            Age 55-59
 Low          0.773         0.895         0.123           0.623        0.694        0.070
 High         0.899         0.952         0.053           0.750        0.762        0.012
                                            Age 60-64
 Low          0.328         0.881         0.553           0.179        0.703        0.523
 High         0.478         0.946         0.468           0.310        0.742        0.433
                                            Age 65-69
 Low          0.037         0.871         0.835           0.022        0.706        0.685
 High         0.075         0.942         0.866           0.019        0.735        0.716
                                            Age 70-74
 Low          0.011         0.867         0.856           0.016        0.711        0.695
 High         0.011         0.932         0.921           0.009        0.713        0.703




                                                         49
