NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CITY TAXES AND PROPERTY TAX BASES

Katharine L. Bradbury
Helen F. Ladd

Working Paper No. 2197

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1987

The authors thank lihong Cho for research assistance and
John Yinger and Lynn Browne for advice and comments. They
are also grateful for helpful suggestions from the participants at the NBER Conference on State and Local Government
Finance (Cambridge, MA, December 12-13, 1986) at which an
earlier version of this paper was presented. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research project in
State and Local Finance. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2197
March 1987

City Taxes and Property Tax Bases

ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the simultaneous relationship between
tax rates and city property tax bases using data for 86 large U.S.
cities in 1967, 1972, 1977, and 1982. We find that a 10 percent
Increase in the city's property tax rate decreases the city's tax
base by about 1.5 percent. In addition, local income taxes and
taxes levied by overlying jurisidictjons (such as county and state
governments) also have negative impacts
on the city's property tax
base. Local sales taxes, in contrast, appear to have little
impact. We conclude that taxes affect local
property values more
than is typically implied by previous studies that have investigated
the impacts of state and local taxes on firms' location decisions.

Katharine L. Bradbury
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

Boston, MA 02106

Helen F. Ladd
Duke University

Durham, NC 27706

7663r
City Taxes arid Property Tax Bases

Katharine L. Bradbury and Helen F. Ladd

The property tax has traditionally been and continues to be the major

revenue source of U.S. cities. Although cities have increasingly turned to
other local revenue sources such as sales and income taxes, they still rely
heavily on the local property tax to finance their local public expenditures.
Despite this, surprisingly little is known about the impact of a city's
property tax rate on its tax base.

Many local public officials apparently believe that property taxes have

significant adverse effects on city economic activity. Witness, for example,
their frequent willingness to grant tax abatements to encourage economic

investment in the city. Applied economists, in contrast, are nearly unanimous
in their skepticism both about the wisdom of such tax breaks and, more
fundamentally, about the magnitude of the adverse behavioral effects of state

and local taxes. Many empirical studies appear to support the contention that
differentials in state and local tax burdens are simply too small to offset
differences in the more basic determinants of firm location such as labor

costs and accessibility to markets. (See surveys by Case, Papke, and
Koenigsberg (1983); Kieschnik (1981); and Wasylemko (1981).)
Recent econometric investigations of the link between state and local

taxes and the location of economic activity fall into two categories. First
are those that focus on particular types of location decisions, typically the
branch plant decision which, one might argue, is the most likely to be

affected by taxes. (See, for example, Carlton (1979), Bartik (1985, 1986),
and Schmenner (1982).) This approach has the advantage of allowing the
researcher to ground the empirical analysis in the microeconomic theory of

firm behavior. The second approach takes a much broader definition of
economic activity such as the level or change in employment or capital

investment either for all industries or certain industrial sectors. (See for
example, Papke (1986) who focuses on investment and Bradbury, Downs, and Small

(1982) who focus on changes in employment.) These more aggregate variables
are harder to model precisely because they reflect a variety of economic
decisions including, for example, the decision to expand, to shut down, to set
up a new branch plant, or to start a new firm.
Even if economists better understood the links between local taxes and the
location and expansion decisions of firms, they would still not be able to
answer the central question of this study, namely, what impact do local

property taxes have on the size of a city's property tax base? The difficulty
arises because the city tax base includes residential as well as business
property and because the market value of such property reflects not only the
intensity of economic development (the quantity of capital) but also location
rents, that is, the prices that firms and households are willing to pay to

invest in the central city rather than elsewhere. High property taxes may
reduce the size of the tax base either by reducing the level of business or
residential economic activity in the city or by being capitalized into lower

property values, or by some combination of both. Whatever the mechanism, city
officials and economists ought to care about the responsiveness of the city's

property tax base to the property tax rate. To the extent that the current
tax rate reduces the size of the base, the additional tax rate needed to
finance a given increase in public expenditures will be higher.
Other state and local taxes such as income or sales taxes may also affect
local property values despite their initial incidence on non—property factors

of production or on other economic transactions. Hence, a secondary goal of
this paper is to provide quantitative estimates of the effects of other state

—2—

and local taxes on the size of a city's property tax base. This aspect of the
study can be viewed as the first step in a larger and more ambitious study
that would examine the effects of all major city taxes on each of the city's
tax bases.

I. The Data and the Role of the Property Tax
Our empirical work focuses on the relationship between city property taxes
and the market value of potentially taxable property in U.S. central cities.
City governments, however, are often not alone in having the power to levy

property taxes on the property located within city boundaries. In many
metropolitan areas, independent school districts, county governments, and
special districts are also authorized to tax city property if it falls within

their jurisdictional boundaries. Moreover, the economic activity generated by
the city's property may be subject to state or local sales and income taxes.
Regardless of whether they apply specifically to property or are levied by
overlying governments, all of these taxes (and the corresponding public
services they finance) could affect the size of a city's tax base. Hence, all
must be taken into account.

Our primary perspective, however, is the city government itself. As an
independent decision—making entity, its decisions about local taxes can be

modeled more easily than could those of an aggregated set of governmental

units. Hence, our goal is to measure the impact of city property taxes on
city property tax bases, controlling for all other taxes that may affect the
amount of taxable property in the city.

The basic data are for 86 U.s. central cities for four years —— 1967,

1972, 1977, and 1982. The 86 comprise all those American cities with
population over 300,000 in 1970 or 1980 plus all the central cities of the 50

largest SMSAs in either 1970 or 1980. Thus, the analysis includes all major

—3—

central cities in the United States. The combined 1980 population of the 86
cities constitutes 21 percent of the 1980 U.S. population and 94 percent of
the U.S. population in central cities containing 50,000 or more people.
Property taxes are less important for city governments than for such other
types of local governments as counties and school districts, but they still
accounted for over half of the 1982 tax revenues of the average city in our

sample. Table 1, which provides information for the 79 cities with complete
revenue data for all four years, shows that reliance on the property tax
varies across cities of different sizes and across regions and that it

declined over time in all groups. Comparing cities grouped by size, cities
with population over 1 million relied least heavily on the property tax in
1967 and experienced the greatest decline in dependence in the succeeding 15

years. Of the six cities in this group, only Houston derived more than half
of its tax revenue from the property tax by 1982.
Cities in the Northeast began the period relying more heavily on the

property tax than cities in other parts of the country. Even in 1982, the
five New England cities still received 98—99 percent of their tax revenue from

the property tax. In contrast, cities in other parts of the country began the
period with more access to alternative taxes and increased their use of such

taxes during the period. Nationwide by 1982, 18 of the 86 cities derived some
revenue from local income or payroll taxes and all but nine cities relied on
general or selectives sales taxes to some degree.
Effective property tax rates, like dependence on the property tax, also
vary substantially across cities and generally declined over the 15—year

period. We define an effective tax rate as
t =

T/B,

where T is the city's total revenues from the property tax, and B is the

market value of all potentially taxable property in the city. The tax base in

—4—

Table 1
Property Taxes as Percent of All City Tax Revenues

Cities by Group

All

Number
Of Cities

1967

1972

1977

1982

79

69%

62%

59%

53%

6

95
67
65

91

89

64

63
52
59
49

91
60
46
52
40

83
46
59
48

82
40
54
40

Population Size:

Less than 100,000
100,000 — 250,000
250,000 — 500,000
500,000 — 1,000,000
Greater than 1,000,000

19

30
18
6

70
63

57
61
53

Region:

Northeast
North Central
South
West

16
15

28
20

87
63
69
58

84
53
61

51

Note: Data are averages for the 79 cities in the sample that had complete
revenue data for all four years.

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Governments and City
Government Finances.

this measure is intended to be independent of how each city defines its tax
base in practice and to include all property other than that universally

exempt from the property tax such as churches and government buildings. Data
on property tax revenues are readily available from the Census of Governments,
but the market value of each city's potential tax base had to be estimated
from data on assessed values and assessment/sales ratios.1
To estimate tax bases, information from the Census of Governments was

supplemented with data gathered directly from cities. Nonetheless, some
missing values remain, especially for the earlier years. As a result,
information on tax bases is available for only 56 of the 86 cities for all
four years, but a total of about 280 city—year observations are available for
the pooled regression analysis reported below.

Table 2 shows the level and variation in effective tax rates for the 56

cities with complete information. The average rate decreased from 0.8 percent
in 1967 to 0.6 percent in 1982. (These rates may appear low, but they are

averages of city tax rates alone. The inclusion of property taxes levied by
overlying governments would raise the rates substantially in some cases.) The
table shows that tax rates are generally highest for the smallest and the

largest cities in the sample. This reflects heavy dependence on the property
tax relative to other revenue sources in the small cities and heavy overall
taxation in the large cities.

Among regions, rates in northeastern cities, especially those in New

England, are strikingly higher than those elsewhere. For the New England
cities, the high rates reflect a combination of heavy dependence on the
property tax and a concentration of revenue—raising responsibility (including

for schools and counties) at the municipal government level. In the West,
rates were low in 1967 and declined by one—half, on average, over the ensuing

fifteen years. This largely reflects the 1978 passage of Proposition 13,

—5—

Table 2
Average Effective Property Tax Rates
(percent)

Cities by Group

All

Number
Of Cities

1967

1972

1977

1982

56

.83%

.85%

.80%

.63%

0

n.a.

n.a.
.91
.66
1.00
1.00

n.a.

n.a.

.85
.57

1.01
1.05

.80
.44
.68
.85

1.85

1.80

2.07

1.62

.54
.94

.63
.93
.46

.57
.78
.39

.47

Population Size:

Less than 100,000
100,000 — 250,000
250,000 — 500,000
500,000 — 1,000,000
Greater than 1,000,000

13
22
16
5

.95
.68
.92
.94

Region:

Northeast
North Central
South
West

8
15
18
15

.45

.66
.22

Notes: Averages shown for cities with data available in all four years.
Thirty of the 86 cities did not have complete property data for all four
years. The missing cities include all 11 in the sample with population under
100,000. Also left out of this table are 7 with population 100,000—250,000, 9
with population 250,000—500,000, and 2 and 1 in the two largest population
categories. Nine of the cities not reported in this table were located in the
Northeast, 12 in the South, and 9 in the West.
These effective property tax rates refer to city government property taxes
alone; see text for definition of effective property tax rate and sources.
Economic activity in these cities may also be subject to property taxes
imposed by independent school districts or county governments.

which rolled back local property taxes in California and strengthened the tax
limitation movement in other states.

This wide variation in effective tax rates provides a natural experiment
for examining the hypothesis that city tax rates affect the attractiveness of
a city to households and firms and thereby directly influence the size of the

city's potential property tax base. Correspondingly wide variation in city
use of alternative revenue sources and in tax burdens imposed on city
residents by overlying jurisdictions also provide the information needed to
determine the effects of other taxes on city property tax bases.

II. Conceptual Framework
The relationship between the market value of a city's property per capita
(PBASE) and the city's property tax rate (t)

PBASE =

f(t,

is

given by the expression

X)

where X is a vector of exogenous variables, including public service levels,

that influence the size of the tax base. Estimating a relationship of this
form using ordinary least squares would not be a problem if the tax rate were

truly exogenous. This would be the case, for example, if state law mandated a

binding limit on the city's property tax rate. Perusal of the laws affecting
city property taxes, however, suggests that in most cases the property tax

rate, expressed as a fraction of full market value, is not exogenous. While
many cities are subject to tax limitations of some form, only rarely do these

limitations determine the effective tax rate. The clearest exceptions are
California cities in 1982 and Boston in 1982, each of which is subject to a
binding limit expressed in terms of an effective tax rate.2
More commonly, the local property tax rate is determined in part by the

size of the tax base. Consider, for example the following model of city
behavior. City government officials choose a level of expenditures in

—6—

response to the demand of citizen voters for public services. They then levy

sufficient

property taxes to pay for whatever portion of total expenditures

that they are unable to finance from other revenue sources. According to this
model, a higher tax base would lead to a lower tax rate for any given property
tax levy.

Assuming a log—linear specification of the tax base equation, we can
eliminate the resulting simultaneity by substituting the definitional

relationship t = PTAX/PBASE, where PTAX is per capita property tax revenues,
for t in the equation explaining the size of the base. Before the
substitution we have

(1) 1nPBASE=a-i.blnt+clnX+e,
where in denotes natural logarithm and e is a random error term. After
substituting for t and solving for PBASE, the equation becomes

(2) ln PBASE =

a/(l+b)

+ b/(l+b) in PTAX + cI(l+b) in X + e/(l+b).

Thus, treating property tax revenue, rather than the tax rate, as the
explanatory variable removes one source of the simultaneity problem, yet still
makes it possible to solve for b, the elasticity of the base with respect to
the tax rate.

Even per capita tax revenue, however, may not be exogenous. A larger base
means that the same amount of revenues can be raised with a lower tax rate,
reducing the pain of raising taxes and thereby increasing the willingness of

voters to vote for higher taxes. (See later sections of the paper for further
discussion.) This endogeneity leads to the following two—equation model:

(3a) PBASE = g(PTAX, X)

with ag/apTAx < 0

(3b) PTAX = h(PBASE, Z)

with ah/apBAsE > 0

—7—

where Z is a vector of exogenous variables that influence tax revenues. The
key to identifying the crucial coefficient of PTAX in equation 3a is that
there be good identifying variables, that is, that the vector Z include
variables that clearly belong in the revenue equation but not in the base

equation. One distinguishing characteristic of this study is the availability
of such variables.

The Tax Base Equation
The tax base equation includes tax revenues and three sets of exogenous

control variables in addition to year dummies. First are those that emerge
from a simple monocentric model of an urban economy. Second are those that
control for taxes other than municipal property taxes levied on economic

activity generated in the city and third are measures of public services. The
variables and reasons for including them are explained in the subsections that

follow. Table 3 reports their mnemonic variable names, definitions, means,
and standard deviations.

Variables Derived From an Urban Model. The starting point for the tax
base equation is a monocentric model of an urban economy. This strategy of
building on the descriptive implications of an urban model dramatically
simplifies what is in fact an enormously complicated and
not—very—well—understood problem, the behavioral modeling of economic activity

in an urban area.3 The following log—linear specification captures the
essential implications of the standard urban model for the total value of
property (B) per unit of land (LAND) in the portion of the metropolitan area
designated as the central city:

(4) (B/LAND) = f(SMPOP, LAND).
Controlling for the amount of land in the city, more activity in the

—8—

Table 3
Variable Definitions and Means
(L denotes the natural logarithm)

Variable

Definition

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Endogenous Variables
LPBASE

Market value of potential property tax base
per capita in thousands of 1972 dollars.

2.51

.40

LPTAX

Property tax revenues per capita in 1972
dollars.

4.20

.76

8.28

.13

7.10

.69

4.22

1.07

Variables in Both Equations

LPCY

Per capita income of city residents in 1972
dollars.

YR82

Dummy variable that takes on the value 1 for
1982 and 0 otherwise.

YR77

Dummy variable that takes the value 1 for
1977 and 0 otherwise.

YR72

Dummy variable that takes the value 1 for
1972 and 0 otherwise.

Other Variables in the Base Equation

LSMPOP

Population in the city's Standard
Metropolitan Statistical Area — in thousands
(1970, 1972, 1977, 1980)

LLAND

City

KEYCC

Dummy variable that takes the value 1 for
dominant central cities and 0 otherwise.

.70

.46

TRINC

Statutory tax rate for city income, earnings
or payroll tax.

.0035

.0086

TRSAL

Statutory tax rate for city general sales

.0060

.0086

land area in square miles.

tax.

LOVTAX

Overlying tax burden per capita in 1972
dollars.

5.86

.70

LGEMP

Government (all levels) employment per
capita.

2.56

.44

Table 3 —

continued

Variable

Definition

LCRIME

Total crimes (both property and violent
as reported in Uniform Crime Reports)
divided by private sector employees in
the city.

LFIRESER

LMISCSER

Mean

Standard
Deviation

—1.78

.42

Total per capita state and local spending
on fire protection in the city's state in
1972 dollars deflated by FCOST.

2.41

.54

Total per capita state and local spending
in the city's state on schools, health
and hospitals, and sewers and sanitation
in 1972 dollars deflated by MCOST.

5.70

.25

4.74

.59

Other Variables in Tax Eauation

LTSRI

Total service responsibilities per capita
in 1972 dollars.

AVINC

Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if
the city uses a local income, earnings, or
payroll tax and zero otherwise.

.18

.39

AVGSAL

Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if
the city uses a general sales tax and zero
otherwise.

.47

.50

AVSSAL

Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if
the city uses a selective sales tax and
zero otherwise.

.87

.34

ERPROP

Export ratio for the property tax.

.37

.11

ERINC

Export ratio for the local income tax
(0 if the tax is not used).

.073

.18

ERSAL

Export ratio for the general sales tax
(0 if the tax is not used).

.106

.15

MCOST

Cost index for miscellaneous services
(Relative to 1972 average)

102.

23.

PCOST

Cost index for police services
(Relative to 1972 average)

118.

79.

FCOST

Cost index for fire services
(Relative to 1972 average)

120.

52.

LFAID

Federal aid per capita in 1972 dollars.

3.04

1.55

LSTAID

State aid per capita in 1972 dollars.

3.27

1.56

metropolitan area as measured by metropolitan population (SMPOP) leads to a

higher value of property in the city per unit of city land. According to the
monocentric model, this occurs both because larger metropolitan areas have
higher land prices at the center and also because the higher price of land
induces more intensive economic development in the city in the form of
business and residential structures.

More city land, controlling for metropolitan population, is predicted to
reduce the value of property per unit of land; more land means that the city
extends further down the rent and density gradients of the metropolitan area.
Expressing the dependent variable in per capita terms rather than per unit

of land is more natural for the current empirical investigation. Hence, the
dependent variable in equation 4 must be multiplied by the inverse of the
population density (that is, by LAND/POP, where POP is the population of the

city). One approach at this point would be to add density (with a predicted
coefficient of —l in a log—linear specification) to the right hand side of the

equation. The difficulty here is that population density is endogenous in
that it, too, is determined by the exogenous determinants of land prices in

the city, namely SMPOP and LAND. Hence, including population density as an
exogenous variable in the estimating equation would not make sense. Instead,
we specify the reduced form of the model in log—linear form as

(5) in PBASE = a + c1 in SMPOP + c2 in LAND + e
where PBASE is the property tax base per capita and the coefficients c1 and
c2 represent the combined effects of the exogenous variables on the base per

unit of land and on population density. Provided the population density
gradient is less affected by the exogenous variables than are the rent and
business density gradients, a positive sign for SMPOP and a negative sign for

LAND are still predicted.4

—9—

The sample cities, and the metropolitan areas in which they are located,
vary in how well they I it the simple monocentric model. Of most concern is
that some of the central cities in the sample are not the primary centers of

economic activity in their respective SMSAs. Thus, for example, Everett WA,
with its 1982 population of 57,000, has far less claim to being the center of
the Seattle—Everett metropolitan area than does Seattle with 490,000

residents. To help control for such variations, an additional variable
(KEYCC) takes on the value one for those cities that dominate their SMSAs and

zero otherwise. Dominant cities are defined as the central city in SMSAs with
one central city and, somewhat arbitrarily, as those that have 60 percent or
more of either population or employment in SMSAs with two central cities or 50

percent or more in SMSAs with three central cities. Dominant central cities
are predicted to have larger tax bases per capita than do nondominant central
cities because of their positions as centers of urban economic activity.
Per capita income of city residents (PCY) completes the specification of

this part of the equation. This variable is expected to have a positive sign
because higher income increases the demand for housing.5
The property tax rate (t) is simply added to equation 5 in logarithmic

form with a coefficient of b, hypothesized to be negative. A higher property
tax rate is expected to reduce the value of the city's property tax base in
part because the land component of the tax will be capitalized into lower

property values. In addition, the improvements component of the tax is
expected to induce producers to shift away from capital toward labor and to

reduce the attractiveness of the city as a place for investing capital. The
reduced attractiveness of the city may manifest itself either in a change in
land prices or in reduced economic activity or, most likely, in some

combination of both. Following the logic of equation 2, the equation is then
respecified as a function of per capita property tax revenues (PTAX) to yield:

— 10 —

(6) in PBASE = a +

b/(i+b)

in PTAX +

ci/(l+b)

+

c2/(i-i-b)

+

c /(l+b) in PCY + Z c /(1-i-b)
4
i=5 I

in LAND +

c3/(l+b)

in SMPOP

in KEYCC

n

X +
i

e,

where X .. .X
5

n are the other control variables in the tax base equation

discussed in the next two sections.

Nonproperty Tax Variables. Three additionai tax variables control for the

other taxes imposed on economic activity in central cities. Alternative taxes
levied by the city itself are represented in the tax base equation by
statutory city tax rates for income taxes (TRINC) and for general sales taxes

(TRSAL). Close to half the sample cities make no use of local general sales

taxes. In these cities the tax rate is zero.6

Only i8 of the 86 sample

cities had some form of a city income or payroll tax in 1982. Negative signs

are expected on both tax rate variables. A higher income tax rate lowers the
net—of—tax income of city residents, and may induce firms to pay higher wages
than they otherwise would, thereby reducing net profits and discouraging

investment in the city. This is predicted to reduce the demand for property
in the city except to the extent that the higher cost of labor induces firms

to substitute in favor of iand and capital. A higher sales tax rate may
reduce the demand for taxed goods, and, similarly, lead to less investment in
the city.

The tremendous complexity and variation in the division of taxing
responsibilities among city and non—city governments across states makes it
impossible to control separately for each of the non—city taxes Imposed on

city economic activity. Instead, we constructed a single variable (OVTAX),

based on statewide data, as a proxy for the burden of overlying taxes. The
variable is calculated as the average state and local per capita tax burden in
the city's state multiplied by the "non—city" share of taxes in the state, and

— 11 —

is based on the following logic. If the city itself imposed no taxes, all
residents (including residents of the city) could be viewed as being subject

to the average state and local tax burden in the state. But since each city's
major taxes (property, income, and sales) are modeled separately, city taxes

must be removed from the total state and local burden. This is accomplished
by using statewide data to subtract the average per capita taxes collected by
all those jurisdictions in the state that perform the same functions as the

city in question. Thus, for example, in constructing the overlying tax
variable for a city such as San Francisco which has responsibility for county
functions as well as municipal functions and hence has no overlying county,
care is taken to make sure that the calculated overlying burden does not

include county taxes.7 The expected sign of this variable is negative;
higher overlying tax burdens are likely to depress economic activity in the
city.

Measures of Public Services. Public services are an important component
of any study of the effects of state or local taxes. Since public services
are valued and taxes are used to pay for them, failure to control for services

could lead to incorrect estimates of the effects of taxes alone. In
principle, we need to control for all services available to city firms and
households regardless of whether the services are provided by the city

government itself or by some overlying government such as a state or county
government or an independent school district.
Public expenditures typically serve as the standard measure of public
services in studies of tax capitalization (e.g. Oates, 1969), but, as shown by
Rosen and Fullerton (1977), output measures such as educational test scores

are far superior. Hence, we have constructed three public service measures
that are intended to measure public sector outputs rather than simply public

inputs. The first is the number of crimes in the city expressed as a fraction

— 12 —

of the city's total private sector employment (CRIME). Vocal public concern
about crime makes it plausible that the decision to invest in a particular
city might be influenced by the perceived risk of being assaulted or robbed.
Higher crime rates per worker in the city are predicted to lead to lower

property values.8 The second and third variables (FIRESER and MISCSER) are
proxies for fire protection and miscellaneous services (consisting of local
schools, sewers, sanitation, and health and hospitals) constructed from per
capita state and local expenditure data by state deflated by the estimated
costs of providing the respective service or sets of services in each city.
The cost indexes are designed to measure the effects of city—specific
environmental and demographic factors on the costs of providing a given

package of public services and are described in more detail below. To the
extent that the indexes correctly measure the costs per unit of final output,
deflating expenditures by them should lead to reasonable proxies for the level

of services actually available to city residents. We expect both variables to
enter the base equation with positive signs since higher service levels should
increase the size of a city's property tax base, ceteris paribus.

Year Dummies. The final three variables are year dummies (YR82, YR77, and

YR72). These dummies are needed in the pooled regression to control for
cyclical trends in the aggregate economy and for secular trends such as the
fall in transportation costs that tend to decentralize business activity.

The Property Tax Revenue Equation
Derivation of the property tax equation proceeds in two steps. First
comes the derivation of the demand for public services and second comes the

city's choice among revenue sources. This approach is consistent with the
view that the equilibrium amount of property taxes collected depends on

explicit choices by city officials. The basic structure of the estimating
equation follows from the identity
— 13 —

(7) PTAX =

(i=l
II E

— OR) (PTAX/TTAX)
1.

I

where PTAX is property tax revenues,EEis all city operating expenditures
summed over I individual spending categories, OR is nontax exogenous revenues
such as lump sum intergovernmental aid, and TTAX is total revenues from all

local tax sources. For estimation, the variables derived from the two steps
are combined in a logarithmic equation with year dummies. The variables are
summarized in table 3.

Demand for Local Public Expenditures. The literature on local public
expenditures is well developed and needs only brief review here.9 The
typical starting point is that quantity demanded is a function of resident

income, per unit costs, and tax prices. Desired expenditure on the ith
expenditure category (Ei) is the product of costs and quantity demanded.
Hence,

(8) Ei =

CjQ =

f

(Y, Cj, TS),

where Y is the income of the decisive voter, C is per unit cost of the ith
expenditure category, and TS is the decisive voter's share of the local tax

burden. The cost and tax share variables are entered separately because they
have different predicted impacts on total expenditures. Assuming a constant
price elasticity of b1 in the equation for quantity demanded, the coefficient
of the tax share variable in the expenditure equation is predicted to be bi

and consequently negative. The coefficient of the cost variable, however, is
predicted to be (l-fb), which will be positive unless the price elasticity
is larger (in the negative direction) than minus one.

Appropriately measured cost variables would reflect not only the costs of
inputs, but, following the logic of Bradford, Malt and Oates (1969), would
also incorporate the amount of intermediate goods such as police patrols that

— 14 —

are needed to produce a given level of protection from crime. The idea here
is that environmental conditions in the city such as city density and the
incidence of poverty may affect the costs to the city of providing a given
level of the output, such as police protection, ultimately valued by city

residents. To reflect such cost variations, we have included three cost
indices for miscellaneous public services (MCOST), police protection services

(PCOST), and fire protection services (FCOST). The cost indices are derived
from a regression model that estimates the average impact on city expenditures
of each cost factor, controlling for other determinants of city spending such

as resident income and preferences)°
Given the purpose of this study, there is little need to be precise about

the identity of the decisive voter. The goal is simply to capture the
essentials of a basic expenditure model in order to think clearly about which
variables appropriately belong in the tax equation and can serve to identify

the coefficient of the property tax variable in the base equation. In the
estimated equations, per capita income (PCY) serves as a reasonable proxy of
the relevant income measure and is expected to have a positive effect on

taxes. The decisive voter's tax share is inversely proxied with a measure of
property tax exporting, which is also expected to influence the choice among
revenue sources, described in the next subsection of the paper.

As specified so far, desired expenditures are not explicitly dependent on

the size of the property tax base. This primarily reflects the simplicity of
the decisive voter model, particularly in its median voter form, rather than

economic reality. In more realistic models, the tax base or its components

might enter the expenditure equation for a variety of reasons. The value of
residential property, for example, might better proxy residents' permanent
income and, consequently, residents' willingness to pay for public services

than does current income. Or higher—valued property (whether residential or

— 15 —

business) may require greater services in the form of protection from crime.
Or large amounts of business property relative to residential property in a
city may give business interests political power that can be used to convince
public officials to provide more services specifically for business or to keep

expenditures low to stabilize tax rates. Hence, using the simple model
presented in equation 8 to justify excluding the size of the property tax base

as an explanatory variable would be a mistake. Moreover, as discussed below,
the choice among revenue sources (the second stage of the derivation of the
tax equation) provides an additional justification for expecting the property
tax base to positively influence the level of property taxes.
The analysis to this point argues for including in the tax equation
standard determinants of the demand for spending on individual public

services: resident income, a tax share variable, service—specific measures of
costs, and the property tax base. One additional variable related to
expenditures dominates all the others in terms of its relevance to this study,
namely a measure of the services for which each city government in the sample

is responsible. Given the cross—sectional nature of the data set, variation
in service responsibilities is likely to be a primary determinant of the

variation in total expenditure. Stated differently, the number of expenditure
categories over which the summation applies in equation 7 varies substantially
among cities.

The variable measuring the total service responsibilities assigned to each
city (TSRI) indicates the per capita spending net of user charges that would
be required in each city to achieve national average per capita state—local
spending on each of 17 designated services, given the particular allocation of

spending responsibilities in each city's state. Constructed from statewide
rather than city—specific expenditure data, the measure avoids the potential
problem of attributing high service responsibilities to cities who choose to

— 16 —

provide high service levels. The measure varies substantially across cities.
The most obvious variation relates to services such as elementary and
secondary education and municipal hospitals for which a city has either

complete spending responsibility or none. Some cities are also responsible
for services provided by counties elsewhere in their state. Variation across
states in the role of state government also accounts for a substantial portion

of the variation in service responsibilities across states. The greater the
state role in welfare, health, and corrections, the lower, in general, is the
city role.

11

Choice among Revenue Sources. Subtracting nontax exogenous revenues (OR
in equation 7) from total desired expenditures yields the amount of revenue

that must be raised from local tax sources. Nontax revenue is primarily
intergovernmental aid, but in principle, only the aid that is truly

exogenous. As measured, however, some of the per capita federal aid (FAID)
and per capita state aid (STAID) may be matching aid.

How the remaining revenue requirements are allocated among local tax
sources has received much less attention from economists than has the

expenditure decision.12 Consistent with the decisive voter approach, one
might hypothesize the following model of the city decision regarding how much
to rely on local property taxes:

(9) PTAX/TTAX= f(PBASE, Ày, ER)

where PBASE, as before is the per capita property tax base, AV is a vector of
dummy variables indicating the legal availability of alternative local taxes,
and ER is a vector of export ratios for alternative taxes.
The larger is the property tax base per person, the easier it should be

for the city to raise revenue through the property tax. A larger tax base
allows the city to raise a given amount of revenue with a lower tax rate and

— 17 —

thereby to avoid the potentially distorting effects and heavy tax burdens of
high tax rates.
The legal availability of alternative revenue sources plays a key role in
the city tax decision given the stringent restrictions often placed on city

revenue—raising authority. As already noted, only 18 of the 86 sample cities
are currently allowed to use some form of local income or payroll tax, and 47

cities a general sales tax. A higher proportion of cities are permitted to
impose some form of selective sales tax. Availability of alternative tax
sources is likely to decrease a city's reliance on the local property tax.

Availability is indicated with dummy variables: AVINC refers to local income,
earnings, or payroll taxes; AVGSAL refers to the general sales tax; AVSSAL
refers to selective sales taxes.

Not all taxing instruments impose equal burdens on resident voters. A
portion of the burden of a local sales tax, for example, might be shifted onto

nonresident tourists and commuters in the form of higher prices. Or a payroll
tax may fall partially on nonresident commuters. Similarly, part of the
property tax burden may ultimately be borne by nonresidents in the form of

lower profits, higher prices, or lower wages. The export ratios (ER), defined
as the proportion of the tax burden associated with each of the major local
taxes that can be shifted to nonresidents, are included in the equation to

account for this burden shifting. The hypothesis is that local voters choose
taxes in such a way as to minimize burdens on themselves. Hence, a higher
export ratio for the property tax (ERPROP) is expected to lead to greater
reliance on property taxes, but higher export ratios for sales (ERSAL) or
income taxes (ERINC) are expected to reduce city reliance on property taxes.
The calculation of each export ratio relies first on assumptions about

which groups —— consumers, workers, or owners of property ——

bear the burden

of each tax and second on estimates of the proportion of each group that lives

— 18 —

outside the city. The incidence assumptions are straightforward for the
income and sales taxes; local income taxes are assumed to be borne fully by
workers in the form of lower wages and local sales taxes by consumers in the

form of higher prices. The incidence assumptions used for the property tax
are much more complex and are spelled out elsewhere.'3 Calculated export
ratios for all three taxes vary substantially across cities because of
differences in how cities define their tax bases, the diversity of city roles
in metropolitan areas, and variations in the mix of shoppers, job—holders, or
property types across cities.

III. Estimation and Results
Table 4 shows the coefficients estimated using two—stage least squares for

three equations: the tax base equation and two versions of the tax equation.
The results correspond quite closely to expectations.

The Tax Base Equation —

Results

The coefficient of primary interest, that of the property tax variable in
the base equation, is —0.13 and significantly different from zero. Recalling
from equation 6 that this estimated coefficient is equal to (b/(l+b)), we
estimate the elasticity of the per capita property tax base with respect to
the property tax rate (b) to be approximately —0.11.

Thus, if the property

tax rate in one city were twice that of another city, per capita property
values would be expected to be 11 percent lower in the higher tax city.
The three additional tax variables provide some interesting new insights
about the effects of alternative revenue sources on the size of a city's

property tax base. The results imply that city income taxes and non—city
taxes both reduce the size of a city's tax base but, somewhat

surprisingly,

that city sales taxes do not. The finding that sales taxes have no effect on

— 19 —

Table 4
Regression Results —

Dependent
Variable:
LPBASE

Independent
Variables:

_.13*
(.035)

LPTAX

1.6*

LPCY

Basic Model

Independent
Variables:

LPBASE

LPCY

Dependent
Variable:
LPTAX
•57*
(.12)

——

LLAND

.16*
(.034)

LTSRI

_.066*

LMCOST

.11*
_l4*

LPCOST

LFCOST

(2.9)

TRSAL

LOVTAX

1.7
(2.3)

AVGSAL

_.093*

AVSSAL

— .065

AVINC

(.059)

.66*
(.15)

(.15)

.29*

(.080)

— .31*
(.10)

•37*
(.13)

_.82*
(.24)

LMISCSER

_.19*
(.10)

ERSAL

..46*

.20*
(.057)

ERPROP

YR77

.12*
(.062)

YR72

.0095
(.057)

Standard error =

Coefficient

(.25)

(.25)

.027
(.28)

(.35)

LFAID

.0082
(.025)

.0074
(.024)

LSTAID

.081*
(.024)

.071*
(.028)

_•4Ø*
(.10)

_•35*

YR82

.17

(.13)
.13

.099
(.12)

(.12)

YR72

.21*
(.10)

.22*
(.097)

Constant

_53*

—9.5

(.76)

(6.4)

Adjusted
R—squared =

.73

.75

Standard error

.40

.38

YR77

.50
.27

_.27*
(.076)

_.26*

_.92*
(.20)

_9.6*
(1.4)

.63*

(.083)

ERINC

Adjusted
R—squared =

*

.12

(.13)

.052
(.049)

Constant

.33*
(.17)

.063

LFIRESER

YR82

.71*
(.053)

(.096)

(.076)

(.034)

LCRIME

.32*
(.18)

(.050)

TRTIC

.71*

(.055)

(.023)

IEYCC

.58
(.86)

(.15)

LSMPOP

.28

(.44)

significantly different from zero at 5% level, one—tailed test.

Notes: N=282; pooled time series and cross—section.
Estimated with two—stage least squares; LPBASE and LPTAX treated as endogenous.
Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses below coefficients.

the size of the base may not be surprising to business owners, many of whom
seem to prefer sales taxes over other state and local taxes on the grounds
that forward shifting of tax burdens to consumers keeps business firms from

bearing the burden of such taxes. To economists, however, the finding is
still somewhat surprising; reduced consumption in response to higher prices
would generally be expected to lead to some reduction in economic activity in
the city.

The coefficient of the overlying tax burden variable (LOVTAX) can be
interpreted directly as an elasticity once it has been multiplied by (l+b).
The coefficient of the income tax rate variable (TRINC) can be converted to an
elasticity evaluated at the mean income tax rate in the sample after
multiplying by (1-i-b). These calculations imply the following elasticities:

—.083 for overlying taxes and — .044 for income taxes, both of which are the
same order of magnitude but, not surprisingly, smaller than the elasticity of

—.11 estimated for the property tax rate. The policy significance of the
relative sizes of these magnitudes is discussed later in the paper.

In contrast to the tax variables, the performance of the service variables

is somewhat disappointing. The crime rate and fire protection services enter
with the expected signs, but neither is statistically significant. Of more
concern is the negative sign on miscellaneous services. Why the quantity or
quality of services such as schools, health services, and sanitation should

lower property values is not clear. Measurement problems may be part of the

answer. Like the fire protection services variable, this measure is based on
statewide spending deflated by a local cost index. In the partial adjustment
model discussed later, the coefficient of miscellaneous services becomes
positive.

Each of the other estimated coefficients in the base equation must also be
multiplied by (1-i-b) =

0.89 to determine the value of the relevant

— 20 —

elasticities. However, since the precise magnitudes of elasticities of per
capita property values with respect to the other variables are not the focus
of this paper, the reader should simply keep in mind that they are somewhat
smaller (in absolute value) than the coefficients shown in Table 4.
The variables derived from the urban monocentric model all perform as

expected. Cities in larger SMSAs have higher property values than those in
smaller SMSAs and cities with greater land areas have lower property values.

Moreover, because the dependent variable is expressed per capita rather than
per unit of land, the estimated coefficients imply that the impacts of SMSA
population and city land area on rent and business density gradients are

greater than on population density gradients. For example, the negative
coefficient of the land variable suggests not only that the market value of
property per unit of land is lower for larger cities (presumably because in
such cities the city extends further down the area's rent and density
gradients), but also that the lower property value per unit of land is not
offset by a sufficiently lower population density to produce a higher value of

property per resident.14
Also consistent with the predictions of the model are the findings that
dominant central cities have higher property values than secondary cities in
multi—centered SMSAs and that the per capita income of city residents is
strongly positively associated with city property values.

The Property Tax Revenue Equation —

Results

The explanatory power of the tax equation as a whole is remarkably strong;
many variables not only show the expected signs, but also exhibit coefficients

significantly different from zero. The two versions of this equation shown in
Table 4 differ only in the exclusion of the per capita income of city
residents from the first equation.

— 21 —

As discussed earlier, theoretical considerations argue for including both
per capita income and per capita property values in the estimating equation.
In practice, however, they are highly correlated, especially after controlling

for other variables in the equations. Hence, identifying the independent
effect of the size of the property tax base on property tax revenues in this

pooled time—series cross—section is difficult. When income is included, the
coefficient of the base is indistinguishable from zero; when income is
excluded, the coefficient reflects the effects on property tax revenues of
both the property tax base and of the portion of resident income that is

correlated with property values across cities. No matter how it is measured,
however, ability—to—pay has a positive effect on revenue, which differs

significantly from zero. If one city has 10 percent more property per capita
than another city, the "combined" coefficient estimate implies that it will
raise 5.7 percent more tax revenues, other things (not including income)
equal, and that its property tax rate will be 4.3 percent lower.

A city's measured index of service responsibilities has a strongly
positive effect on tax revenues, as expected, and serves as a critical

variable identifying the tax variable in the base equation. Where the
"required bundle" of city services involves 10 percent more per capita
spending (at average costs), per capita property tax revenues are about 7

percent higher, on average, other things equal. Presumably the difference is
made up in service quality reductions or in additional revenues from other

sources. The three cost indexes are also positively associated with tax
revenues, indicating that in cities with higher production costs for local
public services, property taxes are also higher, other things equal.

The variables relating to taxes other than the property tax used by city
governments all exhibit statistically significant negative signs, as

expected. The negative coefficients on the dummy variables representing

— 22 —

availability of specific nonproperty taxes indicate that cities tend to
substitute these other taxes for property taxes when they are allowed to use

them. Moreover, where the burdens of these nonproperty taxes

fall

less upon

local residents, cities depend upon them more heavily, as shown by the

negative signs on the income and sales tax export ratios. Also as predicted,
the coefficient of the property tax export ratio is positive, but it is not
significantly different from zero.
Intergovernmental aid from the federal government appears to have no

effect, while that from state government appears to exert a positive effect
on property tax revenues. This positive impact runs counter to the
expectation that intergovernmental transfers substitute for property tax
revenues, but might reflect reverse causation due either to matching
requirements or to distribution formulae that direct more aid to cities with

high property tax burdens. We attempted to purge the state and federal aid
variables of their possible endogeneity by using federal and state aid five
years earlier as instrumental variables, but the results were similar to those
reported in Table 4.

The coefficients on year dummy variables suggest that, controlling for
changes over time in the other included variables, per capita property tax
revenues (in constant dollars) expanded from 1967 to 1972 and then declined to
1982.

Cross—Section by Year

The basic structural model is generally robust over time. Estimating the
same tax base equation as shown in Table 4 (minus the year dummies) separately
for each of the four years yields signs and general patterns that are similar
across years, although some of the coefficients are estimated less precisely,
partly because the samples are smaller and partly because the quality of the

— 23 —

data probably improved over time. An F—test of the complete equation does not
allow us to reject the hypothesis that the coefficients jointly are the same
over all four years and, hence, justifies pooling the four years of data into
one large sample.

Table 5 reports the estimated coefficients by year of all the tax

variables in the base equation. The patterns are remarkably consistent across
years with the exception of 1972, for which year the coefficients of the
property tax variable and the overlying tax variable are surprisingly low.
Multicollinearity in this sample may be part of the problem; excluding the
miscellaneous service variable from the equation, for example, more than
doubles the absolute value of the coefficient of the property tax variable.
Overall, however, the results by year confirm the patterns from the pooled

data: negative effects on the property tax base of property taxes, income
taxes, and overlying taxes and positive (but insignificant) effects of sales
taxes.

Partial Adiustment Model
Researchers generally view coefficients from a cross—section regression as
estimates of long—run responses or elasticities, on the assumption that
differences between cities reflect equilibrium responses to differences in

underlying city characteristics. But over time, the land rents and intensity
of economic activity that determine city property values may not adjust

immediately to changing conditions. The availability of four years of data
for our cities, five years apart, allows us to incorporate this dynamic
behavior into the estimating equation and thereby provides an alternative way
to estimate long—run elasticities.

Partial adjustment models start from the premise that economic actors in

any one period move only part way toward a long—run equilibrium. Thus, if

— 24 —

Table 5
Single—Year Regression Results

Coefficients of Tax

LPT.AX

TRINC

Variables

1982

1967

1972

1977

_.l3*
(.073)

—.033
(.059)

_.12*

_.22*

(.068)

(.074)

—8.6

—7.8

_16*

_18*

(5.8)

(6.0)

(6.2)

(5.2)

4.6

—1.5

(4.8)

(4.7)

3.1
(5.8)

2.9
(4.7)

TRSAL

LOVTAX

in Base Equation

.067

— .039

— .076

— .14*

(.056)

(.067)

(.075)

(.081)

57

72

76

77

—

*Coefficient significantly different from zero at 5% level, one—tailed test.
Notes: Estimated with two—stage least squares; LPTAX treated as endogenous.
Other variables in system as shown in Table 4, excluding year dummies.
Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses below coefficients.

PBASE is the long—run equilibrium tax base per capita in period t and
PBASEt and PBASEt

the actual bases per capita in periods t and t—l, then

in multiplicative form

(11) PBASEt/PBASEt_i = (PBASE/PBAsEt_l)A,
where A is the proportional adjustment occurring in one (five—year) period.
Taking natural logarithms yields:

(12) in PBASEt = A in PBASE + (1—A) in PBASEt.....i.
Hence, the variables needed in the estimating equation are simply the

determinants of the equilibrium base PBASE, as before, plus the lagged

base, PBASEt1.
Estimates of the partial adjustment model are shown in Table 6. The
second column reports coefficients estimated for the base equation including
the lagged base, and the two final columns report estimated coefficients from

the corresponding tax equations. Lack of data on property tax bases in 1962
limits these equations to the later three years of the study —
1972, 1977, and

1982. The first column reports estimates with no lags —

the

same model as

shown in Table 4 but for the same three years as the partial adjustment model

— to
provide a consistent comparison of the two estimates of long—run
responses.

The estimated coefficient on the lagged base variable, 0.54, implies that

A is 0.46 and that slightly less than half of the adjustment to long run

equilibrium occurs during a five—year period. In the partial adjustment
framework, a long—run elasticity (that is, an elasticity of the equilibrium
base) with respect to any right—hand—side variable is equal to the estimated
coefficient shown in Table 6 divided by the estimate of A.

Correcting also

for the substitution of tax revenues for tax rates, the long run elasticity of

— 25 —

Table 6
Regression Results — Partial Adjustment Model
Dependent Variable: LPTItX

Dependent Variables: LPBASE

Full
Model
No Lags

Independent
Variables:

•54*

——

LPBASE—l

Partial
Adjustment

LPBASE

•43*
(.13)

LPCY

——

(.056)

LPTAX

_.14*
(.040)

— .083*

1.5*
(.17)

0.95*
(.16)

.17*
(.040)

.062*
(.033)

LMCOST

_.052*
(.026)

—.026
(.022)

LPCOST

.12*
(.057)

.016
(.047)

_16*
(3.3)

1.8
(2.8)

(2.4)

LPCY

LSMPOP

LLAND

KEYCC

TRINC

TRSAL

LCRIME

LFIRESER

LMISCSER

Constant

LTSRI

(.064)

.52*
(.20)

(.21)

•45*

LFCOST

•57*
(.17)

.56*
(.17)

_8.4*
(2.7)

AVGSAL

_.27*
(.090)

_.27*
(.088)

.58

AVSSAL

_45*

— .055

.12

(.10)

AVINC

8RINC

(.10)

— .31*
(.12)

(.12)

_•99*

—

(.25)

(.26)

—.52
(.36)

—.46
(.36)

—.064
(.35)

(.36)

.91*

—.099

—.042

(.070)

(.060)

.061
(.058)

—.0024

— .12

.098
(.097)

ERPROP

.064
(.043)

LFAID

(.051)

.0063
(.037)

.0034
(.036)

.11*
(.049)

.025
(.041)

LSTAID

.081*
(.030)

.080*
(.029)

_95*

_7.0*

(1.6)

(1.4)

ERSAL

(.046)

.48

.042

54*

_•53*

(.082)

(.081)

—.075
(.081)

(.080)

_5•4*
(.96)

_8.7*
(3.7)

Adjusted
R—squared =

.74

.75

Standard
error =

.40

.39

YR82

YR77
Adjusted
R—squared =

.72*

•73*
(.064)

.17
(.12)

(.034)

.21*

YR77

.47

(.11)

.096*

(.12)

YR82

.27
(.21)

(.50)

(.032)

(.043)

—

LOVTAX

Partial
Adiustment

Independent
Variables:

—.070

.67

Constant

Standard
error =

*

Coefficient

.29

.22

significantly different from zero at 5% level, one—tailed test.

Notes: Pooled time series and cross—section using data for 1972, 1977, and 1982;
N = 202 except in "no lags" model where N = 225.
Estimated with two—stage least squares; LPTAX and LPSASE treated as endogeflOus.
Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses below coefficients.
LPBASE—l is LPBASE lagged one period (five years).

the base with respect to the property tax rate is approximately equal to

—0.15, somewhat higher than the —0.12 estimate implied by the equation with no

lags. Both of these estimates are greater (in absolute value) than the —.11
derived from the comparable equation shown in table 4, presumably because the
year 1982, when the elasticity was more negative, is given more weight.

Although the reported coefficients of many of the other variables are
smaller in the partial adjustment equation than in the equation with no lags,
dividing by X (=0.46) to derive estimates of long—run elasticities restores

most to comparable or larger size. Including the lagged base has the
advantage that it nets out a variety of inter—city differences not captured in
the other included variables and thereby controls for special factors in each

city that might otherwise lead to biased estimates of long—run elasticities.
One not very surprising result of this is that the roles of some of the

descriptive variables such as KEYCC and LSMPOP are reduced. These variables
do not change much over time and their predicted effects on the tax base may
operate through the lagged base variable in the partial adjustment equation.
The coefficients of variables representing public services available to
city residents appear to be quite sensitive to the inclusion of the lagged

base term. The measures of crime and of miscellaneous services now both enter
with the predicted signs, although with relatively large standard errors.
This provides some support, albeit weak, for the conclusion that higher crime
rates reduce property values and that higher miscellaneous services such as

education and sanitation increase property values in the city. Our proxy for
fire protection services enters with an unexpected negative sign but its
coefficient is virtually zero.

The results for the tax equation are similar to those reported in Table

4. Even with lagged base as an additional instrument, we still cannot
identify separate effects for base and income. The elasticity of tax revenues

— 26 —

with respect to the tax base (when income is excluded) is smaller than the
earlier results suggested —

closer

to 0.4 than to 0.6, indicating that a city

with a per capita tax base 10 percent above average would probably enjoy a tax
rate 6 percent below average.

IV. Interpretation: The Effects of Taxes on City Property Tax Bases
Our best estimate of the long—run elasticity of a city's property tax base

with respect to its tax rate is —0.15. We prefer this estimate from the
partial adjustment model because it explicitly allows for the dynamics of
property market adjustments over time and controls for city—specific effects

that might otherwise bias the coefficients. The estimated response appears to
be well identified in a statistical sense thanks to the nature of the data
base and the attention devoted to the specification of the revenue equation as

well as to the base equation. Moreover, the elasticity emerges from a set of
two equations that yield reasonable coefficients for almost all the other
variables suggested by economic theory.

How reasonable is the preferred estimate? In the absence of comparable
studies, one approach is to evaluate it with reference to the theory of

capitalization. Consider, for example, what would happen if property tax
rates were fully capitalized into property values. By way of illustration,
consider a parcel of property worth $100,000 and subject to a 0.8 percent tax

rate, the average city's rate in the sample. Then consider the change in
value predicted to occur with a 10 percent increase in the tax rate, to 0.88

percent. Assuming the resulting $80 tax increase were expected to continue
indefinitely, full capitalization would lead to a 1.5 percent reduction in the
value of the property (as our equation predicts) provided the relevant
interest rate were 5.3 percent (since $80/0.053 = $1500 =

1.5 percent of

$100,000). Thus, at an interest rate of 5.3 percent, the estimated long run

— 27 —

elasticity of —0.15 would be fully consistent with 100 percent

capitalization. For higher interest rates, the estimated elasticity indicates
a larger impact than would be implied by capitalization alone and for lower
rates, it indicates a smaller impact.
Even if one were sure that the relevant interest rate were exactly 5.3
percent, it would be incorrect to interpret our results as evidence that

property taxes are fully capitalized into values. In contrast to previous
studies that explicitly measure capitalization (e.g. Oates, 1969), we
purposely do not control for the amount of capital in the city.

Hence the

estimated response of property values probably represents the combined effects

of some capitalization (price change) and some physical disinvestment in the

city (change in the quantity of capital). That is, part of the reduction in
the base probably represents the decision of some potential residents
(households and firms) not to move into the city, the decision of some firms
to let their city property depreciate as they invest elsewhere, and the
decision of some city residents to disinvest in their residential structures

by reducing maintenance. This decrease in investment occurs simultaneously
with a fall in the price of city land and stops once the after—tax rate of
return to investment is again equalized across jurisdictions.

As noted earlier, this study provides new evidence that taxes other than
city property taxes also affect the size of a city's property tax base. The

one exception is local sales taxes which appear to have essentially no effect

on the property tax base. Table 7 compares the effects of the various taxes,
using the coefficients from the partial adjustment equation. The entries in
the first column show the impact on the logarithm of the property tax base of
a 10 percent increase in a particular tax rate or, equivalently for

nonproperty taxes, in tax revenues. As changes in logarithms, the entries
(multiplied by 100) can be interpreted as percentage changes in the base.

— 28 —

Table 7
Impacts on the Property Tax Base
(By Type of Tax)

10 Percent
Increase in Tax
Rate or Tax Revenues

Property Tax

—.015

City Income Tax

—.0054

City Sales Tax
Taxes Imposed
by Overlying
Governments

0

—.010

$10 Per Capitaa
Increase in Taxes

—.014 or — •020b
—.026
0

—.0026

Notes: Entries are predicted impacts on the natural logarithm of the
per capita property tax base. When multiplied by 100 they can be
interpreted as percentage changes in the tax base. Calculated from
estimated coefficients from the partial adjustment equation shown in
Table 6.
a1972 dollars.
bThe first entry was evaluated at the average tax base and tax rate
in the sample. The second entry was evaluated for average tax
revenues.

Thus, a 10 percent increase in the property tax rate is predicted to reduce
the base by 1.5 percent, while a 10 percent increase in the local income tax

rate is predicted to reduce the base by only 0.5 percent. The estimated
impact of a 10 percent increase in overlying taxes is a 1.0 percent decline in
the base, halfway between the impacts of local income and property taxes.

These findings have two clear implications. First, a 10 percent increase in a
city's property tax rate will produce only an 8.5 percent increase in property

tax revenues on average in the long run. Second, increases in city income tax
rates or in taxes levied by overlying jurisdictions such as state and county
governments will reduce the property tax revenues collected with a given
property tax rate.

Policymakers should also be interested in the second column of Table 7
which shows the impact on the (logarithm of the) property tax base of a $10

increase in per capita tax revenues from each source. The two entries for the
property tax reflect evaluation at different averages. The 1.4 percent
decline was evaluated at the average property tax rate and tax base in the
sample, while the 2.0 percent decline was evaluated at the average per capita
tax revenues in the sample.

Surprisingly, the calculations indicate that a $10 increase in local
income taxes reduces the size of the property tax base by more than does a

comparable per capita increase in property taxes on average. This finding is
easily reconcilable with the apparently contradictory results in column 1: a
$10 per capita increase in revenue from income taxes requires a much larger
percentage increase in income tax rates than does a $10 increase in property

tax revenues, at current average rates in the sample. The larger Impact of
raising revenue through the income tax has important implications for
policymakers trying to reduce property tax burdens by substituting income

taxes for property taxes. Assuming constant total tax revenue and after

— 29 —

allowing time for all adjustments, we find that the net effect of shifting
away from property taxes toward income taxes is to reduce the size of the

property tax base. Shifting away from property taxes in favor of local sales
taxes, in contrast, is estimated to increase the size of the local property
tax base.

An alternative way for local officials to reduce property taxes

is

to

induce higher levels of government to take over some of the city's service

responsibilities and to finance them by higher noncity taxes. Our estimates
suggest that this shift would increase the size of the city's property tax

base. Reducing property taxes by $10 per capita would increase the tax base
by 1.4 to 2.0 percent, an increase that more than offsets the much smaller
decrease of 0.3 percent associated with the $10 increase in the overlying tax
burden on city residents and firms.

15

IV. Conclusion
We began this paper with reference to the many studies that conclude that
state and local taxes do not matter in determining levels of economic activity

in cities. The results of this study indicate, quite to the contrary, that
taxes do matter. We find not only that cities with higher property tax rates
have lower property tax bases, but in addition that cities whose taxpayers are
subject to other taxes such as local income taxes and taxes levied by

overlying jurisdictions have lower property tax bases. These effects are
important because lower property tax bases require higher local property tax
rates to finance a given package of public services.

— 30 —

Footnotes
1-Values of locally—assessed taxable and exempt real and personal
property, and state—assessed property, were combined. Because personal
property is partially or completely exempt from property taxation in many
states, the reported "exempt" values for personalty were generally
incomplete. Personal property values were imputed for most cities based on
their commercial and industrial real property values and the relationship
between personal property values and commercial and industrial real property
values in those cities fully taxing personal property.

2This means that the equation modeling tax revenues (discussed below) is
less appropriate for Boston and the California cities in 1982 than for other
cities. But deleting these observations does not affect the coefficient
estimates.
3See Bradbury, Downs, and Small (1982) for an attempt to model the
simultaneous determination of city population, employment, and per capita
income.

4More precisely, we have
in (B/LAND) = b0 + b1 in SMPOP +
b2 in LAND + e and
in (POP/LAND) = d0 + d1 in SMPOP

+ d2 in LAND +

ii,

so that
in (B/POP) = (b0—d0) +
(bj—d1) in SMPOP + (b2—d2)
in LAND + (e—u).

Hence, c1 should be interpreted as b1—d1 and c2 as b2—d2.
5This prediction should not be confused with the more ambiguous effects
of income that typically emerge from an urban model. According to that model,
household income of the residents of a metropolitan area exerts two opposing
forces on the slope of the price gradient. On the one hand, higher income
increases the demand for space, which tends to flatten the gradient. On the
other, higher income increases the value of travel time and thereby raises the
cost of transportation which leads to steeper gradients, With the relevant
variable specified as the per capita income of city residents alone, the
effects of income on city vs. suburban location are already accounted for and
the issue becomes solely one of the demand for housing services.
6Statutory rates for cities imposing a sales tax were pieced together
from a variety of sources. The four main sources are the Commerce Clearing
House, State Tax Guide; John Due and John Mikesell, (1983); John Due (i97?)
and Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, Significant Features
of Fiscal Federalism, various years.
7The estimated overlying tax burden for all other California cities in
the sample exceeds that for San Francisco, because they all have overlying
counties. See Helen F. Ladd, John Yinger et al. (1986), ch. 8, for a complete
discussion of the complexities of calculating measures of overlying tax
burdens in a slightly different context.

8Previous studies have shown that higher crime rates reduce housing
values. See, for example, Rizzo (1979) and Gray and Joelson (1979). We have
normalized the number of crimes (both property and violent crimes as reported
in The Uniform Crime Reports) by employees rather than by city population
because crimes rates per resident appear to be strongly correlated with the
amount of a city's nonresidential activity, especially commercial activity.
Hence, normalizing by resident population rather than by employees would lead
to a severe reverse causation problem; higher tax bases per capita would be
associated with higher crime rates per capita.
9See, for example, T. Bergstrom and R. Goodman (1973); and
T. Borcherding and R. Deacon (1972).
-0For a complete description of the basic methodology, see Ladd, Yinger
et al. (1986). A similar methodology based on Massachusetts communities is
described in K. Bradbury et al. (1984).
11For a complete derivation and discussion of this measure, see chapter
9 in H.F. Ladd, J. Yinger et al. (1986).
'2One notable exception is Robert P. Inman

(1982).

13See Bradbury and Ladd (1985).
]-4That is, (b1—d1) and (b2—d2) from footnote 4 are positive.

]-5Furthermore, if it typically costs the city more on a per capita basis
to provide the shifted service than it costs other municipalities within the
jurisdiction assuming the responsibility, overlying taxes may rise by less
than $10 per capita; hence, the net increase in the property tax base may be
slightly greater.

References

Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1981). "Regional Growth:
Interstate Tax Competition," Report A—76. March 1981 (Washington, D.C.)
Bartik, Timothy J. (1985). "Business Location Decisions in the United States:
Estimates of the Effects of Unionization, Taxes, and Other Characteristics
of States," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 3.
Bartik, Timothy J. (1986). "Tax Effects on the Location of New Branch Plants
in the United States," Working Paper 86—W19, Department of Economics and
Business Administration, Vanderbilt University.
Bergstrom, T., and R. Goodman (1973). "Private Demands for Public Goods,"
American Economic Review, vol. 63, pp. 280—296.
Bloom, H. S., and H. F. Ladd (1982). "Property Tax Revaluation and Tax Levy
Growth," Journal of Urban Economics, Winter.
Borcherding, T., an R. Deacon (1972). "The Demands for Services of Non—Federal
Governments," American Economic Review, vol. 62, pp. 891—901.
Bradbury, Katharine L., Anthony Downs, and Kenneth A. Small (1982). Urban
Decline and the Future of American Cities. Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution.
Bradbury, Katharine L., and Helen F. Ladd (1985). "Changes in the Revenue—
Raising Capacity of U.S. Cities, 1970—1982," New England Economic Review,
March/April.
Bradbury, Katharine L., Helen F. Ladd, Mark Perrault, Andrew Reschovsky, and
John Yinger (1984). "State Aid to Offset Fiscal Disparities Across
Communities," National Tax Journal, vol. 37, no. 2 (June).

Bradford, D. F., R. A. Malt, and W. E. Oates (1969). "The Rising Cost of Local
Public Services: Some Evidence and Reflections," National Tax Journal,
vol. 22, no. 2 (June).

Carlton, Dennis (1979). "Why New Firms Locate Where They Do: An Econometric
Model," in Interregional Movements and Reiona1 Growth, edited by William
Wheaton. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.
Case, Karl, Leslie Papke, and Susan Koenigsberg (1983). Taxes and Business
Location, final report submitted to New York State Legislature

Due, John F. (1961). "Studies of State—Local Tax Differences on Location of
Industry," National Tax Journal, 14.

Due, John F. (1971). State and Local Sales Taxation. Chicago: Public
Administration Service.
Due, John F., and John Mikesell (1983). Sales Taxation: State and Local
Structure and Administration. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Gray, Charles M. and Mitchell R. Joelson (1979). "Neighborhood Crime and The
Demand for Central City Housing," in Charles M. Gray, The Costs of Crime,
Sage Criminal Justice System Annuals; Vol. 12, pp. 47—61.
Inman, Robert P. (1982). "The Local Decision to Tax," unpublished paper
presented at the 1982 meetings of Taxation, Resources, and Economic
Development (TRED), Lincoln Institute of Land Policy Research, Cambridge,
MA.

Kieschnick, Michael (1981). Taxes and Growth: Business Incentives and
Economic Development. Council of State Planning Agencies, Washington, D.C.
Ladd, Helen F., John Yinger, Katharine L. Bradbury, Ronald Ferguson, and Avis
Vidal (1986). The Changing Economic and Fiscal Conditions of Cities, Final
Report to the Department of Housing and Urban Development and State, Local,
and Intergovernmental Center (John F. Kennedy School of Government)
Research Report R85—3.

Oakland, W. H. (1978). "Local Taxes and Intra—Urban Industrial Location: A
Survey." In George Break (ed.), Metropolitan Financing and Growth
Management Policies. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Oates, W. E. (1969) "The Effects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on
Property Values: .An Empirical Study of Tax Capitalization and The Tiebout
Hypothesis," Journal of Political Economy, 77, no. 6 (November/December);
pp. 1004—08.

Papke, Leslie (1986). "Subnational Taxation and Capital Mobility: Estimates
of Tax—Price Elasticities." MIT mimeo.
Rizzo, Mario J. (1979). "The Loss of Time to Victims: An Empirical Analysis,"
in the Journal of Legal Studies, Vol VIII.
(1), pp. 477—206.
Rosen, Harvey S. and David J. Fullerton (1977). "A Note on Local Tax Rates,
Public Benefit Levels, and Property Values," Journal of Political Economy,
85, no. 21, pp. 433—440.

Schmenner, Roger W. (1982). Making Business Location Decisions. Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice—Hall, Inc.
Wasylenko, M. (1981). "The Location of Firms: The Role of Taxes and Fiscal
Incentives." In R. W. Bahl (ed.), Urban Government Finance: Emerging
Trends, Vol. 20, Urban Affairs Annual Reviews, Sage.
White, Michelle J. (1986) "Property Taxes and Firm Location" in Harvey S.
Rosen (ed.) Studies in State and Local Public Finance Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

