                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             GROWTH THROUGH RIGIDITY:
                       AN EXPLANATION FOR THE RISE IN CEO PAY

                                            Kelly Shue
                                         Richard Townsend

                                        Working Paper 21975
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21975


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016


Corresponding author: Kelly Shue, 5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637, USA, Tel: 773-834-0046,
kelly.shue@chicagobooth.edu. We are grateful to William Schwert (the editor), an anonymous referee,
Rajesh Aggarwal, Malcolm Baker, Vicente Cuñat, Xavier Gabaix, Robert Jackson, Dirk Jenter, Christine
Jolls, Steve Kaplan, Augustin Landier, Ulrike Malmendier, Adair Morse, Kevin Murphy, Canice Prendergast,
and Dick Thaler for helpful comments. We also thank seminar participants at Adam Smith Workshop
in Corporate Finance, ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference, BI Norwegian Business School,
Copenhagen Business School, Chuo University International Workshop, Delaware Corporate Governance
Symposium, Economics of Organizations Workshop, LBS Corporate Finance Symposium, Loyola
University, Michigan State University, Minnesota Corporate Finance Conference, NBER (Behavioral
Economics; Law and Economics), UC Davis, University of Chicago, University of Calgary, and University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign for helpful comments. We thank Matt Turner at Pearl Meyer, Don Delves
at the Delves Group, and Stephen O’Byrne at Shareholder Value Advisors for helping us understand
the intricacies of executive stock option plans. This research was funded in part by the Initiative on
Global Markets at the University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Kelly Shue and Richard Townsend. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Growth through Rigidity: An Explanation for the Rise in CEO Pay
Kelly Shue and Richard Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 21975
February 2016
JEL No. D03,G3,J3,K2,M52

                                             ABSTRACT

The dramatic rise in CEO compensation during the 1990s and early 2000s is a longstanding puzzle.
In this paper, we show that much of the rise can be explained by a tendency of firms to grant the same
number of options each year. Number-rigidity implies that the grant-date value of option awards will
grow with firm equity returns, which were very high on average during the tech boom. Further, other
forms of CEO compensation did not adjust to offset the dramatic growth in the value of option pay.
Number-rigidity in options can also explain the increased dispersion in pay, the difference in growth
between the US and other countries, and the increased correlation between pay and firm-specific equity
returns. We present evidence that number-rigidity arose from a lack of sophistication about option
valuation that is akin to money illusion. We show that regulatory changes requiring transparent expensing
of the grant-date value of options led to a decline in number-rigidity and helps explain why executive
pay increased less with equity returns during the housing boom in the mid-2000s.


Kelly Shue
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kelly.shue@chicagobooth.edu

Richard Townsend
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
Richard.R.Townsend@tuck.dartmouth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21975
                                                  Figure 1
This figure shows the distribution of the proportional change in the number of options granted in the current
year relative to the previous year. The sample is limited to CEOs who receive options in the current and
previous year at firms that were ever a part of the S&P 500 from 1992 to 2010.

                         20




                         15
               Percent




                         10




                         5




                         0
                              -1              0                          1                 2
                                                  Proportionate Change




1.     Introduction

The dramatic rise in compensation awarded to CEOs in the United States during the 1990s and

early 2000s is a longstanding puzzle. Median compensation in 2011 dollars for S&P 500 CEOs grew

more than threefold from $2.9M in 1992 to $9.3M in 2001. After the mid-2000s, growth leveled oﬀ

considerably, with the median CEO earning $9M in 2011 (Murphy, 2013). Compensation for US

CEOs was also relatively flat in the decades leading up to the 1990s (Frydman and Saks, 2010).

Thus, the compensation growth during the 1990s and early 2000s was a sharp break from both

the trend established in preceding years and that which prevailed in subsequent years. Adding

to the puzzle, the growth in CEO pay was also considerably oﬀ-trend relative to growth in other

high-income occupations (Kaplan and Rauh, 2010; Kaplan, 2012).

     A number of explanations have been proposed for the rise in CEO pay, including weak corpo-

rate governance (Bebchuk and Fried, 2004; Kuhnen and Zwiebel, 2009), an increase in managers’

                                                       1
marginal product due to technological advancement (Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg, 2006; Hubbard

and Palia, 1995; Cuñat and Guadalupe, 2009a,b; Dow and Raposo, 2005), greater competition for

CEOs with general skills (Murphy and Zábojník, 2004; Frydman, 2007), and increases in firm size

combined with a multiplicative managerial production function (Gabaix and Landier, 2008; Tervio,

2008). While all these theories are likely to be important contributors to growth in executive com-

pensation, each also has shortcomings in explaining some of the stylized facts (Frydman and Jenter,

2010), particularly the oﬀ-trend growth of CEO pay during the 1990s and early 2000s, hereafter

referred to as the tech boom.

   In this paper, we explore an alternative and complementary explanation for the surge in executive

compensation. It is well known that the bulk of the growth in CEO pay arrived in the form of new

at-the-money option grants. While much of the existing research focuses on the rising grant-date

value of these options, we instead start by examining the number of options awarded to executives.

We show that there is a high degree of rigidity in the number of options awarded. That is, firms

often grant executives the exact same number of options as in the previous year. In addition, other

round multiples of the previous year’s number are common. These patterns suggest a tendency to

think of option compensation in number rather than dollar terms. Such a tendency is also consistent

with the fact that many firms use multi-year option plans, which pre-specify that the same number

of options be granted in consecutive years (Hall, 1999; Shue and Townsend, 2014). Pre-planned or

not, rigidity in number can have major implications for the level of CEO pay.

   In particular, if a firm grants its CEO the same number of new at-the-money options as in the

previous year, and if the firm’s stock price is X% higher than in the previous year, the grant-date

value of the option award will also be X% higher than in the previous year. This fact follows directly

from the Black–Scholes formula. Thus, in an environment like the tech boom with rapid growth in

stock prices, number-rigidity leads to rapid growth in the grant-date value of option pay.

   Our analysis builds on insights from two comprehensive review articles on executive compensa-

tion by Murphy (1999; 2013). Murphy shows a near-perfect historical correlation between average

executive pay and the S&P 500 index in the 1990s and early 2000s. He notes that such a pattern


                                                  2
would be consistent with compensation committees focusing on the number of options granted rather

than the value of options granted. In this paper, we extend Murphy’s insights by first providing

direct evidence that option grants over our sample period are indeed strongly rigid in number. As

shown in Fig. 1, we find that nearly 20% of new grants contain the same number of options as

the previous year’s grant. More broadly, the number change distribution suggests that executives

and/or firms think about options in number rather than dollar terms. Even after adjusting for

splits, there are also pronounced spikes at round multiples of the previous year’s number, such as

double or half. Number increases of exactly 10%, 20%, and so on are also common.

   Next, we show that number-rigidity leads to outsized growth in option pay when a firm’s stock

returns are high. Specifically, we compare pay growth for similarly performing executives with

and without number-rigid option pay. Consistent with the above discussion of the Black–Scholes

formula, we find that the slope of the relation between changes in the grant-date value of option

awards and a firm’s stock return is approximately one when grants are number-rigid. This relation

is significantly less steep for executives with non-number-rigid (henceforth, non-rigid) option pay.

Thus, CEOs with number-rigid grants gain more than CEOs with non-rigid grants when firm returns

are high. Given that the tech boom was a period of extremely high stock returns, number-rigidity

contributed to the concurrent high growth in CEO option pay.

   Even if number-rigidity leads to growth in the value of options granted, it remains possible that

other forms of compensation decrease when returns are high in order to keep total compensation

in line. However, we find no evidence of cash or other forms of compensation oﬀsetting any of the

increase in option compensation caused by number-rigidity. If anything, other forms of compensation

actually appear to reinforce the outsized growth in option pay.

   It it also important to recognize that CEOs receiving non-rigid option pay may still experience

higher pay growth than they would have absent number-rigidity among their peers. This is because

competition for CEO talent among firms should lead to spillovers in compensation. To investigate

whether such spillovers operate in our context, we examine whether executives with non-rigid option

pay tend to have higher compensation growth when more of their peers are number-rigid and have


                                                 3
experienced recent high returns. We find that this is indeed the case, consistent with compensation

spillovers from number-rigid to non-rigid executives.

   Given the above findings that 1) number-rigidity is prevalent, 2) it leads to outsized option

pay growth when returns are high, 3) other forms of compensation do not decrease to oﬀset this

option pay growth, and 4) there are spillovers onto non-rigid executives, it seems quite plausible

that number-rigidity could account for a significant portion of overall growth in CEO pay during

the 1990s and early 2000s. To give a sense of potential magnitudes, we calibrate an equilibrium

model of CEO pay. Our calibrations show that, under a wide range of parameter assumptions,

number-rigid option compensation can explain more than half of the oﬀ-trend growth in CEO pay

during the tech boom.

   A number-rigidity-based explanation for the rise in CEO pay also matches three other stylized

facts. First, not only did the level of CEO pay increase during the 1990s and early 2000s, but so did

the cross-sectional dispersion of CEO pay (Frydman and Jenter, 2010). This increase in dispersion

is a natural consequence of number-rigidity, which increases the sensitivity of compensation to the

highly idiosyncratic returns of individual firms. Second, non-US CEOs experienced significantly

slower compensation growth during the tech boom, controlling for country-level growth and firm

characteristics (Abowd and Bognanno, 1999; Abowd and Kaplan, 1999; Murphy, 1999; Thomas,

2009; Fernandes et al., 2013). Equity-based compensation is also less common for non-US CEOs,

often for regulatory reasons. For example, option plans were illegal in Germany until 1996. As a

result, non-US executives are less likely to have a number-rigid component of their pay. Finally, our

explanation is consistent with the empirical fact that compensation became very correlated with

firm-specific stock returns in the 1990s.

   In the remainder of the paper, we explore the question of why there is number-rigidity in option

pay. In particular, we attempt to distinguish empirically between two broad classes of theories. The

first class consists of theories in which all parties involved understand how to value options and

choose to hold the number granted fixed because number-rigidity implements an optimal incentive

scheme. For example, firms may grant number-rigid options to manage executive ownership or to


                                                 4
award steep pay-for-performance incentives.

   The second broad class of theories includes explanations in which at least one party in the

compensation-setting process is somewhat unsophisticated about how to value options. Given that

options are typically granted at-the-money, it is not immediately obvious that granting the same

number of new options after a stock price increase would coincide with a pay increase. Fully

understanding this notion requires knowledge of option pricing formulas that economists only derived

relatively recently (Black and Scholes, 1973). There is ample anecdotal evidence that when option

compensation first came into widespread use, many did not understand or trust these formulas.

Instead, number may have been used as a proxy for value. This heuristic is similar to thinking

about money in nominal rather than real terms, i.e., money illusion (Kahneman et al., 1986; Shafir

et al., 1997). Further, prior to 2006, government regulations concerning the reporting of options

focused on number rather than value. These regulations likely reflect, but also may have influenced,

the way that option compensation was commonly measured.

   We find a number of results pointing toward the second class of theories. We begin by testing

whether firms become less likely to grant number-rigid options when they are required to disclose

or expense the grant-date dollar value of those options on their proxy and income statements,

respectively. If number-rigidity implements an optimal contract, the contract should remain optimal

regardless of the way option compensation is reported to shareholders. However, if number-rigidity

arises from naïveté on someone’s part, changes in reporting requirements may reduce that naïveté.

   To examine these issues, we exploit two separate reforms by FASB and the SEC that went into

eﬀect in 2006. The FASB reform required firms to expense on their income statements the total

Black–Scholes value of option compensation paid to employees. The SEC reform required firms to

disclose the Black–Scholes value of option compensation paid to each top executives on their proxy

statements. We find that, following these two reforms, the prevalence of option number-rigidity

(conditional on granting options) declines significantly. To control for concurrent time trends, we

use a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences framework with stock compensation as a control group. Stock com-

pensation also has a number and value associated with it, but its value had to be expensed and


                                                 5
disclosed throughout our sample period. We find no change in number-rigidity for stock compensa-

tion and a large decline in number-rigidity for option compensation. Moreover, we find that prior

to the reforms, the prevalence of number-rigidity was much higher for option compensation than

stock compensation. The latter finding is consistent with the idea that converting number to value

is harder for options than for stock, leading to greater money-illusion type thinking.

   The above analysis of regulatory changes suggests that some combination of expensing and

disclosure reduces number-rigidity in option pay. An important remaining question is whether it is

primarily expensing or disclosure that is responsible for the reduction. Given that the FASB and

SEC reforms so closely coincided, it is diﬃcult to distinguish the two empirically. We instead exploit

the fact that, prior to the reforms, some firms voluntarily chose to expense and/or disclose. Using

hand collected data from 10-K filings, we find that firms that voluntarily expensed the Black–Scholes

value of their option compensation were significantly less likely to use number-rigid option awards

(both within and between firms). In contrast, firms that voluntarily disclosed the Black–Scholes

value of their option compensation were no less likely to use number-rigid option awards. These

findings suggest that subtracting the total value of option compensation from reported earnings (i.e.,

expensing) has a greater eﬀect on how the cost of option awards is viewed than merely reporting

the value of option awards paid to high-ranking executives (i.e., disclosure).

   In addition, it is plausible that firms with more independent or sophisticated boards are more

likely to choose optimal compensation structures or to be aware of option valuation methods. We

find that boards with a greater percentage of independent directors, directors that joined before the

current CEO, or directors with an MBA degree are significantly less likely to grant number-rigid

options. These findings cut against the first class of theories, in which number-rigidity arises from

optimal contracting.

   Given that transparent reporting requirements and board independence/sophistication reduce

number-rigidity, one may wonder whether sophisticated CEOs consciously use number-rigidity to

conceal high compensation growth from less sophisticated boards or shareholders. Here, we find

mixed evidence. On the one hand, we find that the probability of receiving number-rigid grants


                                                  6
is asymmetric with respect to firm returns. The probability of a CEO receiving number-rigid pay

following extreme positive returns (when they benefit the most from rigidity) is considerably higher

than the probability following extreme negative returns (when they suﬀer the most from rigidity).

This asymmetry suggests that at least some CEOs recognize that the value of the same number of

new options varies with their firm’s stock price. However, we also find results suggesting that some

CEOs think about option compensation in units of number, or at least endure large losses in value

due to number-rigidity. In particular, we find that following a positive stock split, many CEOs

continue to receive the same, non-split-adjusted number of options as in the previous year. Rigidity

of this type represents a large decline in CEO pay. In contrast, following a split, very few executives

receive the same, non-split-adjusted number of shares of stock as they did in the previous year. This

is again likely because it is much easier to convert number to value for stock than options.

     Overall, we show that number-rigidity helps explain many of the striking stylized facts relating

to CEO pay during the tech boom period. Our analysis also oﬀers a potential explanation for

why CEO pay growth tapered considerably after the tech boom, despite high stock market returns

during the housing boom of the mid-2000s. We show that firms shifted their focus from number to

value during this period, partly due to regulatory changes requiring the expensing of the grant-date

value of option awards.



2.     Recent Trends in Executive Compensation

2.1.     Growth in Executive Compensation

Before exploring the eﬀects of rigidity on compensation growth, we first review recent trends in

executive compensation. Fig. 2 shows how CEO compensation evolved from 1992 to 2010, estimated

following the method used by Murphy (2013). We restrict the sample to CEOs of firms that were

ever a part of the S&P 500 during the sample period. There are 947 such firms. The level of each

bar represents the median level of total compensation in each year in 2011 dollars. Each bar is

decomposed based upon the mean proportion of each component of compensation in each year. As


                                                  7
has been previously documented, total compensation more than tripled from 1992 to 2001, before

subsequently leveling oﬀ. As can also be seen, the vast majority of this growth was in the form of

option compensation, which came to represent the largest component of CEO pay. Most of the other

components remained relatively flat during this time period. In later years, option compensation

appears to have been partly replaced by stock compensation. The decline in option compensation

most likely occurred because firms were required to begin expensing the grant-date fair value of

options in the mid-2000s, which reduced the accounting advantages of option grants.

   Note that compensation in Fig. 2 is reported in terms of grant-date value instead of realized

value at exercise. Therefore, the growth in compensation cannot be attributed to the fact that

previously granted options and restricted stock are worth more at exercise following strong equity

returns. Instead, the figure shows that the grant-date value of new option awards each year grew

dramatically in the 1990s and early 2000s.

   Fig. 3 shows the time series of median option compensation, non-option compensation, and total

compensation for the same sample as Fig. 2. Income for the top 1% and 0.1% of US earners from

Piketty and Saez (2003) are also shown for comparison. All values are adjusted for inflation and

normalized to equal one in 1992. This figure shows that CEO option compensation grew much faster

than other forms of CEO pay from 1992 to 2001. Option compensation grew more than sixfold over

this period, while non-option compensation remained relatively flat, growing at a rate similar to

income for the top 1% and 0.1% of earners. Thus, most of the growth in total CEO compensation

in excess of other high earners during this period came in the form of options. Also consistent with

Fig. 2, total compensation leveled oﬀ considerably after 2001, while option compensation decreased,

and non-option compensation increased.

   Finally, growth rates of CEO and top executive compensation in the US greatly outpaced growth

rates in other countries during the tech boom. This abnormal growth remains after controlling for

country-level economic growth and firm characteristics (Abowd and Bognanno, 1999; Abowd and

Kaplan, 1999; Murphy, 1999; Thomas, 2009; Fernandes et al., 2013). In addition, Frydman and

Jenter (2010) note that the cross-sectional dispersion in CEO pay rose dramatically during the tech


                                                 8
boom, a finding that we corroborate using our data in Fig. A1 in the Online Appendix .


2.2.    Regulatory Changes and the Use of Options

In this paper, we show that rigidity in the number of options granted, combined with rapidly

increasing equity prices and lack of oﬀsetting changes in other forms of compensation, can help

explain the patterns just described. We acknowledge that this is somewhat of a partial theory

in that it does not explain why option compensation came into use in the first place. Murphy

(2013) argues that the sudden rise in the use of options as a form of compensation for executives

in the 1990s was driven by a “perfect storm” of increased shareholder pressure for equity-based pay

combined with various regulatory changes that happened to coincide.

   For example, in 1991, the SEC changed its holding period rules so that stock acquired from

exercising options could be sold immediately, as long as the exercise date was more than six months

after the grant date. Prior to the rule change, executives had to hold stock acquired from exercising

options for at least six months. This requirement meant that executives exercising options had

to deal with cash-flow issues (from paying the exercise price) and risk (from the possibility that

the stock price might decline between the time the options were exercised and the shares obtained

were sold). In 1992, the SEC set pay disclosure rules such that only the number of options paid

to executives needed to be disclosed and not the value of those options. In 1993, the Clinton $1M

deductibility cap was passed. This cap made compensation in excess of $1M non-deductible for

tax purposes. However, the cap did not apply to performance-based pay, including at-the-money

options. In addition, prior to 2006, options did not need to be recognized as an expense on a firm’s

income statement, making them attractive from an accounting perspective.

   Again, we do not attempt to explain why firms began using options. The above factors all likely

contributed. Our goal is to show that, conditional on using option compensation, a focus on the

number of options awarded led to high growth in the grant-date value of new awards.




                                                 9
2.3.    Existing Explanations

A number of theories have been proposed for the growth in US CEO compensation in recent decades.

One view is that CEOs were able to raise their own pay due to weak corporate governance (Bebchuk

and Fried, 2004; Kuhnen and Zwiebel, 2009). However, there is little evidence that corporate

governance has become weaker over time or in the 1990s in particular. If anything, it appears that

governance has been on an upward trend (Holmstrom and Kaplan, 2001; Hermalin, 2005; Kaplan,

2008). More in the spirit of this paper, it has also been argued that options may have been diﬃcult

for boards or shareholders to understand (Hall and Murphy, 2003; Jensen et al., 2004), and thus

were an easier form of compensation for executives to “skim.” In later analysis, we show that lack of

sophistication with respect to option valuation may have contributed to number-rigidity and that

firms with more independent or sophisticated boards were less likely to grant number-rigid pay.

   A second view is that the growth in CEO pay is primarily due to increases in firm size. According

to this view, managerial talent has a multiplicative eﬀect on firm output, so matching with a slightly

more talented manager can lead to large increases in firm value (Gabaix and Landier, 2008; Tervio,

2008). Gabaix and Landier show that, under certain conditions, CEO pay should move one-for-one

with changes in the size of the typical firm. Thus, the sixfold increase in CEO pay between 1980

and 2003 can be explained by the sixfold increase in average market capitalization over that period.

However, Frydman and Saks (2010) show that there is virtually no correlation between firm size

and CEO pay prior to 1970. In a similar vein, Nagel (2010) shows that the relation following 1970

is sensitive to sample-selection. More generally, we believe Gabaix and Landier’s model highlights

a very important channel for the growth in executive compensation. However, for the growth in

firm size to explain all of the rise in CEO compensation in recent decades, one must make strong

parameter assumptions. We show that number-rigidity can help explain the oﬀ-trend growth in

CEO compensation during the tech boom while allowing for more conservative assumptions.

   A third view is that CEO compensation has risen due to changes in the nature of the job.

For example, managers’ marginal product may have increased due to improved communications



                                                 10
technology (Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg, 2006), increased competition (Hubbard and Palia, 1995;

Cuñat and Guadalupe, 2009a,b), or higher volatility of the business environment (Dow and Raposo,

2005; Campbell et al., 2001). Hermalin (2005) suggests that CEOs must be compensated for the

increased risk of being fired due to improved corporate governance. Frydman (2007) and Murphy

and Zabojnik (2010) show that CEO jobs have increasingly placed a greater emphasis on general

rather than firm-specific skills; this shift may have allowed managers to capture a greater portion

of the rents.

   While all these theories are likely to be important contributors to the growth in executive

compensation over the past several decades, they also do not fully capture the unique trends during

the tech boom (Frydman and Jenter, 2010). None of these theories are tied directly to option

compensation, and they do not account for the increase in the cross-sectional dispersion of CEO

pay. In addition, the eﬀect of the various factors suggested may not be large or rapid enough to

explain the dramatic oﬀ-trend growth in compensation during the 1990s and early 2000s.

   Related to this paper, Murphy (2002) argues that misperceptions regarding the cost of option

compensation may have contributed to compensation growth. He argues that many boards and

practitioners viewed the cost of granting options as far below the true economic cost because options

could be granted with no cash outlay, without incurring an accounting charge, and upon exercise led

to no change in accounting income as well as a reduction in taxable income. The number-rigidity

phenomenon highlighted in this paper may be symptomatic of a related form of misperceived costs

in which number is taken as a proxy for value. Consistent with the idea that firms misperceive costs

if they are not accompanied by changes to recognized accounting income, we show in Section 5.2 that

firms were less likely to focus on the number of options granted if they expensed the Black–Scholes

value of options when reporting earnings.




                                                 11
3.     Data

3.1.     Sources

We use executive compensation data from Execucomp, which covers firms in the S&P 1500. Our

sample period runs from 1992 to 2010. The data are derived from firms’ annual proxy statements

and contain information regarding the compensation paid to the top executives in a firm (usually

five per firm) in various forms (e.g., salary, bonus, stock, options, etc.) during the fiscal year. For

options, Execucomp contains detailed grant-level data on the date, number, and value of each option

grant. In 20% of cases, executives receive more than one option grant during a fiscal year. Often,

one grant is specific to the executive, while another is part of a long-term incentive plan that is

common among all executives in the firm. In these cases, we focus on the largest option grant (as

measured by the number of options) within each fiscal year, to better identify number-rigid grants.

     For observations after 2006, we use the exact date of the option grant to precisely measure firm

returns between consecutive grants. Prior to 2006, firms were only required to report the expiration

date of the option grant. Following the literature (e.g., Aboody and Kasznik, 2000; Lie, 2005), we

infer the grant date from the expiration date under the assumption that expiration dates occur on

grant date annual anniversaries. However, we note that this may introduce error into our estimates

of firm returns between consecutive grants as some firms set expiration dates to the end of quarters

or years. In order to properly split-adjust the grant-level data, we assume that, following SEC

requirements, firms do not report the number of options originally in a grant, but the number of

options in a grant as of the proxy date (SRCDATE in Execucomp). Thus, if an executive was

granted 100 options, but there was a 2-for-1 stock split prior to the proxy date, the firm would

report that the executive was granted 200 options on its proxy statement. We verify that our

results are not driven by reporting errors around splits, as discussed in Section C in the Online

Appendix . Finally, firms were required to begin reporting the fair value of option compensation

in 2006. Following the literature, we use the Black–Scholes value computed by Execucomp prior to



                                                  12
2006.

    Execucomp oﬀers grant-level option award data throughout our sample period. However, it

only has grant-level stock award data after 2006. Therefore, we instead use grant-level stock award

data from the Form 4 filings that the SEC requires of CEOs and other insiders. These filings must

report details of changes in ownership—including from stock grants. Thomson-Reuters collects this

information in their TNF Insider Filings dataset.1 We merge these data based on CEO names, hand

matching in ambiguous cases.

    We hand collect data on voluntary expensing of option compensation from firms’ 10-K filings.

Data on board characteristics come from RiskMetrics. Director education information comes from

BoardEx. Accounting data come from Compustat. Market and firm return data come from the

Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and the Fama–French Data Library. For all our

analysis, unless otherwise noted, we restrict the sample to CEOs of S&P 500 firms. Because firms

may enter and exit the S&P 500 during our sample period, we include all 947 firms that were ever

part of the S&P 500 during the sample period. This assures that the trends we document do not

merely reflect changes in the composition of the index.

    Our baseline analysis focuses on S&P 500 CEOs because they experienced the most dramatic

and publicly scrutinized increases in pay. However, other top executives also experienced strong

pay growth during our sample period. In supplementary results shown in Fig. A2 in the Online

Appendix, we also find strong number-rigidity in extended samples using all top executives in a firm

and/or all firms in the S&P 1500. This suggests that number-rigidity can account for increases in

executive compensation more broadly. To increase estimation power, we use these extended samples

in some regressions.




   1
     A limitation of these data is that restricted stock units that are convertible into shares upon vesting might not
be reported on a Form 4 until they vest. However, these units would still show up as “value” in the compensation
summary table of the proxy statement.


                                                         13
3.2.     Identifying Number-Rigid Grants

We categorize option grants each year as number-rigid if the split-adjusted number of options in the

grant is the same as in the previous year. More broadly, we categorize grants as number-reference

(inclusive of number-rigid) if the ratio of the number of options granted in the current year relative

to the previous year equals 1± a multiple of 1/2, 1/4, ... , 1/10. Number-reference grants may award

exactly double or half the number of options awarded in the previous year, or they may award other

exact fractional increases/decreases. These number-reference grants could reflect a focus on number

in the compensation-setting process, however, in some cases they may be an artifact of rounding

to the nearest round lot in number. Observations in which the executive received zero options

in either the current or previous year are never categorized as number-rigid or number-reference

(e.g., receiving zero options in two consecutive years is not considered number-rigid). We also only

compare the number of options in consecutive years (e.g., a CEO who receives 100,000 options in

1996, none in 1997, and 100,000 in 1998 would not be considered number-rigid in either 1997 or

1998).

   In later parts of this paper, we also refer to “number-rigid firms.” By number-rigid firms, we

mean firms that granted number-rigid options to their CEO in the current year. A firm does not

necessarily grant the same number of options to its CEO for the full length of his or her tenure.

However, we find that when a formerly number-rigid firm does adjust the number of options granted,

the CEO usually receives an increase in option compensation (both in terms of number and value),

as shown in Table A2 in the Online Appendix .


3.3.     Summary Statistics

Next, we explore the extent to which firms with number-rigid CEO option compensation diﬀer from

other firms in terms of their observable characteristics. Because there are likely to be time trends

in these variables and the prevalence of number-rigidity has changed over time, we examine three

cross-sections of the data from 1995, 2000, and 2005 rather than pool all years together. Table 1



                                                 14
compares firm characteristics for number-rigid, number-reference, and other option paying firms.

Number-rigid and number-reference firms appear to be fairly similar to other option payers in terms

of size, market to book, investment, leverage, and profitability. We also find that number-rigidity

occurs across many industries and that the overall industry distribution is fairly similar for the three

types of firms (see the Online Appendix for details). However, our analysis does not assume that

firms choose to grant number-rigid compensation randomly. Indeed, firms that do so may choose

to report information in a less transparent manner or have worse proxies for governance, as shown

in our later analysis.



4.     Results

4.1.     Rigidity in Executive Compensation

We begin by exploring the extent of rigidity in various units of executive option and stock grants

over our sample period. By rigidity, we refer specifically to cases in which the compensation growth

distribution appears lumpy, with extra mass at zero (no change relative to the previous year). First,

we compute the percent change in the (split-adjusted) number of options granted to a CEO in the

current year relative to the previous year. Panel A of Fig. 1 shows a histogram representing the

distribution of growth in the number of options awarded to a CEO. The sample consists of CEOs

that received options in the current and previous year. The most striking feature of this figure is

the large spike at zero. By far, the modal outcome is for a CEO to be paid the exact same number

of options in the current year as in the previous year. This is the case for nearly 20% of CEO

option grants. Interestingly, there are also spikes at round changes such as -50% and 100%, even

after adjusting for splits. In addition, we find that many other changes occur in round units—for

example, an exact 10% increase in the number of options awarded relative to the previous year.

These patterns would seem to suggest that someone in the compensation-setting process thinks of

option grants in number rather than dollar terms.

     We focus on number-rigid grants in this paper because they represent a common and easily


                                                  15
identifiable compensation policy in the data. However, some firms may also have focused on number

in other ways. For example, they may have rewarded CEOs for high firm returns with (potentially

non-round) increases in the number of options. It is diﬃcult to necessarily categorize number

increases coupled with high returns as representing number-focus, but such behavior would only

increase compensation growth. For reasons that will become clear in the next section, a number

increase following high returns would lead to a particularly large increase in the value of option

pay. In Fig. A3 in the Online Appendix we show that, conditional on returns over 25%, there were

indeed many firms during the tech boom that still increased the number of options granted.

    To further explore the extent to which option grants reflect a focus on number or value, we also

examine the distribution of growth in the grant-date Black–Scholes value of options awarded to a

CEO. Panel A of Fig. 4 shows this distribution. We find weaker evidence of rigidity in terms of

Black-Scholes value: less than 6% of CEOs receive the same value of options as in the previous

year.2

    Next, we examine stock compensation. In Fig. 4, we plot the growth distribution for the number

and value for shares awarded to a CEO. The value of a stock grant may be easier to conceptualize

than the value of an option grant. Therefore, one might expect executives and boards to be more

likely to think about stock compensation in dollar terms, leading to less number-rigidity. This is

exactly what we find. Stock grants are somewhat rigid in number, but to a significantly lesser extent

than options.


4.2.      Option Number-Rigidity and Option Pay Growth

Next, we explore the implications of number-rigidity for option pay growth when stock returns are

high. As mentioned earlier, if a firm grants its CEO the same number of new at-the-money options


   2
     We also find evidence that other firms focused on value by granting constant value as a multiple of salary
or constant face value (defined as the grant date price of the underlying multiplied by the number of options) in
consecutive years, with large value increases awarded every several years. We argue that all firms, even if they were
value-focused, experienced competitive spillover eﬀects from number-focused firms in terms of growth in compensation
during the tech boom. In addition, prior to 2006, firms were not required to disclose the Black–Scholes value of options
paid to top executives. Therefore, we use the Black–Scholes value computed by Execucomp for the earlier years of the
sample. We do not find major diﬀerences in value-rigidity when value is self-reported or computed by Execucomp.


                                                          16
as in the previous year, and the firm’s stock price is X% higher than in the previous year, the

grant-date value of the option award will also be X% higher than in the previous year. This follows

directly from the Black–Scholes formula. In particular, for an at-the-money option with a strike

price X that is equal to the grant-date stock price S, the Black–Scholes formula reduces to:


                                            dT               rT
                                   S ⇤ [e        N (Z)   e        N (Z   T (1/2) )],



    where Z = [T (r       d + 2 )]/ T (1/2) . From the formula, it is clear that doubling S will double the

value of the option. To gain further intuition, consider what occurs in a reverse stock split, where

two shares become one share and the stock price doubles. In this case, two options also become

one. Thus, two at-the-money options on the old stock must be worth the same as one at-the-money

option on the new stock. In other words, when the stock price doubles in the split, the value of an

at-the-money option must double as well.

    In light of the discussion above, we compare the relation between option compensation growth

and firm returns for the number-rigid and non-rigid samples. For this exercise, we exclude number-

reference grants from the non-rigid sample. This is done because it is unclear whether number-

reference grants reflect a focus on number, and we want to form a counterfactual based on grants

that are less likely to be number-focused.3 Fig. 5 plots changes in the log Black–Scholes value of

options granted against the log firm return between two consecutive grants. The sample consists

of CEOs that received options in the current and previous year. We fit a local linear regression

using the Epanichnikov kernel with the rule-of-thumb bandwidth. Absent any changes in volatility

or other parameters in the Black–Scholes formula, we expect the relation within the number-rigid

sample to fall along the 45 degree line. Because these parameters do not change substantially year

to year within our sample, we indeed find that the empirical relation falls very close to the 45 degree

line. However, for non-rigid grants, we find that the relation between option value growth and firm


   3
     Nonetheless, our results change little if number-reference grants are included in the non-rigid sample. Likewise,
we find similar results if we exclude firms that granted number-rigid options in the previous year (but not in current
year) from the non-rigid sample.


                                                         17
returns is substantially flatter. The two curves cross just to the right of zero. Thus, CEOs with

number-rigid grants gain more than others when firm returns are positive. Consequently, during

boom periods when firm returns are high on average, CEOs with number-rigid grants experience

higher option pay growth than others with similar performance.


4.3.    Lack of Oﬀsets in Other Forms of Compensation

Next, we explore the extent to which changes in cash and other non-option compensation oﬀset

changes in the value of option grants for number-rigid CEOs. In times when option pay growth for

number-rigid CEOs is very high due to high firm returns, boards could presumably counteract the

change in option pay by adjusting cash compensation in the opposite direction. This would allow

firms to follow a number-rigid policy while simultaneously moderating changes in total pay when

returns are extreme. However, Fig. 2 suggests that there was not a broad reduction in other forms

of pay as options exploded during the tech boom. Indeed, for many firms, there are not enough

dollars in these other forms of pay to oﬀset the large increase in grant-date option values.

   To more formally examine the question of whether other forms of compensation decline to

oﬀset increases in option pay induced by number-rigidity, we reproduce Fig. 5 with the y-axis

now representing cash compensation (salary plus bonus). The results are shown in Panel A of Fig.

6. If cash compensation oﬀsets rigidity-driven changes in option pay, we would expect to find a

negatively sloped line. As can be seen, cash compensation does not decline for number-rigid CEOs

as firm returns become increasingly positive; rather, it increases. Moreover, cash compensation

increases similarly with firm returns for number-rigid CEOs and non-rigid CEOs. If anything,

the slope is slightly steeper for number-rigid CEOs. In Panel B, we also examine all non-option

compensation, including the grant-date value of stock awards. Again we find no evidence that

non-option compensation decreases for number-rigid CEOs when returns are high.

   Of course, risk-averse CEOs may value an additional dollar of risky option compensation less

than a dollar of certain cash compensation. Thus, we would not necessarily expect cash or other

non-option compensation to decline one-for-one with rigidity-induced increases in option pay. How-


                                                 18
ever, our findings suggest that non-option compensation does not decline at all. If anything, it

appears that non-option compensation reinforces rather than oﬀsets increases in option pay driven

by number-rigidity.


4.4.    Spillovers

It it also important to recognize that CEOs whose option compensation is not number-rigid may

still experience higher pay growth than they would have absent number-rigidity among their peers.

This is because competition for CEO talent among firms should lead to spillovers in compensation.

Before presenting direct tests of spillovers, we first present three pieces of motivating evidence that

spillovers between number-rigid and non-rigid firms are likely to occur. For brevity, we reserve

detailed analysis for Table A2 in the Online Appendix and summarize the results below.

   First, we find that firms that awarded number-rigid options to the previous CEO tend to award

the same high compensation to new incoming CEOs. This suggests that the compensation levels at

number-rigid firms will add competitive pressures to the market for CEO talent. Similarly, we find

that number-rigid firms do not undo the gains in compensation experienced during number-rigid

years when they do adjust the number of options granted. In fact, number-rigid firms actually tend

to increase the value of compensation granted during flexible years as compared to a control sample

of firms that did not grant number-rigid options in the previous year. Thus, number-rigid firms do

not follow an “Ss-style model” in which they allow compensation to drift up with returns during

rigid years and then implement a large adjustment downwards in value or number during flexible

years. If firms followed an Ss-style model, number-rigidity might not exert upward pressure on the

compensation of non-rigid peers, as gains from number-rigidity would be temporary. Finally, we

find that executives at number-rigid and non-rigid firms appear to work in integrated rather than

segmented labor markets. That is, executives working at number-rigid firms are no more likely

than others to transition to another number-rigid firm. These results suggest that number-rigid and

non-rigid firms compete for a common pool of executive talent.

   While we have shown that conditions are conducive to spillovers in pay from number-rigid to non-


                                                  19
rigid firms, one may question whether such spillovers in value will occur. If firms and/or executives

misperceive the value of options using number, then increases in the value of option pay at number-

rigid firms would not necessarily apply upward pressure on non-rigid peers. However, in setting pay

levels, most S&P 500 companies rely on private surveys from compensation consultants providing

information on executive pay in similar firms in terms of size and industry. By the beginning of

our sample period, most of these compensation consultants were using Black–Scholes to measure

grant-date values. Thus, the surveys informing compensation committees about competitive pay

levels were based on Black–Scholes and did not distinguish firms making number-rigid grants.

    To directly investigate whether there are spillovers from number-rigid firms to non-rigid firms,

we examine whether executives without number-rigid option pay tend to have higher compensation

growth when more of their peers are number-rigid and have experienced high recent returns. Specif-

ically, we match each CEO in our sample to CEOs of peer firms. Following Faulkender and Yang

(2010), we define peer firms as firms in the same industry (2-digit SIC code) with sales between

50% and 200% of the CEO’s firm. We set the CEO’s compensation date as the date of the largest

option grant from the fiscal year. For symmetry, when a CEO does not have an option grant in a

fiscal year, we assign an artificial compensation date 270 days prior to the firm’s fiscal year end.4

    For each CEO, we then define Percent Peers Rigid and Percent Peers Reference as the percent of

peer CEOs (with compensation dates within the past 365 days) that had number-rigid or number-

reference option grants, respectively. We also define Peer Returns as the average firm return of peer

firms in the year leading up to each peer’s compensation date. If there are spillovers among peers,

we should see that compensation growth for non-rigid CEOs is higher when more of their peers have

number-rigid (or number-reference) grants and experience high returns leading up to the grant.

    The results of this spillovers analysis are shown in Table 2. The dependent variable is the log

change in total compensation. In Columns (1)–(3), the sample consists of all S&P 500 CEOs without

a number-rigid option grant. In Columns (4)–(6), the sample consists of CEOs without a number-

reference option grant. As can be seen, we find a significant positive interaction between peer
   4
     For executives receiving options, 270 days is the median time between the date of their largest option grant and
the end of the fiscal year.


                                                         20
returns and peer number focus across all samples and specifications, including with firm fixed eﬀects

in Columns (3) and (6). Thus, CEOs with non-rigid option pay experience stronger compensation

growth when their peer group has more number-rigid option pay and higher returns. These results

are consistent with spillovers, most likely operating through compensation surveys.


4.5.    Calibration Exercise

Given the above findings that 1) number-rigidity is prevalent, 2) it leads to outsized option pay

growth when returns are high, 3) other forms of compensation do not decrease to oﬀset this option

pay growth, and 4) there are spillovers onto non-rigid executives, it seems quite plausible that

number-rigidity could account for a significant portion of overall growth in CEO pay during our

sample period.

   To give a sense of potential magnitudes, we calibrate a model of equilibrium compensation from

Gabaix and Landier (2008) (henceforth, GL). It may appear counterintuitive to use the GL model

to calibrate equilibrium eﬀects of number-rigidity, as under certain parameter assumptions, the

GL model can already explain the growth in compensation during the tech boom without option

number-rigidity. However, for the growth in firm size to explain all of the rise in CEO compensation,

one must assume that a key model parameter, , equals one. The parameter        represents the impact

of CEO skill on firm earnings. When equals one, this implies constant returns to scale. When

is less than one, this implies decreasing returns to scale. GL show evidence that the assumption of

  being equal to one holds from 1992–2004. However, Frydman and Saks (2010) suggest that           is

much closer to zero prior to 1970. In a similar vein, Nagel (2010) shows that the relation following

1970 is sensitive to sample-selection. In our own untabulated results, we estimate     equal to 0.48

in the years 2004–2013.

   We stress that it is not the goal of this paper to claim that   is less than one or that   did not

increase during the tech boom. However, we hope to oﬀer a complementary explanation for the rise

in compensation that is tied to an easily observable empirical pattern (number-rigidity in option

compensation that arose only during the tech boom) and does not require assumptions about


                                                 21
being close to one. In what follows, we show that              = 0.5 plus number-rigidity can explain the

oﬀ-trend growth in CEO compensation during the tech boom.

      GL’s model implies that, if a fraction f of firms wish to pay their CEO         as much as similarly

sized firms, the pay of all CEOs will increase by

                                       " ✓             ◆1/(↵    )
                                                                             #↵
                                             (1   f)
                                  ⇤= f                              +1   f        ,                     (1)
                                              1   f


where       represents the impact of CEO skill on firm earnings,↵ describes the distribution of firm size

in the right tail (most estimates imply that ↵ = 1, see GL for a full explanation) and        is determined

such that         ↵   is equal to the relation between log compensation and log firm size (approximately

0.2       0.4 in the data, see GL for a full explanation). We set f equal to the fraction of number-rigid

CEOs in each year of our data. Following GL, we focus on diﬀerences in the grant-date value of

total pay between number-rigid and non-rigid firms (as shown earlier, these diﬀerences are primarily

due to diﬀerences in the grant date-value of option pay and lack of oﬀsets in non-option pay). We

set       equal to the average diﬀerence between actual and counterfactual total pay growth each year

in the non-rigid sample, using realized returns for each firm and the relation estimated in Fig. A4

in the Online Appendix. For other model parameters, we use               = 0.5, ↵ = 1, and   = 0.3.

      Fig. 7 shows the calibration results. The solid line represents the median value of total com-

pensation granted each year in the real data. The short-dashed line shows cumulative growth that

can be attributed to number-rigid option grants including spillovers, assuming that growth absent

number-rigidity would have been zero. We find that number-rigidity can explain more than half of

the growth in median compensation during the tech boom and over the course of the full sample

period from 1992 to 2010.

      We also account for the additional changes in compensation implied by the GL model due to

changes in firm size. The long-dashed line shows the cumulative growth in median compensation

that can be attributed to a combination of number-rigidity and changes in median firm size.5 We

      5
    The size of the typical firm in each year is calculated as the debt plus equity (Compustat codes:
prcc_f*abs(csho)+at-ceq-txdb) of the 250th largest firm in each year, measured in 2000 dollars, following


                                                       22
find that number-rigidity combined with growth in aggregate firm size can approximately match all

of the growth in compensation over the sample period.

     Our estimates are meant to provide a rough guide for the potential magnitude of the eﬀect of

number-rigidity. In Table A3 in the Online Appendix , we estimate the eﬀect using a range of

alternative parameter values. While the estimates vary with parameter assumptions, we find that

the eﬀect of number-rigidity is likely to be substantial in most cases. We also stress that we calibrate

the GL spillovers model because it is tractable and commonly cited in the literature. The GL model

assumes an important role for firm size and that all large firms compete for CEO talent in a fully

integrated labor market (in reality, spillovers may be stronger within compensation peer groups).

However, spillover eﬀects are likely to operate in any competitive environment, even if the exact

assumptions used in the GL model do not hold.



5.       Sources of Rigidity

5.1.      Two Broad Classes of Theories

Thus far, we have shown that number-rigidity in option pay can account for a substantial portion

of the rise in executive compensation during the tech boom. Had executives with number-rigid

pay been compensated like similarly performing executives without number-rigid pay, aggregate

compensation growth would have been considerably lower. Next, it is natural to ask why executives

received number-rigid option pay in the first place. In the remainder of the paper, we examine this

question. In particular, we attempt to distinguish empirically between two broad classes of theories.


5.1.1.     Optimal Contracting

The first class of theories are ones in which all parties involved in the compensation-setting process

understand how to value options but choose to grant the same number of options each year because

this implements an optimal incentive scheme. For example, firms may grant number-rigid options


the variable definitions in Gabaix and Landier (2008).


                                                    23
to award very steep pay-for-performance incentives. As shown earlier in Fig. 5, number-rigidity

leads to a steeper pay vs. firm return relation than that in a typical non-rigid compensation scheme.

However, in theory, firms could target grant-date value in a flexible manner to implement any desired

pay-for-performance relation without necessarily keeping number fixed.

    Firms may also grant number-rigid options to manage executive ownership. In a classic principal-

agent setting (e.g., Holmstrom, 1979; Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1987), optimal CEO ownership is a

function of the cost of managerial eﬀort, the degree of managerial risk aversion, and the randomness

of output. To the extent that these factors remain constant over time, a firm may wish to keep CEO

ownership constant as well. Number-rigidity may be one way of achieving that objective. However,

in untabulated results, we find that executives with number-rigid pay still experience significant

changes in their fractional ownership as measured by the Jensen–Murphy statistic (Jensen and

Murphy, 1990).6 This is because options vest over time and executives choose to exercise their vested

options at diﬀerent points. In addition, even if number-rigidity did keep CEO ownership fixed, the

above models imply that large stock price increases should lead to at least partial cash compensation

oﬀsets in order to prevent slackness in the participation constraint. As we show in the previous

section, there is no evidence of such oﬀsetting declines in cash compensation. Finally, Edmans et al.

(2009) show theoretically that with multiplicative managerial production functions/preferences, it

is not optimal for a CEO’s fractional ownership to remain constant. Since managerial eﬀort has a

larger dollar eﬀect in larger firms, CEOs will work even when having a relatively small equity stake.

Thus, fractional ownership should decrease when firm size increases due to high equity returns.

    It is also worth noting that number-rigidity is not implied by other multiplicative compensation

models such as Gabaix and Landier (2008). According to Gabaix and Landier (2008), holding

the firm-CEO match fixed, CEO pay should increase with market returns rather than firm-specific

returns because market returns are a better proxy for an executive’s outside option.

    A final variation of the first class of theories are ones in which contracting frictions play an
   6
     The Jensen–Murphy statistic is the dollar change in executive wealth for a $1000 change in firm value and is
calculated as the executive’s fractional equity ownership [(number of shares held + number of options held * average
option delta) / (number of shares outstanding)] multiplied by $1000. Option deltas and holdings are computed using
the Core and Guay (2002) approximation as implemented by Edmans et al. (2009).


                                                        24
important role. In these theories, number-rigidity may not be optimal in a frictionless world, but

it may be optimal once frictions are taken into account. Moreover, deviations from the first-best

may be minor. For example, it may be costly to seek shareholder approval for a change in the

number of options awarded to a CEO. Such menu costs might lead firms to adopt multi-year fixed

number plans (Hall, 1999; Shue and Townsend, 2014). However, when firms do adjust the number

of options granted, they should undo deviations from the first-best, as in an Ss-style model. As

discussed earlier, however, this does not seem to be the case. Number-rigid grants followed by

non-rigid grants are usually associated with increases rather than decreases in option pay, both in

terms of number and value.


5.1.2.    Lack of Sophistication

The second broad class of theories we explore include explanations in which at least one party in

the compensation-setting process is somewhat unsophisticated about how to value options. Given

that options are typically granted at-the-money, it is not immediately obvious that granting the

same number of new options after a stock price increase would coincide with a pay increase. Fully

understanding this notion requires knowledge of option pricing formulas that economists only derived

relatively recently (Black and Scholes, 1973). There is ample anecdotal evidence that when option

compensation first came into use, many did not understand or trust these formulas.

   Instead of using option valuation formulas, people may have used the number of options awarded

as a rough proxy for the value of the grant. This heuristic is similar to the well-known phenomenon of

money illusion, or the tendency to think about money in nominal rather than real terms (Kahneman

et al., 1986; Shafir et al., 1997). Given that it is considerably harder to translate number to value

for options than it is to translate nominal to real for money, it seems plausible that a similar bias

may operate in our context. Along these lines, in Section B in the Online Appendix, we summarize

a survey conducted by a large compensation consulting firm.7 The survey suggests that executives

viewed a decline in the number of options awarded following good performance as unfair, even if
   7
    “Raising the Stakes: A Look at Current Stock Option Granting Practices,” 1998, Towers Perrin CompScan
Report.


                                                   25
the decline in number coincided with an increase in value.

   In addition, there were a variety of regulations that emphasized the number rather than value

of options granted to executives. For example, up until 2006, the SEC only required the number

of options granted to top executives to be reported in the compensation summary table of proxy

statements. Similarly, FASB did not require the value of at-the-money option grants to be expensed

in income statements until 2006. Finally, NYSE and NASD listing requirements also mandated

shareholder approval for only the number of options granted. These regulations likely reflect, but

also may have influenced, the way that compensation was commonly measured.

   Importantly, lack of sophistication in the second class of theories may be on the part of the CEO

or other stakeholders such as the board, shareholders, regulators, and/or lower-level employees. For

example, shareholders may impose an outrage constraint that limits executive compensation. How-

ever, if shareholders do not fully understand that the value of compensation granted is rising even

as number of options remains fixed, this outrage constraint may fail to bind. Similarly, if lower-level

employees do not fully understand options, they may demand number-rigid option compensation.

Number-rigid compensation may then percolate upwards toward the executive suite as a way to

avoid pay inversion within the hierarchy of the firm.


5.2.    Sensitivity to Reporting Requirements and Governance

We conduct a number of tests to help distinguish between the two classes of theories described

above. In what follows, we present results pointing toward the second class of theories, suggesting

that number-rigidity arises primarily from imperfect understanding of option valuation. However,

we cannot rule out the possibility that, for a subset of firms, number-rigidity arises from optimal

contracting.

   We begin by testing whether firms become less likely to grant number-rigid options when they are

required to expense or disclose the grant-date dollar value of those options on their income and proxy

statements, respectively. If number-rigidity implements an optimal contract, the contract should

remain optimal regardless of the way option compensation is reported to shareholders. However,


                                                  26
if number-rigidity arises from naïveté on someone’s part, changes in reporting requirements may

reduce that naïveté.

   To examine sensitivity to reporting requirements, we exploit two separate reforms by FASB and

the SEC that went into eﬀect in 2006. The FASB reform (eﬀective for fiscal years ending after June

15, 2006) required firms to subtract the total Black–Scholes value of option compensation paid to all

employees from reported earnings. For brevity we will refer to this practice as “required expensing.”

The SEC reform (eﬀective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2006) required firms to disclose

the Black–Scholes value of option compensation paid to each proxy-named executive on the firm’s

proxy statements. We will refer to this practice as “required disclosure.” We exploit these reforms

to test whether number-rigidity declines when option pay is expensed or disclosed transparently

in dollar terms to shareholders. To control for concurrent time trends, we use a diﬀerences-in-

diﬀerences framework with stock compensation as a control group. Stock compensation also has a

number and value associated with it, but its value had to be disclosed and expensed throughout

our sample period. Because the two reforms coincide so closely, it is diﬃcult to distinguish their

eﬀects empirically. We begin by estimating the combined eﬀect of the two reforms. In particular,

we exclude observations with fiscal years ending between June 15, 2006 and December 15, 2006,

because in these fiscal years only the FASB reform was in eﬀect. In subsequent analysis, we attempt

to separately estimate the eﬀect of expensing and disclosure.

   Table 3 explores the eﬀects of these reforms. Observations are at the executive by year by grant

type level, where grant type represents option grants or stock grants. The sample is restricted to

S&P 500 CEOs who received the relevant grant type in the current year and in the previous year.

Thus, a CEO receiving both stock and options compensation would have two observations per year.

Our dependent variable is a number-rigid (number-reference) indicator variable equal to one if the

stock or option grant under observation is number-rigid (number-reference) relative to the grant of

the same type in the previous year. We define number-rigid (number-reference) grants for stock

analogously to options (see Section 3.2). The primary independent variables are an indicator equal

to one if the grant was awarded after the reforms went into eﬀect, an indicator equal to one if the


                                                 27
grant was in the form of options (rather than stock), and the interaction between the two. The

regressions show that, throughout our sample period, option grants are significantly more likely

to be number-rigid than stock grants. This is consistent with the idea that converting number

to value is harder for options than for stock, leading to greater money-illusion type thinking. If

option compensation were number-rigid for incentive reasons, for example, to keep CEOs’ ownership

stake at a certain level, one would expect a similar level of number-rigidity for stock compensation.

Likewise, one would expect a similar level of number-rigidity for stock compensation if number-

rigidity were primarily designed to ensure that compensation grows one-for-one with returns.

   We also find that the rule changes had no eﬀect on number-rigidity for stock grants, consistent

with the fact that the changes only targeted options. In particular, the coeﬃcient on Post-Reforms

is insignificant except for in Column 3, where we do not include controls. Finally, and most impor-

tantly, we estimate a significant negative coeﬃcient on the interaction term. This shows that the

probability of number-rigidity declined more for options than for stock following the rule changes

(the diﬀerence between number-rigidity in stocks and options is approximately cut in half).

   Note that these results are not driven by a general decline in the use of options following the

rule changes. The use of option compensation did decline after 2006; however, Table 3 shows

that, conditional on granting options, the probability that the options were number-rigid declined

significantly. Similarly, our results are not driven by option-granting firms simply reducing option

compensation in the year of the reforms, which would lead to lower number-rigidity that year.

We actually find stronger results if we exclude a larger window around the reforms. Overall, our

findings are consistent with the idea that number-rigidity at least partly results from inattention

to value. However, it remains possible that a subset of firms use number-rigidity to implement

an optimal (or near-optimal) contract along the lines outlined in Section 5.1.1. In particular, the

few firms that continue to use number-rigid option pay after the disclosure and expensing reforms

may have done so because number-rigidity implements their optimal incentive scheme. Similarly,

optimal contracting may help explain why, to a lesser extent, number-rigidity also exists for stock

compensation as shown earlier in Fig. 4 (even though the value of stock compensation is relatively


                                                 28
easy to calculate and had to be expensed and disclosed throughout our sample period). For this

subset of firms, number-rigid stock compensation may again implement an optimal or near-optimal

compensation scheme.

    The above results suggest that some combination of expensing and disclosure reduces number-

rigidity in option pay. An important remaining question is whether it is primarily expensing or

disclosure that is responsible for the reduction. One approach would be to examine whether number-

rigidity declined in fiscal years ending between June 15, 2006 and December 15, 2006, when required

expensing was in eﬀect but not required disclosure. Given the shortness of the time window, such

a test has limited statistical power. However, we show in Table A4 in the Online Appendix that

there is indeed a significant decline in number-reference grants during those months, suggesting that

expensing without disclosure does have an eﬀect.

    To shed further light on this question, we exploit the fact that, prior to the reforms, some

firms voluntarily chose to expense and/or disclose. In particular, with the passage of FAS123 in

1995, FASB gave firms the option of (1) expensing the Black–Scholes value of option awards or (2)

expensing the intrinsic value, which is zero when options are granted at-the-money, as is typically

the case.8 Virtually all firms chose to expense the (zero) intrinsic value of option grants until a few

years preceding the passage of FAS123r, when some switched voluntarily.

    Similarly, prior to the SEC rule change in 2006, all non-option components of executive pay

were stated in dollar terms in the compensation summary table of a proxy statement, while option

pay was stated in number terms. In the detailed option table, firms had the choice of reporting

Black–Scholes value or potential realizable value, which stated what the future intrinsic value of

the options would be under 5% and 10% stock price appreciation scenarios. Again, the majority

of firms elected not to disclose Black–Scholes value, although some did do so voluntarily (Murphy,

1996).9
   8
        When options were expensed at intrinsic value, a footnote was required stating what earnings would have been
if firms had instead expensed the total Black–Scholes value of all employee stock options. However this footnote may
not have been very salient as it did not aﬀect the main reported earnings numbers. In addition many firms prefaced
the footnote by stating their belief that Black–Scholes was not a sensible methodology.
      9
        Because potential realizable value also increases proportionally with the stock price, one may argue that even
reporting this number should reduce naïveté. However, this information did not appear in the compensation summary


                                                         29
    To test how voluntary expensing and disclosure relate to number-rigidity, we hand collect data

on voluntary expensing from firm 10-K filings. In particular, for each firm that was ever a part of

the S&P 500 in our data, we go through its 10-K filings following the passage of FAS123 in October

1995. We record the date (if any) that the firm first expensed the Black–Scholes value of option

compensation through 1) the voluntary adoption of the fair value provisions of FAS123 or 2) the

voluntary early adoption of FAS123r.10 Based on these dates, we create a Voluntary Expensing

indicator variable equal to one if the firm voluntarily expensed option compensation in a given year.

Similarly, we create a Voluntary Disclosure indicator variable based on the PCDVALUE variable in

Execucomp. For fiscal years ending between December 15, 1996 and June 15, 2006, all firms could

choose to expense or disclose. Therefore, for this sample period, we regress number-rigidity on both

the voluntary expensing and voluntary disclosure indicators. The results are shown in Table 4. To

increase power, we expand our sample to include all top executives (rather than only CEOs) at

firms that were ever a part of the S&P 500 during our sample period. We find that grants become

significantly less likely to be number-rigid and number-reference when firms voluntarily expense, but

voluntary disclosure has a statistically insignificant eﬀect. The results remain relatively unchanged

with the inclusion of firm fixed eﬀects in Columns (2) and (4). Thus, it does not appear that the

results are driven by time-invariant unobservable diﬀerences between the types of firms that choose

to expense or disclose and those that choose not to. Overall, these results show that expensing the

grant-date value of options (which leads to lower reported earnings) has a greater eﬀect on how the

cost of option awards is viewed than merely disclosing the value. One reason may be that proxy

disclosures do not reflect the views of the CEO or board but are merely made by accountants and

lawyers hired by the firm.

    Finally, in Table 5, we test how various board characteristics relate to number-rigidity. To

further increase power, we expand our sample to include all top executives at firms that were ever

table and thus may have been less salient. Moreover, potential realizable value represents a scenario analysis and
thus is less likely to be viewed as a measure of the grant’s current value. In fact, because potential realizable value
is tied to the intrinsic value of the options, this measure may still encourage the idea that the current value is zero
for at-the-money options.
    10
       FAS123r was issued in December 2004. After its issuance, firms did not have to adopt it until their first fiscal
year starting after June 15, 2006. However, some firms adopted it before they were required to.


                                                          30
a part of the S&P 1500 during our sample period. It is plausible that firms with more independent

or sophisticated boards are more likely to choose optimal compensation structures or to be aware

of option valuation methods. We find that boards with a greater percentage of directors that are

independent, a greater percentage of independent directors that joined before the current CEO, or a

greater percentage of independent directors with an MBA degree are significantly less likely to grant

number-rigid options. This again cuts against the first class of theories, in which number-rigidity

arises from optimal contracting, as it seems that number-rigidity is correlated with proxies for worse

governance.


5.3.    Sophistication

Given that transparency and governance reduce number-rigidity, one may wonder whether CEOs

and/or boards always understood the value-implications of number-rigidity. To investigate the

degree of CEO/board sophistication, we examine whether the probability of CEOs receiving number-

rigid grants is asymmetric with respect to firm returns. If CEOs or boards are sophisticated about

option valuation and want to reward good performance and also to bound losses following poor

performance, they would implement number-rigid pay when their firm had positive returns but

not when their firm had negative returns. Panel A of Figure 8 shows a local linear regression in

which the number-rigid indicator is regressed on firm returns in the year prior to the option grant

date. We limit the sample to CEOs of firms that were ever a part of the S&P 500 over our sample

period and use the Epanichnikov kernel with the rule-of-thumb bandwidth. We find that, indeed,

the probability of a CEO receiving number-rigid pay following very positive returns (when rigidity

would lead to large pay increases) is considerably higher than the probability following very negative

returns (when rigidity would lead to large pay declines). This asymmetry is consistent with at least

some CEOs or boards recognizing that the value of the same number of new options varies with

their firm’s stock price. Panel B shows that the asymmetry is weaker among the sample of all S&P

1500 executives.

   In contrast to the previous result, we also find evidence suggesting that some CEOs do endure


                                                 31
large losses in value due to number-rigidity. Specifically, we examine whether executives continue to

receive the same (non-split adjusted) number of options as in the previous year following a positive

stock split. The compensation survey cited earlier suggests this may be the case. The survey finds

that, following a split, roughly half of number-rigid firms hold their (non-split adjusted) number

of options fixed. The report concludes that: “Stock splits also oﬀer an opportunity to readjust

grant levels, moving back toward more competitive levels, without jolting employees’ perceptions

or expectations quite so drastically.”

    To more formally test whether there is evidence of such behavior, we limit our sample to firms

that engaged in a positive stock split between the time of the previous option grant and the current

grant. Panel A of Fig. 9 shows the distribution of growth in the (non-split-adjusted) number of

options granted in the current year relative to the previous year. For both the sample of S&P 500

CEOs and S&P 1500 Top Executives, following a stock split, the modal percentage change in the

number of options granted is 100%; this corresponds to split-adjusted number-rigidity following a

2-for-1 split. However, the second most common occurrence is for the number of options granted to

remain the same as in the previous year, despite the split. This is in contrast to stock compensation,

where, following a split, very few executives receive the same number of shares as they did in the

previous year. Overall, these results are consistent with naïveté regarding options. Following

positive stock splits, CEOs who continue to receive the same number of options typically experience

a 50% decline in the value of their option compensation, all else equal.11

    In Panel B of Fig. 9, we explore whether the decline in option compensation from lack of

split-adjustments is oﬀset by an increase in non-option compensation. The sample is limited to the

set of observations in which the (non-split-adjusted) number of options awarded remains constant

following a positive stock split. The figure plots the change in non-option compensation against

the loss in value due to the lack of split adjustment in the number of options granted. The dotted
  11
     One important concern is that the above results may be driven by reporting errors. In our analysis, we assume
that, as required by the SEC, firms report their compensation for the previous fiscal year in terms of the correct
units as of the proxy date. It is possible that some firms violate these requirements. However, the most obvious type
of potential reporting errors would actually lead us to find a smaller spike at zero in Panel A of Fig. 9 than exists
in reality. Moreover, we confirm that our results are very similar using only observations that are unlikely to have
reporting errors as well as using alternative data sources. See Section C of the Online Appendix for details.


                                                         32
line shows the change in other compensation necessary to fully oﬀset these losses. The solid line

represents the relation between the actual change in non-option compensation and the losses due

to the lack of the split adjustment, as estimated using a local linear regression. As can be seen,

the smoothed regression line is relatively flat. Moreover, the diﬀerence between the two lines is also

statistically significant in a linear regression. Thus, non-option compensation does not change to

oﬀset the loss of option compensation due to the lack of split adjustment. Again, these findings seem

to run counter to optimal contracting theories, in which all parties understand option valuation.



6.     Conclusion

Several theories have been proposed to explain the dramatic rise in CEO pay during the 1990s

and early 2000s. In this paper, we explore an alternative and complementary explanation, based

on the observation that there is a high degree of rigidity in the number of options CEOs receive.

Number-rigidity in option compensation implies that the grant-date value of option pay will grow

with firm equity returns, which were very high on average during the tech boom. We also show that

salary, bonus, and other non-option compensation did not adjust downward to oﬀset the rigidity-

induced increases in option pay. Moreover, there are compensation spillovers from executives that

receive number-rigid option pay to those that do not. Finally, we present evidence that number-

rigidity arises from a lack of sophistication about option valuation that is akin to money illusion.

In particular, we show that number-rigidity is more prevalent for option compensation than stock

compensation, which is easier to value. Moreover, option number-rigidity declines relative to stock

number-rigidity when firms (voluntarily or involuntarily) begin to disclose and expense the grant-

date value of their option pay. In particular, firms are significantly less likely grant number-rigid

options if they expense the grant-date value of options on their income statements. Finally, improved

governance also corresponds to reduced number-rigidity in options.

     Overall, we conclude that number-rigidity in options can explain a substantial portion of the

oﬀ-trend growth in CEO compensation during the tech boom. Number-rigidity can also explain the



                                                 33
increased dispersion in CEO pay, the diﬀerence in pay growth between the US and other countries,

and the increased correlation between pay and firm-specific equity returns. Finally, the decline in

number-rigidity, resulting from changes in reporting requirements, helps to explain why executive

pay increased less with the high equity returns during the housing boom in the mid-2000s.




                                                34
                                                                                               Figure 2
                                      CEO Compensation Over Time
This figure is created following the methodology in Murphy (2013). The sample is restricted to CEOs of firms
that were ever a part of the S&P 500 from 1992 to 2010. The height of each bar represents the median level of
total compensation each year in 2011 dollars. In addition, each bar is decomposed into the mean proportion
represented by each component of compensation in each year. The bonus component includes compensation
included in non-equity incentive plans and long-term incentive plans. All components of compensation are
calculated using grant-date values instead of realized values at exercise.


                                                                                                                                              7.8 7.6                     8.0
                                       8                                                                   7.4
                                                                                                                                7.1 6.9                     7.0
                                                                                                    6.8                                                            6.7
      Median CEO Compensation (Millions)




                                                                                                                  6.5 6.3
                                                                                             6.2
                                       6
                                                                                      5.0
                                                                               4.5
                                                                        3.9
                                       4
                                                         3.1 3.2
                                                  2.5
                                           2.1
                                       2




                                       0
                                           1992
                                                  1993
                                                          1994
                                                                 1995
                                                                        1996
                                                                               1997
                                                                                      1998
                                                                                             1999
                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                           2001
                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                         2003
                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                     2007
                                                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                                                   2009
                                                                                                                                                                           2010
                                                         Salary                      Bonus                       Other                   Options                          Stock




                                                                                                      35
                                                                                       Figure 3
                   Compensation for CEOs vs. Other High-Income Households
The solid lines show the evolution of median option compensation, median non-option compensation, and
median total compensation for the sample of CEOs of firms that were ever a part of the S&P 500 from
1992 to 2010. The dotted lines show the evolution of income for the top 0.1% and top 1% of US tax units
(including individual and joint tax filers). Data on income are the updated version of those from Piketty
and Saez (2003). All values are adjusted for inflation using the CPI index and normalized to equal one in
the year 1992.



                                6
      Normalized Compensation




                                5


                                4


                                3


                                2


                                1
                                    1992
                                           1993
                                                  1994
                                                         1995
                                                                1996
                                                                       1997
                                                                              1998
                                                                                     1999
                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                    2001
                                                                                                           2002
                                                                                                                  2003
                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                2005
                                                                                                                                       2006
                                                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                                                                      2008
                                                                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                   Year

                                                     Option Comp                               Non-Option Comp                                       Total Comp
                                                     Top 0.1%                                  Top 1%




                                                                                             36
                                                     Figure 4
                        Distribution of Change in Option and Stock Grants
Panel A shows the log change in the nominal grant-date Black–Scholes value of options granted. The sample
is limited to CEOs who receive options in the current and previous year at firms that were ever a part of the
S&P 500 from 1992 to 2010. Panel B shows the proportional change in the number of shares of stock granted
in the current year relative to the previous year. Panel C shows the log change in the nominal grant-date
value of shares granted in the current year relative to the previous year. The sample in Panels B and C is
limited to CEOs who receive stock grants in the current and previous year at firms that were ever a part of
the S&P 500 from 1992 to 2010.

                               Panel A: B–S Value of Options Granted

                                          20




                                          15
                                Percent




                                          10




                                          5




                                          0
                                               -1     0                          1   2
                                                              Log Change


                                  Panel B: Number of Shares Granted

                                          20




                                          15
                                Percent




                                          10




                                          5




                                          0
                                               -1     0                          1   2
                                                          Proportionate Change


                                          Panel C: Value of Shares Granted

                                          20




                                          15
                                Percent




                                          10




                                          5




                                          0
                                               -1     0                          1   2
                                                              Log Change




                                                             37
                                               Figure 5
                  Option Value Growth For Number-Rigid and Non-Rigid CEOs
This figure plots changes in the log grant date value of new options against the log firm return over the
previous 12 months. For the number-rigid and non-rigid samples, we fit a local linear regression using the
Epanichnikov kernel and the rule-of-thumb bandwidth. The sample is limited to CEOs who receive options
in the current and previous year at firms that were ever a part of the S&P 500 from 1992 to 2010.




                                                   38
                                               Figure 6
                                 Oﬀsets in Non-Option Compensation
This figure reproduces 5 using the same sample, with the y-axis now representing cash compensation (salary
plus bonus) in Panel A and all non-option compensation in Panel B.
                                    Panel A: Cash Compensation




                              Panel B: All Non-Option Compensation




                                                   39
                                                                                                 Figure 7
                     The Eﬀect of Number-Rigidity on Aggregate Compensation
In this figure we calibrate an equilibrium model CEO pay from Gabaix and Landier (2008) to estimate the
potential magnitude of the eﬀect of number-rigidity on aggregate compensation. We use the sample of all
firms that were a part of the S&P 500 from 1992 to 2010. We assume that f is the fraction of number-rigid
CEOs in each year of our data and that the probability of being number-rigid is uncorrelated with size
(an assumption that is approximately true within our sample). The parameter is equal to the average
diﬀerence between actual and counterfactual pay growth each year in the non-rigid sample, using realized
returns in each year and the relationship estimated in Appendix Figure A4. For other model parameters, we
use = 0.5, ↵ = 1, and = 0.3. The short-dashed line shows cumulative growth that can be attributed to
number-rigidity (including spillovers), assuming that growth absent number-rigidity would have been zero.
The long-dashed line shows cumulative growth that can be attributed to a combination of number-rigidity
and changes in size of the typical firm. The size of the typical firm in each year is calculated as the debt plus
equity (Compustat codes: prcc_f*abs(csho)+at-ceq-txdb) of the 250th largest firm in each year, measured
in 2000 dollars, following the variable definitions in Gabaix and Landier (2008).



                                         4
           Value of total compensation




                                         3




                                         2




                                         1
                                             1992

                                                    1993

                                                           1994

                                                                  1995

                                                                         1996

                                                                                1997

                                                                                       1998

                                                                                              1999

                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                             2001

                                                                                                                    2002

                                                                                                                           2003

                                                                                                                                  2004

                                                                                                                                         2005

                                                                                                                                                2006

                                                                                                                                                       2007

                                                                                                                                                              2008

                                                                                                                                                                     2009

                                                                                                            Year                                                            2010

                                                                                Real growth in median value
                                                                                Predicted growth from number-rigidity
                                                                                Predicted growth from number-rigidity + change in firm size




                                                                                                       40
                                                                                        Figure 8
                                                 Asymmetry
This figure shows a local linear regression in which the number-rigid indicator is regressed on firm returns in
the year prior to the option grant date. We use the Epanichnikov kernel with the rule-of-thumb bandwidth.
In Panel A, the sample is limited to CEOs who receive options in the current and previous year at firms that
were ever a part of the S&P 500 from 1992 to 2010. In Panel B, the sample is limited to all top executives
who receive options in the current and previous year at firms that were ever a part of the S&P 1500 from
1992 to 2010.

                                                                                         S&P 500 CEOs
                                                                  .2
                 Probability of receiving number-rigid options




                                                                 .18



                                                                 .16



                                                                 .14



                                                                 .12



                                                                  .1
                                                                       -.5   -.25                  0                 .25   .5
                                                                                      Firm return in previous year


                                                                                    S&P 1500 Top Executives
                                                                  .2
                 Probability of receiving number-rigid options




                                                                 .18




                                                                 .16




                                                                 .14




                                                                 .12
                                                                       -.5   -.25                  0                 .25   .5
                                                                                      Firm return in previous year




                                                                                              41
                                                                                                                           Figure 9
                                                                     Adjustment to Splits
     In Panel A, the sample is limited to firms that engaged in a positive stock split between the time of the previous option grant and the current grant.
     Panel A shows the distribution of the proportional change in the non-split adjusted number of options granted in the current year relative to the
     previous year. Following these positive stock splits, executives who continue to receive the same number of options (proportionate change equal to
     zero) receive a substantial decline in the value of their option grant, all else equal. In Panel B, the sample is limited to the set of executive-years in
     which option number remains constant following a positive stock split. The figure plots the change in non-option compensation against the loss in
     value due to the lack of split adjustment in the number granted. The dotted line shows the change in other compensation necessary to fully oﬀset
     the losses. The solid line represents the relationship between the actual change in non-option compensation and the losses due to the lack of the split
     adjustment, as estimated using a local linear lowess regression. The sample in Panel B consists of all S&P 1500 top-executive years.
                                          Panel A: Change in Number of Options Granted Following a Split
                                              S&P 500 CEOs                                                                                                              S&P 1500 Top Executives
                                                                                                                                               15
                           15




                                                                                                                                               10
                           10




                 Percent
                                                                                                                                     Percent
                           5                                                                                                                   5




42
                           0                                                                                                                   0
                                -1        0                                                                1                  2                     -1                         0                          1   2
                                              Proportionate Change                                                                                                                 Proportionate Change



                                                                  Panel B: Adjustment of Non-Option Compensation
                                                                                                                      S&P 1500 Top Executives
                                                                                                 30



                                                                                                 20



                                                                                                 10



                                                                                                  0

                                                       Change in Other Compensation (Millions)
                                                                                                                                                         N=282
                                                                                                 -10

                                                                                                       0       2               4               6                  8                  10
                                                                                                                   Loss Due to No Split Adjustment (Millions)

                                                                                                               Smoothed Change                      Full Compensatory Change
                                                                            Table 1
                                                                     Summary Statistics
     This table reports summary characteristics for the sample of all firms that were ever a part of the S&P 500 from 1992 to 2010. The table is divided
     between number-rigid firms, number-reference firms, and all other firms where options were paid in the current and previous year. A firm is categorized
     based on the pay of the CEO that year (relative to the previous year). Because the prevalence of number-rigidity has changed over time, we present
     the summary statistics separately for three cross-sections in 1995, 2000, and 2005.

      Year: 1995                               Number Rigid                           Number Reference                                Other
                                    N       p25         p50        p75       N       p25        p50        p75       N       p25         p50        p75
      Assets (Millions)             78    1223.86     3965.55    11955.90   189    1003.78    3473.40    13253.00    251   1963.60     5015.97   14282.00
      Market to Book                78     1.15        1.44        1.98     189     1.15       1.45        2.07      251    1.15        1.52       2.09
      CAPX / PPE                    69     0.14        0.19        0.27     166     0.14       0.21        0.35      221    0.14         0.20      0.29
      Market Leverage               78     0.11        0.20        0.36     188     0.09       0.21        0.38      251    0.10        0.20       0.35
      Book Leverage                 78      0.26        0.41       0.53     188      0.24       0.42       0.57      251     0.23        0.40      0.56
      Total Dividends (Millions)    78     10.73       44.59      154.41    189      4.42      44.48      141.24     251    18.79       66.90     195.00
      Firm Return                   78     0.08        0.30        0.48     189     0.12       0.30        0.50      251    0.12        0.29       0.47
      Return on Assets              78     0.03        0.07        0.10     189     0.02        0.06       0.10      251     0.02        0.05      0.09
      Cash Flow / Assets            69     0.09        0.12        0.17     165     0.09       0.12        0.17      222     0.08        0.12      0.16


      Year: 2000                               Number Rigid                           Number Reference                                Other
                                    N       p25         p50        p75       N       p25        p50        p75       N       p25         p50        p75




43
      Assets (Millions)             60    1742.21     5957.98    14881.40   170    1985.15    6710.02    16767.24    312   2239.32     5631.26   19578.00
      Market to Book                60     1.17        1.65        3.24     169     1.19       1.67        3.21      312    1.14        1.53       2.83
      CAPX / PPE                    56     0.14        0.18        0.28     154      0.14      0.21        0.38      272     0.14        0.21      0.36
      Market Leverage               59     0.08        0.18        0.42     168     0.05       0.17        0.42      312    0.06        0.21       0.44
      Book Leverage                 59      0.26        0.42       0.59     169      0.24       0.39       0.58      312     0.26        0.46      0.62
      Total Dividends (Millions)    60      0.00       30.23      162.55    168      0.00      28.07      166.15     310     0.00       58.20     230.60
      Firm Return                   60     -0.12       0.15        0.44     170     -0.18      0.12        0.41      309    -0.18       0.14       0.49
      Return on Assets              60      0.03       0.07        0.13     170      0.02       0.07       0.13      312     0.02        0.05      0.10
      Cash Flow / Assets            53      0.08       0.15        0.19     153      0.08      0.13        0.20      283     0.06        0.11      0.17


      Year: 2005                                  Number Rigid                        Number Reference                                Other
                                    N       p25         p50         p75      N        p25       p50        p75        N       p25        p50        p75
      Assets (Millions)             60    3104.27     10216.69   28330.50   145    2940.00    6869.61    21633.00    279    3878.98    9727.00   29141.20
      Market to Book                60     1.26         1.76       2.39     145     1.30       1.78        2.47      278      1.23      1.64       2.35
      CAPX / PPE                    60     0.12         0.16       0.29     143      0.13      0.19        0.32      263      0.13       0.19      0.28
      Market Leverage               60     0.06         0.14       0.29     145     0.04       0.11        0.27      278     0.08       0.15       0.34
      Book Leverage                 60      0.16        0.31       0.51     145      0.12       0.29       0.46      279      0.21       0.35      0.59
      Total Dividends (Millions)    60      4.15       103.50     243.50    145      0.00      62.53      225.11     276      0.00      90.61     291.36
      Firm Return                   60     -0.08        0.07       0.25     145     -0.07      0.07        0.28      279     -0.05      0.08       0.27
      Return on Assets              60      0.02        0.06       0.10     145      0.03      0.07        0.11      279      0.02       0.07      0.11
      Cash Flow / Assets            57      0.06        0.09       0.14     139      0.06      0.11        0.16      271      0.05       0.11      0.17
                                                                           Table 2
                                                    Spillovers from Number-Rigid to Non-Rigid CEOs
     This table shows the eﬀect of number-rigid peers on the compensation of non-rigid CEOs. Observations are at the executive by year level. The sample
     consists of CEOs at firms that were a part of the S&P 500 from 1992–2010. We match each CEO in our sample to CEOs of peer firms. Following
     Faulkender and Yang (2010), we define peer firms as firms in the same industry (2-digit SIC code) with sales between 50% and 200% of the CEO’s
     firm. We set the CEO’s compensation date as the date of the largest option grant from the fiscal year. When a CEO does not have an option grant in
     a fiscal year, we assign an artificial compensation date 270 days prior to the firm’s fiscal year end. For each CEO, we define Percent Peers Rigid and
     Percent Peers Reference as the percent of peer CEOs (with compensation dates within the past 365 days) that had number-rigid or number-reference
     option grants, respectively. The variable Number Rigid is an indicator equal to one if the split-adjusted number of options granted in the current year
     is the same as in the previous year. The variable Number Reference is an indicator equal to one if the ratio of the split-adjusted number of options
     granted in the current year relative to the previous year equals 1± a multiple of 1/2, 1/4, ... , 1/10. We also define Peer Returns as the average firm
     return of peer firms in the year leading up to each peer’s compensation date. In Columns (1)–(3), the sample consists of CEOs without a number-rigid
     option grant. In Columns (4)–(6), the sample consists of CEOs without a number-reference option grant. The dependent variable is the log change in
     total compensation. Firm controls include assets, leverage-to-book ratio, return on assets, market-to-book ratio, and capital expenditures to lagged
     PP&E. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                                        Log Change Total Compensation
                                                           (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)




44
      Peer Returns                                      0.104⇤⇤⇤           0.0892⇤⇤            0.0617            0.0502           0.0375          0.00267
                                                        (0.0369)           (0.0385)           (0.0447)          (0.0461)         (0.0485)         (0.0576)
      Percent Peers Rigid                                -0.0335            -0.0141           -0.00748
                                                        (0.0736)           (0.0778)           (0.0927)
      Peer Returns ⇥ Percent Peers Rigid                 0.618⇤⇤            0.752⇤⇤            0.759⇤⇤
                                                         (0.306)            (0.292)            (0.329)
      Percent Peers Reference                                                                                    -0.0148          -0.0213          -0.0443
                                                                                                                (0.0522)         (0.0567)         (0.0668)
      Peer Returns ⇥ Percent Peers Reference                                                                     0.446⇤⇤          0.471⇤⇤          0.550⇤⇤
                                                                                                                 (0.194)          (0.194)          (0.222)
      Sample                                           Non-Rigid          Non-Rigid          Non-Rigid          Non-Ref          Non-Ref          Non-Ref
      Controls                                            No                Yes                Yes                No               Yes              Yes
      Firm FE                                             No                 No                Yes                No               No               Yes
      R2                                                 0.00215            0.00279            0.0538           0.00178          0.00220           0.0743
      Observations                                        10022              9029               9029             8445             7611              7611
                                                 Table 3
                 Combined Eﬀect of FASB and SEC Reforms on Number-Rigidity
This table shows how the prevalence of number-rigid and number-reference option grants change relative to
stock grants after the FASB and SEC reforms in 2006. The FASB reform (eﬀective for fiscal years ending
after June 15, 2006) required firms to subtract the total Black–Scholes value of option compensation paid to
employees from earnings. The SEC reform (eﬀective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2006) required
firms to disclose the Black–Scholes value of option compensation paid to each top executives on their proxy
statements. Stock compensation also has a number and value associated with it, but its value had to be
disclosed and expensed throughout our sample period. Observations with fiscal years ending between June
15, 2006 and December 15, 2006 are excluded because in these fiscal years only the FASB reform was in eﬀect.
Observations are at the executive by year by grant type level, where grant type represents option grants or
stock grants. The sample is restricted to S&P 500 CEOs who received the relevant grant type in the current
year and in the previous year. Thus, a CEO receiving both stock and options compensation would have two
observations for that year. Our dependent variable is a number-rigid (number-reference) indicator variable
equal to one if the stock or option grant under observation is number-rigid (number-reference) relative to
the grant of the same type in the previous year. We define number-rigid (number-reference) grants for stock
analogously to options (see Table 2). The variable Post-Reforms is an indicator equal to one if the award is
granted following the two reforms (fiscal years ending after December 15, 2006). The variable Options is an
indicator variable equal to one if the grant is an option grant and zero if the grant is a stock grant. Time
trends include a linear time trend. Firm controls include assets, leverage-to-book ratio, return on assets,
market-to-book ratio, capital expenditures to lagged PP&E, and firm returns. Standard errors are clustered
by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                   Number Rigid                    Number Reference
                                                (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
 Post-Reforms                                  -0.00531        -0.00103        -0.0467⇤⇤⇤         0.00308
                                               (0.0112)        (0.0173)         (0.0171)         (0.0236)
 Options                                     0.0937⇤⇤⇤        0.0841⇤⇤⇤         0.207⇤⇤⇤         0.189⇤⇤⇤
                                              (0.00862)       (0.00972)         (0.0144)         (0.0159)
 Post-Reforms ⇥ Options                      -0.0387⇤⇤⇤       -0.0302⇤⇤         -0.130⇤⇤⇤        -0.124⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.0143)        (0.0146)         (0.0211)         (0.0216)
 Time Trend                                     No                Yes              No               Yes
 Controls                                       No                Yes              No               Yes
 Firm FE                                        No                Yes              No               Yes
 R2                                           0.0158            0.0139           0.0525           0.0534
 Observations                                 10004              9754            10004             9754




                                                      45
                                                  Table 4
                                 Voluntary Expensing and Disclosure
This table shows how number-rigidity relates to voluntary expensing and disclosure. Observations are at
the executive by year level. The sample consists of all top executives that were part of the S&P 500 from
1992–2010 (that received options in the current and previous year). The variable Voluntary Expensing is
an indicator equal to one if the firm voluntarily expensed the Black–Scholes value of option compensation
on its income statement, either through 1) the voluntary adoption of the fair value provisions of FAS123
or 2) the voluntary early adoption of FAS123r. The variable Voluntary Disclosure is an indicator variable
equal to one if the firm voluntarily reported the Black–Scholes value of option compensation paid to each
top executive in its proxy statement. In the first two columns, the dependent variable is a number-rigid
indicator variable defined as described is Table 2. In the second two columns, the dependent variable is a
number-reference indicator variable as described is Table 2. The sample period is limited to firms with fiscal
years ending between December 15, 1996 and June 15, 2006 as all firms could choose to voluntarily expense
or disclose during that time period. Firm controls include assets, leverage-to-book ratio, return on assets,
market-to-book ratio, capital expenditures to lagged PP&E, and firm returns. Industry fixed eﬀects use
the Fama–French 49 industry classification. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            Number Rigid                              Number Reference
                                      (1)                   (2)                 (3)                  (4)
 Voluntary Expensing              -0.0562⇤⇤⇤              -0.0462⇤           -0.108⇤⇤⇤            -0.0895⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.0214)               (0.0237)           (0.0336)              (0.0317)
 Voluntary Disclosure              0.00649                 0.0122             -0.0226              0.00602
                                   (0.0143)               (0.0212)           (0.0209)              (0.0274)
 Controls                             Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Industry FE                          Yes                   No                  Yes                  No
 Year FE                              Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Firm FE                              No                    Yes                 No                   Yes
 R2                                 0.0226                 0.204              0.0418                0.293
 Observations                       18105                  18105              18105                 18105




                                                     46
                                                                           Table 5
                                                                   Board Characteristics
     This table shows how number-rigidity relates to various board characteristics. Observations are at the executive by year level. The sample consists
     of all top executives that were part of the S&P 1500 from 1992–2010 (that received options in the current and previous year). In the even columns,
     the dependent variable is a number-rigid indicator variable as described in Table 2. In the odd columns, the dependent variable is a number-reference
     indicator variable as described in Table 2. The variable Board Size represents the total size of the board. The variable Percent Independent represents
     the percent of the board that consists of independent directors. The variable Percent Pre-CEO represents the percent of the independent directors
     that were appointed before the current CEO. The variable Percent MBA represents the percent of the independent directors that hold an MBA degree.
     Firm controls include assets, leverage-to-book ratio, return on assets, market-to-book ratio, capital expenditures to lagged PP&E, and firm returns.
     Industry fixed eﬀects use the Fama–French 49 industry classification. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
     the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                 (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                                Rigid          Ref         Rigid        Ref         Rigid        Ref         Rigid         Ref         Rigid        Ref
      Board Size              -0.0000558   -0.00579⇤⇤                                                                               -0.0000336     -0.00461




47
                               (0.00179)    (0.00283)                                                                                (0.00218)    (0.00338)
      Percent Independent                               -0.0737⇤⇤⇤   -0.126⇤⇤⇤                                                       -0.0784⇤⇤    -0.155⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.0260)     (0.0388)                                                        (0.0355)    (0.0504)
      Percent Pre-CEO                                                            -0.0585⇤⇤⇤   -0.0590⇤⇤⇤                            -0.0624⇤⇤⇤   -0.0679⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                  (0.0102)     (0.0155)                              (0.0118)     (0.0184)
      Percent MBA                                                                                          -0.0766⇤⇤⇤   -0.108⇤⇤⇤    -0.0545⇤⇤    -0.0811⇤⇤
                                                                                                            (0.0253)     (0.0383)     (0.0255)     (0.0401)
      Controls                   Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
      Industry FE                Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
      Year FE                    Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
      R2                        0.0174       0.0598       0.0182       0.0606      0.0200       0.0608       0.0241      0.0736       0.0304       0.0846
      Observations              49507        49507        49507        49507       49453        49453        36115       36115        31759        31759
References
Aboody, D., E. Barth, M., Kasznik, R., 2004. Firms’ voluntary recognition of stock-based compensation
  expense. Journal of Accounting Research, 42, 123–150.

Aboody, D., Kasznik, R., 2000. CEO stock option awards and the timing of corporate voluntary disclosures.
  Journal of Accounting and Economics, 29, 73–100.

Abowd, J. M., Bognanno, M. L., 1999. International diﬀerences in executive and managerial compensation.
  In: Hallock, K. F., Murphy, K. J. (eds.), The economics of executive compensation. Volume 2 , Elgar
  Reference Collection. International Library of Critical Writings in Economics, vol. 103., pp. 489–525.

Abowd, J. M., Kaplan, D. S., 1999. Executive compensation: Six questions that need answering. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 13, 145–168.

Akerlof, G. A., 1982. Labor contracts as partial gift exchange. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97, 543–569.

Akerlof, G. A., Yellen, J. L., 1988. Fairness and unemployment. American Economic Review, 78, 44–49.

Altonji, J. G., Devereux, P. J., 2000. Is there nominal wage rigidity? Evidence from panel data. Research in
  Labor Economics, 19, 383–431.

Baker, M., Pan, X., Wurgler, J., 2012. The eﬀect of reference point prices on mergers and acquisitions.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 106, 49–71.

Bebchuk, L., Cohen, A., Ferrell, A., 2009. What matters in corporate governance? Review of Financial
  Studies, 22, 783–827.

Bebchuk, L., Fried, J., 2004. Pay without performance: The unfulfilled promise of executive compensation.
  Cambridge and London:.

Becker, B., 2006. Wealth and executive compensation. Journal of Finance, 61, 379–397.

Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2001. Are CEOs rewarded for luck? The ones without principals are.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 901–932.

Bewley, T. F., 1999. Why wages don’t fall during a recession. Cambridge and London:.

Bewley, T. F., 2007. Fairness, reciprocity, and wage rigidity. In: Diamond, P., Vartiainen, H. (eds.), Behav-
  ioral Economics and Its Applications, Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, pp. 157–188.

Black, F., Scholes, M. S., 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of Political Economy,
  81, 637–654.

Camerer, C. F., Malmendier, U., 2012. Behavioral economics of organizations. In: Vartiainen, H., Diamond,
  P. (eds.), Behavioral Economics and Its Applications, Princeton University Press.

Campbell, J. Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B. G., Xu, Y., 2001. Have individual stocks become more volatile? An
  empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Finance, 56, 1–43.

Card, D., Hyslop, D., 2007. Does inflation grease the wheels of the labor market. In: Reducing Inflation:
  Motivation and Strategy, University of Chicago Press.

Chaigneau, P., Edmans, A., Gottlieb, D., 2014. The informativeness principle under limited liability. Working
  Paper.

Cheng, I.-H., Hong, H. G., Scheinkman, J. A., 2014. Yesterday’s heroes: Compensation and risk at financial
  firms. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.



                                                      48
Core, J., Guay, W., 2002. Estimating the value of employee stock option portfolios and their sensitivities to
  price and volatility. Journal of Accounting Research, 40, 613–630.

Cuñat, V., Guadalupe, M., 2009a. Executive compensation and competition in the banking and financial
  sectors. Journal of Banking & Finance, 33, 495–504.

Cuñat, V., Guadalupe, M., 2009b. Globalization and the provision of incentives inside the firm: The eﬀect
  of foreign competition. Journal of Labor Economics, 27, 179–212.

DeMarzo, P. M., Sannikov, Y., 2006. Optimal security design and dynamic capital structure in a continuous-
  time agency model. Journal of Finance, 61, 2681–2724.

Dow, J., Raposo, C. C., 2005. CEO compensation, change, and corporate strategy. Journal of Finance, 60,
  2701–2727.

Edmans, A., Gabaix, X., 2011. The eﬀect of risk on the CEO market. Review of Financial Studies, 24,
  2822–2863.

Edmans, A., Gabaix, X., Landier, A., 2009. A multiplicative model of optimal CEO incentives in market
  equilibrium. Review of Financial Studies, 22, 4881–4917.

Faulkender, M., Yang, J., 2010. Inside the black box: The role and composition of compensation peer groups.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 96, 257–270.

Fernandes, N., Ferreira, M. A., Matos, P., Murphy, K. J., 2013. Are U.S. CEOs paid more? New international
  evidence. Review of Financial Studies, 26, 323–367.

Frydman, C., 2007. Rising through the ranks: The evolution of the market for corporate executives, 1936-
  2003. Working Paper.

Frydman, C., Jenter, D., 2010. CEO compensation. Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2, 75–102.

Frydman, C., Saks, R. E., 2010. Executive compensation: A new view from a long-term perspective,
  1936–2005. Review of Financial Studies, 23, 2099–2138.

Gabaix, X., Landier, A., 2008. Why has CEO pay increased so much? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123,
  49–100.

Garen, J. E., 1994. Executive compensation and principal-agent theory. Journal of Political Economy, 102,
  1175–1199.

Garicano, L., Rossi-Hansberg, E., 2006. Organization and inequality in a knowledge economy. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121, 1383–1435.

Gopalan, R., Milbourn, T., Song, F., 2010. Strategic flexibility and the optimality of pay for sector perfor-
  mance. Review of Financial Studies, 23, 2060–2098.

Hall, B. J., 1999. The design of multi-year stock option plans. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 12,
  97–106.

Hall, B. J., Murphy, K. J., 2003. The trouble with stock options. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17,
  49–70.

Harris, M., Holmstrom, B., 1982. A theory of wage dynamics. Review of Economic Studies, 49, 315–333.

He, Z., 2009. Optimal executive compensation when firm size follows geometric brownian motion. Review of
  Financial Studies, 22, 859–892.

Hermalin, B. E., 2005. Trends in corporate governance. Journal of Finance, 60, 2351–2384.


                                                     49
Holmstrom, B., 1979. Moral hazard and observability. Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 74–91.

Holmstrom, B., 1982. Moral hazard in teams. Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 324–340.

Holmstrom, B., Kaplan, S. N., 2001. Corporate governance and merger activity in the United States: Making
  sense of the 1980s and 1990s. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15, 121–144.

Holmstrom, B., Milgrom, P., 1987. Aggregation and linearity in the provision of intertemporal incentives.
  Econometrica (1986-1998), 55, 303.

Hubbard, R. G., Palia, D., 1995. Executive pay and performance evidence from the U.S. banking industry.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 39, 105–130.

Innes, R. D., 1990. Limited liability and incentive contracting with ex-ante action choices. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 52, 45–67.

Ittner, C. D., Lambert, R. A., Larcker, D. F., 2003. The structure and performance consequences of equity
   grants to employees of new economy firms. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 34, 89–127.

Jensen, M. C., Murphy, K. J., 1990. Performance pay and top-management incentives. Journal of Political
  Economy, 98, 225–264.

Jensen, M. C., Murphy, K. J., Wruck, E. G., 2004. Remuneration: Where we’ve been, how we got to here,
  what are the problems, and how to fix them. Working Paper.

Kahn, S., 1997. Evidence of nominal wage stickiness from microdata. American Economic Review, 87, 993–
  1008.

Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., Thaler, R., 1986. Fairness as a constraint on profit seeking: Entitlements in
  the market. American Economic Review, 76, 728–741.

Kaplan, S. N., 2008. Are U.S. CEOs overpaid? Academy of Management Perspectives, 22, 5–20.

Kaplan, S. N., 2012. Executive compensation and corporate governance in the U.S.: Perceptions, facts, and
  challenges. Working Paper, pp. 1–6.

Kaplan, S. N., Rauh, J., 2010. Wall street and main street: What contributes to the rise in the highest
  incomes? Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1004–1050.

Kuhnen, C. M., Zwiebel, J., 2009. Executive pay, hidden compensation and managerial entrenchment. Work-
  ing Paper.

Lie, E., 2005. On the Timing of CEO Stock Option Awards. Management Science, 51, 802–812.

Malmendier, U., Tate, G., 2005. CEO overconfidence and corporate investment. Journal of Finance, 60,
 2661–2700.

Mas, A., 2006. Pay, reference points, and police performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 783–821.

McLaughlin, K. J., 1994. Rigid wages? Journal of Monetary Economics, 34, 383–414.

Murphy, K. J., 1996. Reporting choice and the 1992 proxy disclosure rules. Journal of Accounting, Auditing
 & Finance, 11, 497–515.

Murphy, K. J., 1999. Executive compensation. In: Ashenfelter, O., Card, D. (eds.), Handbook of Labor
 Economics, North Holland.

Murphy, K. J., 2002. Explaining executive compensation: Managerial power versus the perceived cost of
 stock options. The University of Chicago Law Review, 69, 847–869.


                                                    50
Murphy, K. J., 2003. Stock-based pay in new economy firms. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 34,
 129–147.

Murphy, K. J., 2013. Executive compensation: Where we are, and how we got there. In: Constantinides,
 G. M., Harris, M., Stulz, R. M. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Elsevier Science North
 Holland, Oxford, vol. 2A, pp. 211–282.

Murphy, K. J., Zábojník, J., 2004. CEO pay and appointments: A market-based explanation for recent
 trends. American Economic Review, 94, 192–196.

Murphy, K. J., Zabojnik, J., 2010. Managerial capital and the market for CEOs. Working Paper.

Nagel, G. L., 2010. The eﬀect of labor market demand on U.S. CEO pay since 1980. Financial Review, 45,
  931–950.

Oyer, P., 2004. Why do firms use incentives that have no incentive eﬀects? Journal of Finance, 59, 1619–1650.

Oyer, P., Schaefer, S., 2005. Why do some firms give stock options to all employees?: An empirical exami-
  nation of alternative theories. Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 99–133.

Piketty, T., Saez, E., 2003. Income inequality in the United States, 1913–1998. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 118, 1–41.

Prendergast, C., 2002. The tenuous trade-oﬀ between risk and incentives. Journal of Political Economy, 110,
  1071–1102.

Romer, C. D., Romer, D. H., 1997. Reducing inflation: Motivation and strategy. NBER Studies in Business
  Cycles, vol. 30. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.

Shafir, E., Diamond, P., Tversky, A., 1997. Money illusion. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 341–374.

Shapiro, C., Stiglitz, J. E., 1984. Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline device. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 74, 433–444.

Shue, K., Townsend, R. R., 2014. Swinging for the fences: Executive reactions to quasi-random option grants.
  Working Paper.

Solow, R. M., 1979. Another possible source of wage stickiness. Journal of Macroeconomics, 1, 79–82.

Tervio, M., 2008. The diﬀerence that CEOs make: An assignment model approach. American Economic
  Review, 98, 642–668.

Thomas, R. S., 2009. International executive pay: Current practices and future trends. In: Dau-Schmidt,
  K. G. (ed.), Labor and Employment Law and Economics, Edward Elgar Publishing.

Weiss, A., 1980. Job queues and layoﬀs in labor markets with flexible wages. Journal of Political Economy,
 88, 526–538.

Weiss, A., 1990. Eﬃciency wages: Models of unemployment, layoﬀs, and wage dispersion. Princeton:.

Yermack, D., 1997. Good timing: CEO stock option awards and company news announcements. Journal of
  Finance, 52, 449–476.




                                                     51
