                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       FINANCIAL MARKETS’ VIEWS ABOUT THE EURO-SWISS FRANC FLOOR

                                           Urban J. Jermann

                                         Working Paper 21977
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21977


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2016




Comments from seminar participants at the Wharton School, London Business School, as well as from
Philipp Illeditsch, Jakub Jurek, Karen Lewis, Nick Roussanov, and Amir Yaron are gratefully acknowledged.
A not-for-publication appendix is available at http://finance.wharton.upenn.edu/~jermann/research.html.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Urban J. Jermann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Financial Markets’ Views about the Euro-Swiss Franc Floor
Urban J. Jermann
NBER Working Paper No. 21977
February 2016
JEL No. F31,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

Exchange rates and option prices incorporate market participants’ views about the credibility and the
effects of exchange rate targets. I present a model to determine exchange rates under policy targets
that can be used to price options. The model is estimated with Euro-Swiss Franc exchange rate and
options price data. In the first few months of the minimum exchange rate policy, the implied survival
probability of the policy for a three month horizon was typically less than 75%. Over time, the credibility
increased and this probability reached 95% in August 2014. The analysis also implies that during the
second quarter of 2012, when reserve accumulation was high, the exchange rate without the policy
would have been as low as about 1 Swiss franc per euro.


Urban J. Jermann
Finance Department
The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvan
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jermann@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction

From September 2011 to January 2015 the Swiss central bank’s oﬃcial policy has been to
maintain a minimum exchange rate at CHF 1.20 per euro. To achieve this objective, the cen-
tral bank had stated that it would be willing to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities
(SNB, 2011). This commitment and the sustainability of this policy had been questioned
right from the beginning. Under such a policy, a lack of credibility to carry through with
defending the floor invites capital inflows and requires the central bank to buy large quanti-
ties of foreign currency which could ultimately make the policy very expensive. Therefore, it
is important to be able to precisely assess the views of financial markets participants about
the policy and in particular its credibility
    Financial prices can be used to learn about the implied risk-neutral probability that the
EURCHF will move below the oﬃcial floor of 1.20. For instance, a put option with a strike
price of 1.20 or lower with a positive price requires that financial markets assign positive
probability that the policy will not persist until the maturity of the option. If exchange
rates are lognormally distributed, then one can use the standard Black-Scholes option pricing
model to measure the implied risk-neutral probability for any range of the exchange rate.
However, given the floor introduced by the policy, lognormality is a poor assumption for
the exchange rate distribution in this case. Moreover, standard option pricing models that
take the exchange rate as exogenous have nothing to say about how the policy aﬀects the
exchange rate.
    In this paper, I present a model where the fundamental exchange rate (the "shadow"
exchange rate in the absence of the policy floor) follows a process with given risk-neutral
probabilities. It is assumed that there is uncertainty about whether the policy floor will be
in place next period. If the policy ends, the observed exchange rate is assumed to equal
the fundamental exchange rate. In this setting, the dynamics of the observed exchange rate
are derived based on no-arbitrage principles, and the exchange rate equals a function of
the current fundamental exchange rate, its risk neutral probabilities, and the continuation

                                               2
probability of the policy.
   This model is used to price put and call options on the exchange rate. The model is fitted
to data on EURCHF spot and options prices and it produces estimates for the market implied
probabilities of the floor being violated as well as for what the exchange rate would have
been without the policy. I find that during the first few months of the minimum exchange
rate policy, markets typically attached a probability of less than 75% to the policy being in
place three months later. Over time, the credibility increased and reached 95% in August
2014. The analysis also implies that during 2012 Q2 and Q3, when reserve accumulation was
high, the exchange rate without the policy would have been as low as about 1 Swiss franc
per euro. The model can also shed light on specific episodes. For instance, it is shown how
it could be used to successfully forecast the outcome of the popular vote on the Swiss Gold
Initiative in the fall 2014.
   This paper is related to the large literature on exchange rate target-zones initially devel-
oped for the European Exchange Rate Mechanism prior to the birth of the euro. Krugman
(1991) presents a model that characterizes exchange rate behavior with a target zone. Bertola
and Caballero (1992) and Bertola and Svensson (1993) extend the model to allow for realign-
ment risk, that is, uncertainty about whether the target will be maintained. Dumas et al.
(1995) explicitly link a target zone model to option prices and present numerical characteri-
zations for option prices with realignment risk. Campa and Chang (1996) study target zone
credibility with currency options data by using select no-arbitrage relations, but without a
fully specified model for the exchange rate. Malz (1996) estimates risk-neutral probabilities
of realignment, that is, exchange rates outside the target-zone, with an option pricing model
where the exchange rate follows a jump-diﬀusion process. More recent papers with related
approaches are Söderlind (2000) and Hui and Lo (2009). In these three studies, unlike in
target zone models, exchange rates are taken as exogenous and no attempt is made to derive
exchange rate dynamics from the exchange rate policy and fundamentals in an internally
consistent way.


                                              3
   Like in a traditional target zone model, I derive the exchange rate endogenously. In
my model, the exchange rate is derived based on a no-arbitrage condition. Traditional
target zone models (Krugman (1992), or Dumas et al (1995)) assume the logarithm of the
exchange rate depends on the expected logarithm of the future exchange rate; this is usually
motivated as an approximation to uncovered interest parity. Uncovered interest parity has
been conclusively rejected by a large number of empirical studies (Engel (1996), Lustig et al
(2011)). Unlike in the existing target zone literature, my model is estimated with options
data. In contrast to the typical models in this literature, my model is specified in discrete-
time; it is solved through an application of the contraction mapping theorem. Discrete
time gives me more flexibility when deriving exchange rate dynamics and pricing options in
an internally consistent way, as there is no need to rely on analytic solutions. The model
framework proposed in this paper can be adapted to other exchange rate target regimes and
used to price other derivative securities.
   There are two other recent studies on the Swiss franc floor from an options perspec-
tive. Hertrich and Zimmermann (2013) use a version of the Black-Scholes model to derive
probabilities of EURCHF going below 1.20. As in Malz (1996), their approach takes the
exchange rate as exogenous and there is no attempt to derive exchange rate dynamics from
the exchange rate policy and fundamentals in an internally consistent way. Our approach is
closer to Hanke et. al (2014) whose main focus is on what the EURCHF exchange rate would
have been without the minimum exchange rate policy. Their exchange rate is modelled to
explicitly depend on the existence of the policy floor. However, in their model the exchange
rate is determined under the assumption that there is no uncertainty about when the min-
imum exchange rate policy ends. As such, their framework is not well suited to assess the
credibility of the policy.
   Some papers in the literature have modelled and numerically analyzed government guar-
antees for stock prices such as Ljungqvist (2000) and Durdu and Mendoza (2006). In this
paper, I am introducing a similar price support mechanism into a no-arbitrage model for


                                              4
exchange rates that is used to price options.
    The next section presents the exchange rate model. Section 3 describes the empirical
analysis and 4 the results. Concluding remarks follow. Additional details of the analysis are
available in a separate appendix.



2     Exchange rate dynamics under minimum exchange

      rate policy

I start by describing the model for the exchange rate, and then use it to price European style
options contingent on this exchange rate.
    Consider a process for  , the fundamental value of the exchange rate CHF per EUR
in the absence of the price support policy for the euro. This process is assumed to be
exogenously given, it is arbitrage-free, and in discrete-time. As the model is mainly used to
price derivatives, we directly assume risk-neutral probabilities.
    For the next period,  + 1, there are two possible regimes: price support and no support,
+1 = 1 and +1 = 0, respectively. In the price support regime, the central bank is assumed
to guarantee a minimum value of  Swiss francs for one euro. It is assumed that initially
the minimum rate policy is in place,  = 1, and that once that policy stops, it will not be
restarted.
    Under these assumptions, no-arbitrage implies that the equilibrium exchange rate ̃
satisfies

                          1 + ∗ h     
                                              ³         ´
                                                                        
                                                                            i
                  ̃   =             max ̃+1   + (1 −  )  +1
                          1 + 
                          1 + ∗           ³         ´
                        =           max ̃+1   + (1 −  )                      (1)
                          1 + 

with  the expectation under the risk-neutral distribution,  the (risk-neutral) probability
of the continuation of the policy (+1 = 1), and ∗ and  the per period interest rates for


                                                5
the euro and Swiss franc, respectively. The observed exchange rate is given by

                                                    ³       ´
                                             = max ̃                                                  (2)


Intuitively, the equilibrium exchange rate represents the expected value over the two regimes
of next period’s exchange rate, discounted by the numeraire interest rate  , and augmented
by the interest rate on the euro ∗ . The time  equilibrium exchange rate ̃ can possibly be
below the policy floor . In that case, it is assumed that the central bank can intervene in
the current spot market to guarantee that the observed exchange rate equals , that is, the
observed exchange rate satisfies (2). The distinction between the equilibrium exchange rate
̃ and the observed exchange rate  allows the model to produce a well-defined exchange
rate based on the no-arbitrage equation (1), while at the same time allowing for the peg to
be enforced in the current period.
       The minimum rate policy can be viewed as introducing an option-like payoﬀ profile into
the exchange rate. Hanke at al. (2014) propose such an interpretation, where the exchange
rate policy is viewed as a put to sell euro for  Swiss francs. Given put-call parity, this is
equivalent to a call, as equation (1) suggests. As a substantive diﬀerence from their approach,
the exchange rate in my model takes into account the uncertainty about whether the policy
will be discontinued. This is captured by (1 −  ), the probability that the policy will be
discontinued next period. Hanke et al. (2014) assume that the policy has a known maturity
date.1
       Options on the exchange rate are easily priced. For instance, for the case of a constant
continuation probability, a European style put on the observed spot rate with strike  and
   1
     In their case, this is inconsistent with their later assumption that traded options are priced by accounting
for the uncertainty about the continuation of the policy. That is, they implicitly assume that the spot EU-
RCHF exchange rate and options on this exchange rate are priced under mutually inconsistent assumptions
about the uncertainty of the policy.




                                                       6
maturity   is priced at

                                           ⎧               h         ³        ´ i    ⎫
                                           ⎪
                                           ⎨ +  max  − max ̃+    0   ⎪
                                                                                     ⎬
                                  1                                      
            (    ) =                       ¡        ¢      £             ¤          (3)
                              (1 + )    ⎪
                                           ⎩ + 1 − +   max  − +   0    ⎪
                                                                                     ⎭


    If the market view is that the exchange rate floor will be in place with probability 1 for
the time covering the maturity of the option, then +  = 1, and


                                        1         h        ³           ´ i
                     (    ) =        max  − max ̃+     0                 (4)
                                       1+

In this case, as seen in equation (4), a put with a strike below the floor,   , will have
a market price of zero. Option prices in general are informative about the market’s implied
probability of the persistence of the policy. As suggested by equation (4), put options with
strike prices below the minimum exchange rate are particularly useful in this regard.



3     Empirical approach

The fundamental exchange rate,  , is assumed to follow a recombining binomial tree, with
the standard assumptions that per period up and down moves are given by

                                                         ∗ )+
                                             = (−             and
                                                         ∗ )−
                                             = (−            


and the risk-neutral probability of an up move equals

                                                         ∗
                                                  − − 
                                               =          
                                                    −

with  the standard deviation of the log of the growth of the fundamental exchange rate.
For tractability, I impose upper and lower bounds on  , so that  takes a finite number


                                                     7
of values. The bounds are set far enough from the typical range of the exchange rate so as
not to aﬀect current exchange rates and option prices with finite maturity. The equilibrium
exchange rate ̃ can be computed as the fixed point of the operator

                                   1 + ∗     ³             ´
                      ̃ ( ) =          max ̃ ( 0 )   + (1 − ) 
                                   1+

where  is the constant continuation probability. It can easily be checked that Blackwell’s
                                                                   1+∗
suﬃcient conditions for a contraction mapping are satisfied for     1+
                                                                            1, see Stokey, Lucas
and Prescott (1989). The fixed point is found by applying the operator repeatedly.
   The observed spot exchange rate for a given date,  , can be viewed as a function of
the parameters (   ∗ ) and the value of the state variables: the fundamental rate  and
the policy regime  . The model is used to estimate the values for (   ) that best fit a
set of option prices { } and the spot rate  for a given date. Interest rates are taken
as given from the data. Goodness of fit is represented by the sum of squared deviations
between the prices (for the options and the exchange rate) from the model and the data.
As the benchmark, the deviations are equally weighted. Alternative weighting schemes are
explored. This procedure is repeated — and the model is re-estimated — for every day of
the sample to produce time series for the implied values of (      ). While this procedure
produces values for the survival probability of the policy and the volatility of the fundamental
exchange rate,  and , that are typically changing daily, the model does not incorporate
this variation. Below, a time-varying  is shown to have only minimal eﬀects on estimates.
Explicitly modelling time-varying parameters complicates the model and slows down the
estimation procedure. Of course, users of the Black-Scholes option pricing model typically
also take this shortcut.




                                                8
                        Strike price         Price             Impl. vol.
               Option   average ( )       average (100) average
               Put 10∆ 1164                 021              706
               Put 25∆ 1196                 048              518
               Call 10∆ 1270                019              656
               Call 25∆ 1239                047              520
Table 1: Summary of data for daily close mid-point prices of EURCHF 3 month options
from Reuters covering 9/7/2011 to 1/14/2015.

3.1    Data and implementation

Data for options and spot EURCHF are from Reuters covering the entire period of the policy
floor, 9/7/2011 to 1/14/2015, for a total of 848 observations. I use daily mid-point close
implied volatility quotes for at-the-money options, ATM, risk reversals, RR, and butterfly
spreads, BY, with a maturity of 3 months. The RR and BY quotes are available for strike
prices corresponding to 25% and 10% delta, 25∆ and 10∆, so that out-of-the-money puts
and calls with these two strike prices can be obtained without interpolation. For 25∆ calls
and puts, for instance, implied volatilities are computed as

                                                       1
                               25 =    +  25 +  25
                                                       2
                                                       1
                               25 =    +  25 −  25 
                                                       2

This is the standard approach for deriving the volatility surface for foreign exchange options,
for details see Bisesti et al. (2005). Following the quoting convention of the OTC options
markets, the Black-Scholes model is then used to compute the prices and strike prices corre-
sponding to 25∆ and 10∆ options. Interest rates are daily LIBOR rates for euro and Swiss
franc for three month maturity. Based on this data, there are four option price series, two
for puts and two for calls.
   As shown in Table 1, the 10∆ put options have an average strike of 1164 CHF per EUR.
Given that our main interest is in the implied probabilities of exchange rate realizations
below the 1.20 floor, it is useful that our data includes put options with strike prices that


                                              9
are typically below this floor.
    The length of a period in my model is set to one half of a week, precisely 1/104 of a year.
With this, so far as options with a three month maturity are concerned, the model without
the policy floor is essentially equivalent to the lognormal Black-Scholes model.



4     Results

This section describes the empirical results and their robustness, specifically to allowing for
a more general specification of the policy’s survival probability. This section also documents
how the model provided insights about the possible outcome of the popular vote on the Swiss
Gold Initiative in the fall of 2014
    Figure 1 displays the main results of the estimation. As shown in the first panel, dur-
ing the first few months of the minimum exchange rate policy, markets often attached a
probability of less than 75% to the policy being in place three months later. The credibility
increased to around 90% in the middle of 2012. This was a period were the euro was very
close to its floor of 1.20 (as seen in the second panel) and substantial amounts of euros were
purchased by the Swiss central bank. It appears that this willingness to actively enforce the
floor through intervention contributed to increasing the credibility of the policy. Later in
2012 the credibility declined to about 75%, before persistently increasing to reach a peak
around 95% in the summer of 2014. In the second half of 2014 the probability declined again,
fluctuating around 80% during the final months of the policy. The Swiss vote on November
30 2014 that would have required a gold backing of the Swiss currency appears to have been
an important driver during this time. Consistent with media reactions on January 15th
2015, financial markets were mostly surprised by the end of the policy (Bosley, 2015). The
president of the Swiss central bank noted at that occasion that "if you decide to exit such a
policy, you have to take the market by surprise". (Baghdjian, 2015).
    As shown in the first panel of Figure 1, the gap between the observed and the estimated



                                              10
fundamental exchange rates,  and  , is seen to fluctuate considerably during the first year
of the policy. During the second quarter of 2012, the fundamental exchange rate is at its
lowest level, dropping to around 1 Swiss franc per euro. After late 2012, the fundamental
rate is usually close to 1.20 and its distance from the observed spot rate is relatively stable,
before widening during the last two months of the policy regime.
   The implied volatility of the fundamental exchange rate shown in the third panel displays
a steady downward trend with a reversal in the last few months of the policy. The downward
trend in the estimated implied volatility for the fundamental rate seems comforting given
the similar trend in the measured implied volatilities for EURCHF. Estimates show little
sensitivity to changes in the weights of the objective function, yearly option maturities
produce somewhat diﬀerent estimates, see the separate appendix for more details.
   Figure 1 suggests some negative comovements between  and  , particularly for the
period 2014 Q2 and Q3. It might therefore be too restrictive to assume a constant survival
probability . This assumption can be relaxed by assuming that


                                   +1 ( ) =  +  ·  ( )                            (5)


with  ( ) =  ( ;   ). The parameter  can capture a smooth monotonic relation
between  and  . It is convenient that  () is bounded, given that the probability  is
bounded itself between 0 and 1. The model is used to estimate values for (    ).   is
fixed at 04, alternative values do not significantly aﬀect results. This specification increases
the computational burden, but remains tractable.
   Over the entire sample period, the average of the estimated  coeﬃcients is − = 015,
which is in line with a negative relation between  and  . The average of the estimated 
is 09987. With a period length in the model set at half a week, at these average values, the
quarterly probability can fluctuate between about 0998726 = 0967 and (09987 − 015)26 =
065 over the range of possible values for  . Despite this, estimated values for  and



                                                11
Figure 1: Model estimated continuation probabilities, fundamental values, and volatilities.
The model is estimated daily. Observed EURCHF annualized volatility represents the aver-
age of the implied volatilities over the four types of options used.
                                               12
the implied  are only marginally aﬀected, while the estimated volatility parameter  is
moderately higher. Overall, in this case, this more general specification does not appear to
make a significant diﬀerence relative to the benchmark model with a constant .
      The estimates in Figure 1 for  are significantly diﬀerent from Hanke et al. (2014).
Their fundamental exchange rates are mostly below 1.15 and display somewhat diﬀerent
low frequency movements. Their estimated implied volatility for  is not much lower in
2013 than in the earlier part of the sample. The implied continuation probabilities reported
by Hertrich and Zimmermann (2013) are typically lower than my estimates and also display
somewhat diﬀerent low frequency movements. Given the disparity in approaches, the sources
of these diﬀerences are hard to determine.


4.1       Swiss Gold Initiative

The period leading up to the vote on the Swiss Gold Initiative on November 30, 2014, oﬀered
an opportunity to forecast the outcome of the popular vote with estimates of the model. This
subsection summarizes key points, more details are given in Jermann (2014).
      A positive vote for the Gold Initiative would have required the Swiss central bank to hold
20% of its assets in gold and to never sell any of this gold. As gold has no yield, a further
expansion of the balance sheet to buy euros would have severely limited the central bank’s
seigniorage revenues in the long run when large holdings of euro would no longer be useful.
Under the requirement of the initiative, it would have been therefore very unlikely that the
policy of a floor for a euro at CHF 1.20 could have been continued.
      Based on this, assume that the probability of survival of the policy is 0 following a positive
vote for the initiative, and 1 following a negative vote. In this case, the probability of a No
vote equals the survival probability of the exchange rate policy.2
      As shown in Figure 2, the continuation probability declined from over 095 early August
to around 075 in mid October. As indicated in the figure, on October 24 a poll from the
  2
   Alternative assumptions are considered in Jermann (2014). However, these do not produce such clearcut
implications.

                                                  13
gfs.bern institute showed a small advantage for the positive vote on the initiative, while
the same institute released a second poll where the No votes had the majority on Novem-
ber 19 (gfs.bern, 2014). To the extent that the polls where measuring a change in public
opinion about the initiative, the continuation probability of the exchange rate policy mimics
this change, as the continuation probability had increased to about 09 in the later part of
November. The vote was ultimately rejected on November 30, consistent with a very high
continuation probability of the policy. Estimating  only requires current quotes for options
and the exchange rate. As such, estimates made in real time were identical to the ones
reported in Figure 2.



5     Conclusion

My analysis shows that financial markets had initially significant doubts about whether the
minimum EURCHF floor would survive for very long. However, over time, the credibility of
the policy had improved and by the summer of 2014 markets seemed essentially convinced
that the policy would not quickly be ended. In the fall 2014, views had become less sup-
portive. Nevertheless, the end of the policy surprised financial markets like the media. The
analysis also suggests that from the forth quarter of 2012 until the summer of 2014, the
EURCHF exchange rate would not have been a lot lower without the minimum exchange
rate policy. However, during the second quarter of 2012, the model implied an exchange rate
without the policy that would have been as low as about 1 Swiss franc per euro.
    The model presented in this paper builds on the literature on target zone models. My
model is based on a no-arbitrage equation. Traditional target zone models are based on the
assumption of uncovered interest parity, an assumption that by now has been conclusively
rejected by the data. The tractability of my discrete-time setup should also make this
approach adaptable to other exchange rate target regimes.




                                             14
Figure 2: Model estimated continuation probabilities, fundamental values, and volatilities.
The model is estimated daily. Observed EURCHF annualized volatility represents the aver-
age of the implied volatilities over the four types of options used.

                                            15
References

 [1] Baghdjian, A and S. Koltrowowitz, 2015, "Swiss central bank stuns market
    with policy U-turn", http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/01/15/us-swiss-snb-cap-
    iduskbn0ko0xk20150115.

 [2] Bertola, G. and R. J. Caballero, 1992, Target zones and realignments, American Eco-
    nomic Review, Vol 82, 520-536.

 [3] Bertola, G. and L. E.O. Svensson, 1993, Stochastic devaluation risk and the empirical
    fit of target-zone models, Review of Economic Studies 60, 689-712.

 [4] Bisesti, A., Castagna, and F. Mercurio, 2005, "Consistent Pricing and Hedging of an
    FX Options Book", Kyoto Economic Review 74(1), 65—83.

 [5] Bosley,   C. "SNB Unexpectedly Gives Up Cap on Franc,               Lowers Deposit
    Rate", http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-01-15/snb-unexpectedly-gives-
    up-cap-on-franc-lowers-deposit-rate

 [6] Durdu D. and E. Mendoza, 2006, "Are Asset Price Guarantees Useful for Preventing
    Sudden Stops?: A Quantitative Investigation of the Globalization Hazard-Moral Hazard
    Tradeoﬀ", Journal of International Economics, vol. 69(1), 84-119.

 [7] Campa, J.M., and Chang, K., 1996, "Arbitrage-based tests of target-zone credibility:
    Evidence from ERM cross-rate options," American Economic Review 86, 726-740.

 [8] Dumas B., Jennergren L.P, and Naslund P., 1995, "Realignment risk and currency
    option pricing in target zones", European Economic Review 39, 1523-1544.

 [9] Engel C. 1996, "The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: A survey of
    recent evidence", Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123-192.

[10] gfs.bern, 2014, announcements on Twitter on Oct 24 and Nov 19.


                                           16
[11] Hanke M., R. Poulsen, and A. Weissensteiner, 2014, "Where would the EUR/CHF
    exchange rate be without the SNB’s minimum exchange rate policy?", unpublished
    manuscript, SSRN working paper 2368698.

[12] Hertrich, M., Zimmermann, H., 2013, "How credible is the euro/Swiss franc floor? A
    financial market perspective", SSRN working paper No. 2290997.

[13] Hui, C., and Lo, C., 2009, "A note on estimating realignment probabilities — A first
    passage-time approach," Journal of International Money and Finance 28, 804—812.

[14] Jermann, U, 2014, "Forecasting the Outcome of the Swiss Gold Initiative",
    http://finance.wharton.upenn.edu/~jermann/research.html.

[15] Krugman P, 1991, "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics", The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 669-682.

[16] Lustig H, N Roussanov and A. Verdelhan, 2011, Common risk factors in currency mar-
    kets, Review of Financial Studies, 3731-3777.

[17] Ljungqvist L., 2000, “Government Guarantees on Assets and Volatility,” mimeo, Stock-
    holm School of Economics.

[18] Söderlind, P. 2000, "Market Expectations in the UK Before and After the ERM Crisis,”
    Economica, 67, 1—18.

[19] SNB, 2011, "Swiss National Bank sets minimum exchange rate at CHF 1.20 per euro"
    http://www.snb.ch/en/mmr/reference/pre_20110906/source/pre_20110906.en.pdf

[20] Stokey N., R.E. Lucas and E. Prescott, 1989, Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics,
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.




                                           17
