                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MACROECONOMIC SHOCKS AND THEIR PROPAGATION

                                           Valerie A. Ramey

                                         Working Paper 21978
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21978


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2016




Prepared for the Handbook of Macroeconomics. I wish to thank John Cochrane, Marco Del Negro,
Graham Elliott, Neville Francis, Marc Giannoni, Robert Hall, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Karel Mertens,
Christina Romer, David Romer, James Stock, John Taylor, Harald Uhlig, Mark Watson, Johannes
Wieland, and participants at the Stanford Handbook of Macro conference and NBER Monetary Economics
conference for very helpful discussions. I am grateful to the numerous authors who sent their estimated
technology shocks and to Shihan Xie for providing her updated FAVAR factors. I would also like
to express appreciation to the American Economic Association for requiring that all data and programs
for published articles be posted. In addition, I am grateful to researchers who publish in journals without
that requirement but still post their data and programs on their websites. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Valerie A. Ramey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation
Valerie A. Ramey
NBER Working Paper No. 21978
February 2016
JEL No. E3,E5,E6

                                            ABSTRACT

This chapter reviews and synthesizes our current understanding of the shocks that drive economic
fluctuations. The chapter begins with an illustration of the problem of identifying macroeconomic
shocks, followed by an overview of the many recent innovations for identifying shocks. It then reviews
in detail three main types of shocks: monetary, fiscal, and technology shocks. After surveying the
literature, each section presents new estimates that compare and synthesize key parts of the literature.
The penultimate section briefly summarizes a few additional shocks. The final section analyzes the
extent to which the leading shock candidates can explain fluctuations in output and hours. It concludes
that we are much closer to understanding the shocks that drive economic fluctuations than we were
twenty years ago.


Valerie A. Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
vramey@ucsd.edu
                                 Table of Contents



1.   Introduction

2.   Methods for Identifying Shocks and Estimating Impulse Responses

     2.1 Overview: What is a Shock?
     2.2 Illustrative Framework
     2.3 Common Identification Methods
         2.3.1 Cholesky Decompositions
         2.3.2 Other Contemporaneous Restrictions
         2.3.3 Narrative Methods
         2.3.4 High Frequency Identification
         2.3.5 External Instruments/Proxy SVARs
         2.3.6 Restrictions at Longer Horizons
         2.3.7 Sign Restrictions
         2.3.8 Factor-Augmented VARs
         2.3.9 Estimated DSGE Models
     2.4 Estimating Impulse Responses
     2.5 The Problem of Foresight
     2.6 The Problem of Trends
     2.7 Brief Notes on Nonlinearities
     2.8 DSGE Monte Carlos

3.   Monetary Policy Shocks

     3.1 A Brief History Through 1999
     3.2 Some Alternatives to the Standard Model
         3.2.1 Regime Switching Models
         3.2.2 Time-Varying Effects of Monetary Policy
         3.2.3 Historical Case Studies
     3.3 Main Identification Challenges
         3.3.1 The Recursiveness Assumption
         3.3.2 The Problem of Foresight
     3.4 Summary of Recent Estimates
     3.5 Explorations with Three Types of Monetary Shocks
         3.5.1 The Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999) Benchmark
         3.5.2 Greenbook/Narrative Identification of Shocks
         3.5.3 High Frequency Identification Shocks
     3.6 Summary of Monetary Shocks

4.   Fiscal Shocks

     4.1 Government Spending Shocks


                                        1
         4.1.1 Summary of Identification Methods
         4.1.2 Summary of the Main Results from the Literature
         4.1.3 Exploration with Several Identified Shocks
     4.2 Tax Shocks
         4.2.1 Unanticipated Tax Shocks
                4.2.1.1 Summary of the Literature
                4.2.1.2 Further Explorations
         4.2.2 News About Future Tax Changes
                4.2.2.1 Summary of the Literature
                4.2.2.2 Further Explorations
     4.3 Summary of Fiscal Shocks

5.   Technology Shocks

     5.1 Neutral Technology Shocks
     5.2 Investment-Related Technology Shocks
     5.3 News about Future Technology Changes
     5.4 Explorations with Estimated Technology Shocks
     5.5 Summary of Technology Shocks


6.   Additional Shocks

7.   Summary and Conclusions




                                        2
1. Introduction


          At the beginning of the 20th Century, economists began to recognize the importance of
impulses and propagation mechanisms for explaining business cycle fluctuations. A key question
was how to explain regular fluctuations in a model with dampened oscillations. In 1927, the
Russian statistician Eugen Slutsky published a paper titled “The Summation of Random Causes
as a Source of Cyclic Processes.” In this paper, Slutsky demonstrated the surprising result that
moving sums of random variables could produce time series that looked very much like the
movements of economic time series – “sequences of rising and falling movements, like
waves…with marks of certain approximate uniformities and regularities.”1             This insight,
developed independently by British mathematician Yule in 1926 and extended by Frisch (1933)
in his paper “Propagation Problems and Impulse Problems in Dynamic Economics,”
revolutionized the study of business cycles. Their insights shifted the focus of research from
developing mechanisms to support a metronomic view of business cycles, in which each boom
created conditions leading to the next bust, to a search for the sources of the random shocks.
Since then economists have offered numerous candidates for these “random causes,” such as
crop failures, wars, technological innovation, animal spirits, government actions, and commodity
shocks.
          Research from the 1940s through the 1970s emphasized fiscal and monetary policy
shocks, identified from large-scale econometric models or single equation analyses. The 1980s
witnessed two important innovations that fundamentally changed the direction of the research.
First, Sims’ (1980a) paper “Macroeconomics and Reality” revolutionized the study of systems
driven by random impulses by introducing vector autoregressions (VARs). Sims’ VARs made the
link between innovations to a linear system and macroeconomic shocks. Using his method, it
became easier to talk about identification assumptions, impulse response functions, and to do
innovation accounting using forecast error decompositions. The second important innovation
was the expansion of the inquiry beyond policy shocks to consider important non-policy shocks,
such as technology shocks (Kydland and Prescott (1982)).
          These innovations led to a flurry of research on shocks and their effects. In his 1994
paper “Shocks,” John Cochrane took stock of the state of knowledge at that time by using the by-

1
    Page 105 of the 1937 English version of the article published in Econometrica.

                                                       3
then standard VAR techniques to conduct a fairly comprehensive search for the shocks that drove
economic fluctuations. Surprisingly, he found that none of the popular candidates could account
for the bulk of economic fluctuations. He proffered the rather pessimistic possibility that “we
will forever remain ignorant of the fundamental causes of economic fluctuations.” (Cochrane
(1994), abstract)
       Are we destined to remain forever ignorant of the fundamental causes of economic
fluctuations? Are Slutsky’s “random causes” unknowable? In this chapter, I will summarize the
new methodological innovations and what their application has revealed about the propagation of
the leading candidates for macroeconomic shocks and their importance in explaining economic
fluctuations since Cochrane’s speculation.
       The chapter progresses as follows. Section 2 begins by defining what a macroeconomic
shock is. It then summarizes the many tools used for identifying macroeconomic shocks and
computing impulse responses. It also highlights some of the complications and pitfalls, such as
the effects of foresight and nonlinearities.
       The topic of Section 3 is monetary shocks and their effects on the macroeconomy. The
section summarizes the existing literature and the challenges to identification. It then explores
the effects of several leading monetary shocks in a framework that incorporates some of the
newer innovations.
       Section 4 discusses fiscal shocks. It begins by summarizing results on government
spending shocks and highlights the importance of anticipations. It estimates the effects of several
leading identified shocks in a common framework. The second part of the section looks at tax
shocks. It summarizes the literature on both unanticipated tax shocks and news about future tax
changes and conducts some robustness checks. .
       Section 5 summarizes the literature on technology shocks, including total factor
productivity shocks, investment-specific technology shocks, and marginal efficiency of
investment shocks. It also discusses news about future technology. It compares a wide variety of
identified shocks from the literature.
       Section 6 briefly discusses four other candidate shocks: oil shocks, credit shocks,
uncertainty shocks, and labor supply (or “wage markup”) shocks.
       Section 7 concludes by synthesizing what we have learned about shocks. It conducts a
combined forecast error variance decomposition for output and hours to determine how much of


                                                 4
the fluctuations can be accounted for by some of the leading shocks discussed in the earlier
sections. It concludes that we have made substantial progress in understanding the shocks that
drive the macroeconomy.




2. Methods for Identifying Shocks and Estimating Impulse Responses


2.1. Overview: What is a Shock?


       What, exactly, are the macroeconomic shocks that we seek to estimate empirically? There
is some ambiguity in the literature about the definition because of some researchers’ use of the
term shock when they mean innovation (i.e. the residuals from a reduced form vector
autoregression model (VAR)) or instrument.          Sims (1980a) equated innovations with
macroeconomic shocks, despite claiming to be atheoretical. Others have used the word shock
when they mean instrument (e.g. Cochrane (2004)). In this chapter, I view shocks, VAR
innovations, and instruments to be distinct concepts, although identification assumptions may
equate them in many cases. Shocks are most closely related to the structural disturbances in a
simultaneous equations system. I adopt the concept of shocks used by researchers such as
Blanchard and Watson (1986), Bernanke (1986), and Stock and Watson (forthcoming).
According to Bernanke (1986), the shocks should be primitive exogenous forces that are
uncorrelated with each other and they should be economically meaningful (pp. 52-55).
       I view the shocks we seek to estimate as the empirical counterparts to the shocks we
discuss in our theories, such as shocks to technology, monetary policy, fiscal policy, etc.
Therefore, the shocks should have the following characteristics: (1) they should be exogenous
with respect to the other current and lagged endogenous variables in the model; (2) they should
be uncorrelated with other exogenous shocks; otherwise, we cannot identify the unique causal
effects of one exogenous shock relative to another; and (3) they should represent either
unanticipated movements in exogenous variables or news about future movements in exogenous
variables. With regard to condition (2), one might counter with situations in which both fiscal
and monetary policy respond to some event and argue that therefore the fiscal and monetary
shocks would be correlated. I would respond that these are not primitive shocks, but rather the


                                               5
endogenous responses of policies to a primitive shock. A primitive shock may directly enter
several of the equations in the system. For example, a geopolitical event might lead to a war that
causes both fiscal and monetary policy to respond endogenously. The geopolitical event would
be the primitive shock from the standpoint of our economic models (though it might be
considered an endogenous response from the standpoint of a political science model).2
        To match these theoretical shocks, we want to link the innovations in a structural vector
autoregression (SVAR) to these theoretical (“structural”) shocks, to estimate them in a structural
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model, or to measure them directly using rich
data sources.


2.2. Illustrative Framework


        In this section, I lay out a simple framework in order to discuss the problem of
identification and to illustrate some of the leading identification methods. I begin with the
problem of identifying shocks to fiscal policy in a simple model with no dynamics. I then
generalize the model to a dynamic trivariate model.
        Consider first a simple model of the link between fiscal variables and GDP in a static
setting. Suppose the structural relationships are given by the following equations:




(2.1)




where     is taxes,    is government spending, and         is GDP. The ’s are the macroeconomic
shocks we seek to identify. We assume that they are uncorrelated and that, in this simple
example, each one affects only one equation.           is the tax shock; it might represent legislation
resulting from a change in political power.       might capture the sudden outbreak of war, which
raises desired military spending.       might capture technological progress. The b’s capture the
usual interactions. For example, we would expect that government spending would raise output
2
  Of course, the war might be caused by something like rainfall, in which case the primitive shock would
be the rainfall. This shock would enter even more equations, such as the equations for government
spending, GDP, productivity, etc.

                                                   6
while taxes would lower it, so                 0 and         0. Because of automatic stabilizers, however,
the fiscal variables should also respond to GDP, i.e.,                  0 and                   0. This means that a
simple regression of GDP on government spending and taxes will not uncover                                   and
because         and       are correlated with the shock to GDP,       . For example, we might observe no
correlation between GDP and government spending, but this correlation is consistent with both
no structural relationship between GDP and government spending (i.e.                                     0) and with
      and        being large, with equal but opposite signs. Without further assumptions or data, we
cannot identify either the parameters or the shocks.
         Now let us move to a simple trivariate model with three endogenous variables,                        1,   2,

and     3,   in which dynamics are potentially important.3 In the monetary context, these variables
could be industrial production, a price index, and the federal funds rate; in the fiscal context, they
could be GDP, government purchases, and tax revenue; and in the technology shock context,
they could be labor productivity, hours, and investment. Let                    1   ,   2   ,    3   be the vector of
endogenous variables. Suppose that the dynamic behavior of                   is described by the following
structural model:


(2.2)


                            ∑                      ′
where                 0         1        and                if t = s, and 0 otherwise, where D is a diagonal
matrix. The ε’s are the primitive structural shocks. Since a primitive shock can in principle affect
more than one variable, I initially allow Ω to have nonzero off-diagonal elements.
         The elements of         0   are the same as the b’s from equation (2.1), with                  0 . Thus, the
easiest way to address the dynamics is to recast the problem in terms of the innovations from a
reduced form vector autoregression (VAR):


(2.3)




3
  See Stock and Watson’s chapter (forthcoming) in this Handbook for a more precise analysis of
identification using SVARs. I use the same notation they do.

                                                        7
where                   is a polynomial in the lag operator and                            ∑    1       .
                                                                                                    ′
    1
        ,   2
                ,   3
                        are the reduced form VAR innovations. We assume that               0,
                        ′
and that                     0          . We then can link the innovations        in the reduced form VAR
equation (2.3) to the unobserved structural shocks, , in the structural equation (2.2) as follows:


(2.4a)                                                0

                                                      or
                                                                                  1
(2.4b)                                                    ,       where       0       .


                I will now write out the system in equation (2.4a) explicitly in a way that incorporates a
commonly used identification assumption and a normalization. These restrictions are (i) Ω is the
identity matrix (meaning each shock enters only one equation); and (ii) the structural shocks
have unit effect (i.e. the diagonal elements of H are unity).4 The system can then be written as:


                                        1     12 2            13 3        1

(2.5)                                   2     21 1            23 3        2

                                        3     31 1            32 2        3



This equation is the dynamic equivalent of equation (2.1). The only difference is that instead of
writing the structural relationships in terms of the variables such as GDP, government spending,
and taxes themselves, we now write them in terms of the reduced form VAR innovations. The
interpretations of the b’s, however, are the same if the structural relationships depend on
contemporaneous interactions.
                As discussed at the start of this section, we cannot identify the coefficients or the shocks
without more restrictions. We require at least three more restrictions for identification of all three
shocks, potentially fewer if we want to identify only one shock. Since a number of the common
identification methods depend on contemporaneous restrictions, I will refer to the system of
equations in (2.5) when discussing them.


4
  An alternative normalization to (ii) is the assumption that the structural shocks have unit standard
deviation (i.e. the variances of the ε’s are unity).

                                                              8
2.3 Common Identification Methods


        In this section, I briefly overview some of the most common methods for identification.
This section is not meant to be comprehensive. See Stock and Watson (forthcoming) for more
detailed treatments of the methods I summarize, as well as for a few other methods I do not
summarize, such as set identification and identification through heteroscedasticity. I use the term
“policy variable” for short, but it should be understood that it can represent any variable from
which we want to extract a shock component.




2.3.1   Cholesky Decompositions


        The most commonly used identification method in macroeconomics imposes alternative
sets of recursive zero restrictions on the contemporaneous coefficients. This method was
introduced by Sims (1980a), and is also known as ”triangularization.” The following are two
widely-used alternatives.


    A. The policy variable does not respond within the period to the other endogenous
        variables. This could be motivated by decision lags on the part policymakers or other
        adjustment costs. Let    1   be the policy variable and     1
                                                                        be its reduced form innovation.
        Then this scheme involves constraining          12     13       0 in equation (2.5), which is
        equivalent to ordering the policy variable first in the Cholesky ordering. For example,
        Blanchard and Perotti (2002) impose this constraint to identify the shock to government
        spending; they assume that government spending does not respond to the
        contemporaneous movements in output or taxes.5


    B. The other endogenous variables do not respond to the policy shock within the period.
        This could be motivated by sluggish responses of the other endogenous variables to
        shocks to the policy variable. This scheme involves constraining         21    31   0, which is

5
  To implement this identification using ordinary least squares (OLS), one would simply regress
government spending on p lags of all of the variables in the system and call the residual the government
spending shock.

                                                   9
        equivalent to ordering the policy variable last in the Cholesky ordering. For example,
        Bernanke and Blinder (1992) were the first to identify shocks to the federal funds rate as
        monetary policy shocks and used this type of identification.6


Several of the subsequent sections will discuss how these timing assumptions are not as
innocuous as they might seem at first glance. For example, forward-looking behavior or superior
information on the part of policy-makers may invalidate these restrictions.


2.3.2   Other Contemporaneous Restrictions


        Another more general approach (that nests the Cholesky decomposition) is what is known
as a Structural VAR, or SVAR, introduced by Blanchard and Watson (1986) and Bernanke
(1986). This approach uses either economic theory or outside estimates to constrain parameters.
Consider, for example, Blanchard and Perotti’s (2002) identification of government spending and
net tax shocks. Let      be net taxes,   be government spending, and          be GDP. They identify the
shock to government spending using a Cholesky decomposition in which government spending
is ordered first (i.e.   21   23    0). They identify exogenous shocks to net taxes by setting         13 =

2.08, an outside estimate of the cyclical sensitivity of net taxes.7 These three restrictions are
sufficient to identify all of the remaining parameters and hence all three shocks.


2.3.3   Narrative Methods


        Narrative methods involve constructing a series from historical documents to identify the
reason and/or the quantities associated with a particular change in a variable. Friedman and
Schwartz (1963) is the classic example of using historical information to identify policy shocks.
Hamilton (1985) and Hoover and Perez (1994) used narrative methods to identify oil shocks.
6
   To implement this identification using OLS, one would regress the federal funds rate on
contemporaneous values of the other variables in the system, as well as p lags of all of the variables, and
call the residual the monetary policy shock.
7
  One way to implement the tax shock identification is to construct the variable 1 2.08 3 from the
estimated reduced form residuals. One would then regress 3 on 1 and 2 , using 1 2.08 3 as the
instrument for 1 . (Note that the assumption that 21     23   0 identifies 2 as 2 , which is uncorrelated
with 3 t by assumption) This regression identifies 31 and 32 . The residual is the estimate of 3 t.


                                                    10
These papers isolated political events that led to disruptions in world oil markets. Other
examples of the use of narrative methods are Poterba’s (1986) tax policy announcements, Romer
and Romer’s (1989, 2004) monetary shock series based on FOMC minutes, Ramey and Shapiro
(1998) and Ramey’s (2011) defense news series based on Business Week articles, and Romer and
Romer’s (2010) narrative series of tax changes based on reading legislative documents.
          Until recently, these series were used either as exogenous shocks in sets of dynamic
single equation regressions or embedded in a Cholesky decomposition. For example, in the
framework above, we could set       1   to be the narrative series and constrain   12   13   0. As a
later section details, recent innovations have led to an improved method for incorporating these
series.
          A cautionary note on the potential of narrative series to identify exogenous shocks is in
order. Some of the follow-up research has operated on the principle that the narrative alone
provides exogeneity. It does not. Shapiro (1984) and Leeper (1997) made this point for monetary
policy shocks. Another example is in the fiscal literature. A series on fiscal consolidations,
quantified by narrative evidence on the expected size of these consolidations, is not necessarily
exogenous. If the series includes fiscal consolidations adopted in response to bad news about the
future growth of the economy, the series cannot be used to establish a causal effect of the fiscal
consolidation on future output.


2.3.4     High Frequency Identification


          Research by Bagliano and Favero (1999), Kuttner (2001), Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002),
Faust, Swanson, and Wright (2004), Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005), Piazzesi and
Swanson (2008), Gertler and Karadi (2015), Nakamura and Steinsson (2015) and others has used
high frequency data (such as news announcements around FOMC dates) and the movement of
federal funds futures to identify unexpected Fed policy actions. This identification is also based
in part on timing, but because the timing is so high frequency (daily or higher), the assumptions
are more plausible than those employed at the monthly or quarterly frequency. As I will discuss
in the foresight section below, the financial futures data is ideal for ensuring that a shock is
unanticipated.



                                                   11
         It should be noted, however, that without additional assumptions the unanticipated shock
is not necessarily exogenous to the economy. For example, if the implementation does not
adequately control for the Fed’s private information about the future state of the economy, which
might be driving its policy changes, these shocks cannot be used to estimate a causal effect of
monetary policy on macroeconomic variables.


2.3.5    External Instruments/Proxy SVARs


         The “external instrument,” or “proxy SVAR,” method is a promising new approach for
incorporating external series for identification. This method was developed by Stock and Watson
(2008) and extended by Stock and Watson (2012) and Mertens and Ravn (2013). This approach
takes advantage of information developed from “outside” the VAR, such as series based on
narrative evidence, shocks from estimated DSGE models, or high frequency information. The
idea is that these external series are noisy measures of the true shock.
         Suppose that Zt represents one of these external series. Then this series is a valid
instrument for identifying the shock       1   if the following two conditions hold:


(2.6a)                                 1        0,


(2.6b)                             0       i = 2, 3


Condition (2.6a) is the instrument relevance condition: the external instrument must be
contemporaneously correlated with the structural policy shock. Condition (2.6b) is the
instrument exogeneity condition: the external instrument must be contemporaneously
uncorrelated with the other structural shocks. If the external instrument satisfies these two
conditions, it can be used to identify the shock       1   .
         The procedure is very straightforward and takes place with the following steps.8




8
  This exposition follows Merten and Ravn (2013a, online appendix). See Mertens and Ravn (2013a,b) and
the associated online appendices for generalizations to additional external instruments and to larger
systems.

                                                      12
        Step 1: Estimate the reduced form system to obtain estimates of the reduced form
        residuals,   .
        Step 2: Regress        2
                                    and       3
                                                      on   1
                                                               using the external instrument              as the instrument.
        These regressions yield unbiased estimates of                        21 and    31 .   Define the residuals of these
        regressions to be       2   and   3       .
        Step 3: Regress        1
                                    on    2
                                                  and      3
                                                               , using the     2    and       3   estimated in Step 2 as the
        instruments. This yields unbiased estimates of                   12   and     13 .



As an example, Mertens and Ravn (2014) reconcile Romer and Romer’s (2010) estimates of the
effects of tax shocks with the Blanchard and Perotti (2002) estimates by using the Romer’s
narrative tax shock series as an external instrument                     to identify the structural tax shock. Thus,
they do not need to impose parameter restrictions, such as the cyclical elasticity of taxes to
output. As I will discuss in section 2.4 below, one can extend this external instrument approach
to estimating impulse responses by combining it with Jordà’s (2005) method.


2.3.6   Restrictions at Longer Horizons


        Rather than constraining the contemporaneous responses, one can instead identify a
shock by imposing long-run restrictions. The most common is an infinite horizon long-run
restriction, first used by Shapiro and Watson (1988), Blanchard and Quah (1989), and King,
Plosser, Stock and Watson (1991). Consider the moving average representation of equation (2.3):


(2.7)


                          1
where                         . Combining equation (2.4b) with (2.7), we can write the Y’s in terms of
the structural shocks:


(2.8)


where                    . Suppose we wanted to identify a technology shock as the only shock that
affects labor productivity in the long-run. In this case,                       1   would be the growth rate of labor

                                                                 13
productivity and the other variables would also be transformed to induce stationary (e.g. first-
                                                                                            11
differenced). Letting              denote the (i,j) element of the D matrix and                  1 denote the lag
                                                                                   12                  13
polynomial with L = 1, we impose the long-run restriction by setting                    1 = 0 and           1 = 0.
This restriction constrains the unit root in Y1 to emanate only from the shock that we are calling
the technology shock. This is the identification used by Galí (1999).
          An equivalent way of imposing this restriction is to use the estimation method suggested
by Shapiro and Watson (1988). Let Y1 denote the first-difference of the log of labor productivity
and Y2 and Y3 be the stationary transformations of two other variables (such as hours). Then,
imposing the long-run restriction is equivalent to identifying the error term in the following
equation as the technology shock:


                                                     1                   1
(2.9)              1    ∑    1   11,       1     ∑   1   12,   2     ∑   1   13,        3



We have imposed the restriction by specifying that only the first differences of the other
stationary variables enter this equation. Because the current values of those differences might
also be affected by the technology shock, and therefore correlated with the error term, we use
lags 1 through p of      2   and       3   as instruments for the terms involving the current and lagged
values of those variables. The estimated residual is the identified technology shock. We can then
identify the other shocks, if desired, by orthogonalizing the error terms with respect to the
technology shock.
        This equivalent way of imposing long-run identification restrictions highlights some of the
problems that can arise with this method. First, identification depends on the relevance of the
instruments. Second, it requires additional identifying restrictions in the form of assumptions
about unit roots. If, for example, hours have a unit root, then in order to identify the technology
shock one would have to impose that only the second difference of hours entered in equation
(2.9).9
          Another issue is the behavior of infinite horizon restrictions in small samples (e.g. Faust
and Leeper (1997)). Recently, researchers have introduced new methods that overcome these
problems. Building on earlier work by Faust (1998) and Uhlig (2003, 2004), Francis, Owyang,

9
  To be clear, all of the Y variables must be trend stationary in this system. If hours have a unit root,
then Y2 must be equal to hourst, so the constraint in (2.9) would take the form 2 hourst

                                                         14
Roush, and DiCecio (2014) identify the technology shock as the shock that maximizes the
forecast error variance share of labor productivity at some finite horizon h. A variation by Barsky
and Sims (2011) identifies the shock as the one that maximizes the sum of the forecast error
variances up to some horizon h. See those papers for details on how to implement these methods.


2.3.7   Sign Restrictions


        A number of authors had noted the circularity in some of the reasoning analyzing VAR
specifications in practice. In particular, whether a specification or identification method is
deemed “correct” is often judged by whether the impulses they produce are “reasonable,” i.e.
consistent with the researcher’s priors. Faust (1998) and Uhlig (1997, 2005) developed a new
method to incorporate “reasonableness” without undercutting scientific inquiry by investigating
the effects of a shock on variable Y, where the shock was identified by sign restrictions on the
responses of other variables (excluding variable Y). Work by Canova and De Nicoló (2002) and
Canova and Pina (2005) introduced other variations.
        The sign restriction method has been used in many contexts, such as monetary policy,
fiscal policy and technology shocks. Recently, there have been a number of new papers on sign
restrictions using Bayesian methods. For example, Arias, Rubio-Ramirez, and Waggoner (2015)
propose methods involving agnostic priors in one dimension and by Baumeister and Hamilton
(2015) propose methods involving agnostic priors in another dimension. Amir and Uhlig (2015)
combine sign restrictions with Bayesian Factor-Augmented VARs (FAVARs). See Stock and
Watson (forthcoming) for more discussion of sign restrictions as an identification method.




2.3.8   Factor-Augmented VARs


        A perennial concern in identifying shocks is that the variables included in the VAR do not
capture all of the relevant information. The comparison of price responses in monetary VARs
with and without commodity prices is one example of the difference a variable exclusion can
make. To address this issue more broadly, Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2005) developed the


                                                15
Factor-Augmented VARs (FAVARS) based on earlier dynamic factor models developed by Stock
and Watson (2002) and others. The FAVAR, which typically contains over one hundred series,
has the benefit that it is much more likely to condition on relevant information for identifying
shocks. In most implementations, though, it still typically relies on a Cholesky decomposition.
Amir and Uhlig’s (2015) new methods using sign restrictions in Bayesian FAVARs is one of the
few examples that does not rely on Cholesky decompositions. One shortcoming of FAVAR
methods is that all variables must be transformed to a stationary form, which requires pretesting
and its concomitant problems (e.g. Elliott (1998), Gospodinov, Herrera, and Pesavento (2013)).
See Stock and Watson (forthcoming) for an in depth discussion of dynamic factor models.


2.3.9   Estimated DSGE Models


        An entirely different approach to identification is the estimated dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) model, introduced by Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007). This
method involves estimating a fully-specified model (a New Keynesian model with many
frictions and rigidities in the case of Smets and Wouters) and extracting a full set of implied
shocks from those estimates. In the case of Smets and Wouters, many shocks are estimated
including technology shocks, monetary shocks, government spending shocks, wage markup
shocks, and risk premium shocks. One can then trace out the impulse responses to these shocks
as well as do innovation accounting. Other examples of this method appears in work by Justiano,
Primiceri, Tambolotti (2010, 2011) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012). Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) take a different estimation approach by first estimating impulse
responses to a monetary shock in a standard SVAR and then estimating the parameters of the
DSGE model by matching the impulse responses from the model to those of the data.
        These models achieve identification by imposing structure based on theory. It should be
noted that identification is less straightforward in these types of models. Work by Canova and
Sala (2009), Komunjer and Ng (2011), and others highlight some of the potential problems with
identification in DSGE models. On the other hand, this method overcomes some of the potential
problems of unrestricted VARs highlighted by Fernández-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramírez, Sargent
and Watson (2007).




                                               16
2.4 Estimating Impulse Responses


         Suppose that one has identified the economic shock through one of the methods
discussed above. How do we measure the effects on the endogenous variables of interest? The
most common way to estimate the impulse responses to a shock uses nonlinear (at horizons
greater than one) functions of the estimated VAR parameters. In particular, estimation of the
reduced form system provides the elements of the moving average representation matrix
                 1
                      in equation (2.7) and identification provides the elements of B0. Recalling that
                                                                  2       3
                , we write out              0       1         2       3       ⋯ , and denoting            ,
we can express the impulse response of variable              at horizon t+h to a shock to    as:


                                            ,
(2.10)
                                                ,




These       parameters are nonlinear functions of the reduced form VAR parameters.
         If the VAR adequately captures the data generating process, this method is optimal at all
horizons. If the VAR is mispecified, however, then the specification errors will be compounded
at each horizon. To address this problem, Jordà (2005) introduced a local projection method for
estimating impulse responses. The comparison between his procedure and the standard procedure
has an analogy with direct forecasting versus iterated forecasting (e.g. Marcellino, Stock, and
Watson (2006)). In the forecasting context, one can forecast future values of a variable using
either a horizon-specific regression (“direct” forecasting) or iterating on a one-period ahead
estimated model (“iterated” forecasting). Jordà’s method is analogous to the direct forecasting
whereas the standard VAR method is analogous to the iterated forecasting method. Chang and
Sakata (2007) introduce a related method they call long autoregression and show its asymptotic
equivalence to Jordà’s method.
         To see how Jordà’s method works, suppose that                    has been identified by one of the
methods discussed in the previous section. Then, the impulse response of                at horizon h can be
estimated from the following single regression:


(2.11)            ,           ,   1



                                                        17
  ,   is the estimate of the impulse response of Yi at horizon h to a shock   1   . The control variables
need not include the other Y’s as long as       1    is exogenous to those other Y’s. Typically, the
control variables include deterministic terms (constant, time trends), lags of the Yi, and lags of
other variables that are necessary to “mop up;” the specification can be chosen using information
criteria. One estimates a separate regression for each horizon and the control variables do not
necessarily need to be the same for each regression. Note that except for horizon h = 0, the error
term        will be serially correlated because it will be a moving average of the forecast errors
from t to t+h. Thus, the standard errors need to incorporate corrections for serial correlation,
such as a Newey-West (1987) correction.
         Because the Jordà method for calculating impulse response functions imposes fewer
restrictions, the estimates are often less precisely estimated and are sometimes erratic.
Nevertheless, this procedure is more robust than standard methods, so it can be very useful as a
heuristic check on the standard methods. Moreover, it is much easier to incorporate state-
dependence with this method (e.g. Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013)).
         One can extend the Jordà method in several ways that incorporates some of the new
methodology. First, one can incorporate the advantages of the FAVAR method (see Section 2.3.8)
by including estimated factors as control variables. Second, one can merge the insights from the
external instrument/proxy SVAR method (see Section 2.3.5). To see this, modify equation (2.11)
as follows:


(2.12)             ,        ,   1,                                 ,


where we have replaced the shock ε1t with Y1,t. As discussed above, an OLS regression of Yi on
Y1 cannot capture the structural effect if Y1 is correlated with       . We can easily deal with this
issue, however, by estimating this equation using the external instrument Zt as an instrument for
Y1,t. For example, if Yi is real output and Y1,t is the federal funds rate, we can use Romer and
Romer’s (2004) narrative-based monetary shock series as an instrument. As I will discuss below,
in some cases there are multiple potential external instruments. We can readily incorporate these
in this framework by using multiple instruments for Y1. In fact, these overidentifying restrictions
can be used to test the restrictions of the model (using a Hansen’s J-statistic, for example).

                                                    18
2.5 The Problem of Foresight


          The problem of foresight presents serious challenges to, but also opportunities for, the
identification of macroeconomic shocks.10 There are two main foresight problems: (i) foresight
on the part of private agents; and (ii) foresight on the part of policy makers. I will discuss each in
turn.
          It is likely that many changes in policy or other exogenous shocks are anticipated by
private agents in advance. For example, Beaudry and Portier (2006) explicitly take into account
that news about future technology may have effects today even though it does not show up in
current productivity. Ramey (2011) argues that the results of Ramey and Shapiro (1998) and
Blanchard and Perotti (2002) differ because most of the latter’s identified shocks to government
spending are actually anticipated. Building on work by Hansen and Sargent (1991), Leeper,
Walker, and Yang (2013) work out the econometrics of “fiscal foresight” for taxes, showing that
foresight can lead to a non-fundamental moving average representation. The growing importance
of “forward guidance” in monetary policy means that many changes in policy rates may be
anticipated.
          Consider the following example, based on Leeper et al. (2013), of a simple growth
model with a representative household with log utility over consumption, discount factor β, and a
production function                  , with       1. The government taxes output at a rate             and
there are i.i.d. shocks,   , to the tax rate relative to its mean . Shocks to technology,         , are also
i.i.d. Suppose that agents potentially receive news in period t of what the tax rate will be in t+q,
so that         ,   . If the shocks are unanticipated (q = 0), the rule for capital accumulation is:


                                                         1    ,




10
   The general problem was first recognized and discussed decades ago. For example, Sims (1980) states:
“It is my view, however, that rational expectations is more deeply subversive of identification than has yet
been recognized.”


                                                    19
which reproduces the well-known result that unanticipated i.i.d. tax rate shocks have no effect on
capital accumulation. If the tax rate shock is anticipated two periods in advance (q=2), however,
then optimal capital accumulation is:


                                                 1           ,         ,   1      ,



where           1         1 and              1                   . Can we uncover the tax shocks by regressing
                                                         1

capital on its own lags? No, we cannot. Because                       1, this representation is not invertible in the
                                                 ∞                                         ∞
current and past k’s; we say that        ,               is not fundamental for                    . If we regress kt on
                                                     0                                         0

its own lags and recover the innovations, we would be recovering the discounted sum of tax
news observed at date t and earlier, i.e., “old” news. Adding lagged taxes to the VAR does not
help.
        Beaudry, Fève, and Guay (2015) develop a diagnostic to determine whether non-
fundamentalness is quantitatively important. They argue that in some cases the non-fundamental
representation is close to the fundamental representation.
        The second foresight problem is foresight on the part of policymakers. Sometimes
policymakers have more information about the state of the economy than private agents. If this is
the case, and we do not include that information in the VAR, part of the identified shock may
include the endogenous response of policy to expectations about the future path of
macroeconomic variables. Consider the “price puzzle” in monetary VARs, meaning that some
identified monetary policy shocks imply that a monetary contraction raises prices in the short-
run. Sims (1992) argued that the “price puzzle” was the result of typical VARs not including all
relevant information for forecasting future inflation. Thus, the identified policy shocks included
not only the exogenous shocks to policy but also the endogenous policy responses to forecasts of
future inflation. In the fiscal context, governments may undertake fiscal consolidations based on
private information about declining future growth of potential GDP. If this is not taken into
account, then a finding that a fiscal consolidation lowers output growth may be confounding
causal effects with foresight effects.
        The principal methods for dealing with the problem of foresight are measuring the
expectations directly, time series restrictions, or theoretical model restrictions. For example,


                                                                 20
Beaudry and Portier (2006) extracted news about future technology from stock prices; Ramey
(2011) created a series of news about future government spending by reading Business Week and
other periodicals; Fisher and Peters (2010) created news about government spending by
extracting information from stock returns of defense contractors; Poterba (1986) and Leeper,
Richter, Walker (2012) used information from the spread between federal and municipal bond
yields for news about future tax changes; and Mertens and Ravn (2012) decomposed Romer and
Romer’s (2010) narrative tax series into one series in which implementation was within the
quarter (“unanticipated”) and another series in which implementation was delayed (“news”). In
the monetary shock literature, many papers use high frequency financial futures prices to extract
the anticipated versus unanticipated component of interest rates changes (e.g. Rudebusch (1998),
Bagliano and Favero (1999), Kuttner (2001), and Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005).
          The typical way that news has been incorporated into VARs is by adding the news series
to a standard VAR, and ordering it first. Perotti (2011) has called these “EVARs” for
“Expectational VARs.” Note that in general one cannot use news as an external instrument in
Mertens and Ravn’s proxy SVAR framework. The presence of foresight invalidates the
interpretation of the VAR reduced form residuals as prediction errors, since the conditioning
variables may not span the information set of forward looking agents (Mertens and Ravn (2013,
2014)).


2.6 The Problem of Trends


          Most macroeconomic variables are nonstationary, exhibiting behavior consistent with
either deterministic trends or stochastic trends. A key question is how to specify a model when
many of the variables may be trending. Sims, Stock and Watson (1990) demonstrate that even
when variables might have stochastic trends and might be cointegrated, the log levels
specification will give consistent estimates. While one might be tempted to pretest the variables
and impose the unit root and cointegration relationships to gain efficiency, Elliott (1998) shows
that such a procedure can lead to large size distortions in theory. More recently, Gospodinov,
Herrera, and Pesavento (2013) have demonstrated how large the size distortions can be in
practice.




                                                21
       Perhaps the safest method is to estimate the SVAR in log levels (perhaps also including
some deterministic trends) as long as the imposition of stationarity is not required for
identification. One can then explore whether the imposition of unit roots and cointegration lead
to similar results but increase the precision of the estimates. For years, it was common to include
a linear time trend in macroeconomic equations. Many analyses now include a broken trend or a
quadratic trend to capture features such as the productivity slowdown in 1974 or the effect of the
baby boom moving through the macroeconomic variables (e.g. Perron (1989), Francis and
Ramey (2009)).


2.7 Some Brief Notes on Nonlinearities


       In the previous sections, we have implicitly assumed that the relationships we are trying
to capture can be well-approximated with linear functions. There are many cases in which we
believe that nonlinearities might be important. To name just a few possible nonlinearities,
positive shocks might have different effects from negative shocks, effects might not be
proportional to the size of the shock, or the effect of a shock might depend on the state of the
economy when the shock hits.
       A thorough analysis of nonlinearities is beyond the scope of this chapter, so I will
mention only three items briefly. First, Koop, Pesaran, and Potter (1996) provide a very useful
analysis of the issues that arise when estimating impulse responses in nonlinear models. Second,
if one is interested in estimating state dependent models, the Jordà (2005) local projection
method is a simple way to estimate such a model and calculate impulse response functions.
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013) and Ramey and Zubairy (2014) discuss this application and
how it relates to another leading method, Smooth Transition VARs.
       The third point is a cautionary note when considering the possibility of asymmetries.
Many times researchers posit that only positive, or only negative, shocks matter. For example, in
the oil shock literature, it is common to assume that only oil price increases matter and to include
a variable in the VAR that captures increases but not decreases. Kilian and Vigfusson (2011)
demonstrate the serious biases and faulty inference that can result from this specification. Their
explanation is simple. Suppose Y is a linear function of X, where X takes on both negative and
positive values. If one imposes the restriction that only positive values matter, one is in essence


                                                22
setting all of the negative values of X to zero. Figure 1 of Kilian and Vigfusson’s paper
demonstrates how this procedure that truncates on the X variable produces slope coefficients that
are biased upward in magnitude. Thus, one would incorrectly conclude that positive X’s have a
greater impact than negative X’s, even when the true relationship is linear. To guard against this
faulty inference, one should always make sure that the model nests the linear case when one is
testing for asymmetries. If one finds evidence of asymmetries, then one can use Kilian and
Vigfusson’s (2011) methods for computing the impulse responses correctly.


2.8 DSGE Monte Carlos


       Much empirical macroeconomics is linked to testing theoretical models. A question that
arises is whether shocks identified in SVARs, often with minimal theoretical restrictions, are
capable of capturing the true shocks. Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2007) study this question by
comparing the state-space representation of a theoretical model with the VAR representation.
They note that in some instances an invertibility problem can arise and they offer a method to
check whether the problem is present.
       Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust (2005) were perhaps the first to subject an SVAR involving
long-run restrictions to what I will term a “DSGE Monte Carlo.” In particular, they generated
artificial data from a calibrated DSGE model and applied SVARS with long-restrictions to the
data to see if the implied impulse responses matched those of the underlying model.
       This method has now been used in several settings. Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2008)
used this method to argue against SVARs’ ability to test the RBC model, Ramey (2009) used it to
show how standard SVARs could be affected by anticipated government spending changes, and
Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio (2014) used this method to verify the applicability of their
new finite horizon restrictions method. This method seems to be a very useful tool for judging
the ability of SVARs to test DSGE models. Of course, like any Monte Carlo, the specification of
the model generating the artificial data is all important.


3. Monetary Policy Shocks




                                                  23
       Having discussed the definition of macroeconomic shocks and the leading methods for
identifying them, I now turn to the first of the candidate shocks that will be discussed in detail:
monetary policy shocks. In this section, I review the main issues and results from the empirical
literature seeking to identify and estimate the effects of monetary policy shocks. I begin with a
brief overview of the research before and after Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evan’s (1999)
Handbook of Macroeconomics chapter on the subject. I revisit Christiano, Eichenbaum and
Evan’s specification, and then focus on two leading types of externally identified monetary
policy shocks, Romer and Romer’s (2004) narrative/Greenbook shock and Gertler and Karadi’s
(2015) recent high frequency identification shocks identified using fed funds futures. I focus on
these two types of shocks in part because they both imply very similar effects of monetary policy
on output, despite using different identification methods and different samples.
       Before beginning, it is important to clarify that the “shocks” identified in the monetary
shock literature are not always the empirical counterparts to the shocks from our theoretical
models, as discussed in Section 2.1. Because monetary policy is typically guided by a rule, most
movements in monetary policy instruments are due to the systematic component of monetary
policy rather than to deviations from that rule.11 We do not have many good economic theories
for what a structural monetary policy shock should be. Other than “random coin flipping,” the
most frequently discussed source of monetary policy shocks is shifts in central bank preferences,
caused by changing weights on inflation vs. unemployment in the loss function or by a change in
the political power of individuals on the FOMC. A few papers explicitly link the empirically
identified shocks to shifts in estimated central bank preferences (e.g. Owyang and Ramey (2004)
and Lakdawala (2015)), but most treat them as innovations to a Taylor rule, with no discussion of
their economic meaning.12
       If many macroeconomists now believe that monetary policy shocks themselves contribute
little to macroeconomic outcomes, why is there such a large literature trying to identify them?
The reason is that we want to identify nonsystematic movements in monetary policy so that we
can estimate causal effects of money on macroeconomic variables. As Sims (1998) argued in his
response to Rudebusch’s (1998) critique of standard VAR methods, we need instruments in order
to identify key structural parameters. Analogous to the supply and demand framework where we
11
   Milton Friedman argued, however, that most fluctuations in monetary instruments before 1960 were
due to nonsystematic components of monetary policy.
12
   Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999) discuss a few other possibilities, such as measurement error
in preliminary data (pp. 71-73).

                                                  24
need demand shift instruments to identify the parameters of the supply curve, in the monetary
policy context we require deviations from the monetary rule to identify the response of the
economy to monetary policy. Thus, much of the search for “shocks” to monetary policy is a
search for instruments rather than for primitive macroeconomic shocks.


3.1 A Brief History through 1999


       The effect of monetary policy on the economy is one of the most studied empirical
questions in all of macroeconomics. The most important early evidence was Friedman and
Schwartz’s path-breaking 1963 contribution in the form of historical case studies and analysis of
historical data. The rational expectations revolution of the late 1960s and 1970s highlighted the
importance of distinguishing the part of policy that was part of a rule versus shocks to that rule,
as well as anticipated versus unanticipated parts of the change in the policy variable. Sims (1972,
1980a, 1980b) developed modern time series methods that allowed for that distinction while
investigating the effects of monetary policy. During the 1970s and much of the 1980s, shocks to
monetary policy were measured as shocks to the stock of money (e.g. Sims (1972), Barro (1977,
1978)). This early work offered evidence that (i) money was (Granger-) causal for income; and
(ii) that fluctuations in the stock of money could explain an important fraction of output
fluctuations. Later, however, Sims (1980b) and Litterman and Weis (1985) discovered that the
inclusion of interest rates in the VAR significantly reduced the importance of shocks to the
money stock for explaining output, and many concluded that monetary policy was not important
for understanding economic fluctuations.13
       There were two important rebuttals to the notion that monetary policy was not important
for understanding fluctuations. The first rebuttal was by Romer and Romer (1989), who
developed a narrative series on monetary policy shocks in the spirit of Friedman and Schwarz’s
(1963) work. Combing through FOMC minutes, they identified dates at which the Federal
Reserve “attempted to exert a contractionary influence on the economy in order to reduce
inflation” (p. 134). They found that industrial production decreased significantly after one of
these “Romer Dates.” The Romer and Romer series rapidly gained acceptance as an indicator of


13
  Of course, this view was significantly strengthened by Kydland and Prescott’s (1982) seminal
demonstration that business cycles could be explained with technology shocks.

                                                25
monetary policy shocks.14 A few years later, though, Shapiro (1994) and Leeper (1997) showed
that Romer and Romer’s dummy variable was, in fact, predictable from lagged values of output
(or unemployment) and inflation. Both argued that the narrative method used by Romer and
Romer did not adequately separate exogenous shocks to monetary policy, necessary for
establishing the strength of the causal channel, from the endogenous response of monetary policy
to the economy.15
        The second rebuttal to the Sims and Litterman and Weiss argument was by Bernanke and
Blinder (1992). Building on an earlier idea by McCallum (1983), Bernanke and Blinder turned
the money supply vs. interest rate evidence on its head by arguing that interest rates, and in
particular the federal funds rate, were the key indicators of monetary policy. They showed that
both in Granger-causality tests and in variance decompositions of forecast errors, the federal
funds rate outperformed both M1 and M2, as well as the three-month Treasury bill and the 10-
month Treasury bond for most variables.
        The 1990s saw numerous papers that devoted attention to the issue of the correct
specification of the monetary policy function. These papers used prior information on the
monetary authority’s operating procedures to specify the policy function in order to identify
correctly the shocks to policy. For example, Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992) used
nonborrowed reserves, Strongin (1995) suggested the part of nonborrowed reserves orthogonal to
total reserves, and Bernanke and Mihov (1998) generalized these ideas by allowing for regime
shifts in the type of monetary instrument that is targeted.16 Another issue that arose during this
period was the “Price Puzzle,” a term coined by Eichenbaum (1992) to describe the common
result that a contractionary shock to monetary policy appeared to raise the price level in the
short-run. Sims (1992) conjectured that the Federal Reserve used more information about future
movements in inflation than was commonly included in the VAR. He showed that the price
puzzle was substantially reduced if commodity prices, often a harbinger of future inflation, were
included in the VAR.
        Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans’ 1999 Handbook of Macroeconomics chapter
“Monetary Policy Shocks: What Have We Learned and To What End?” summarized and

14
   Boschen and Mills (1995) also extended the Romers’ dummy variables to a more continuous indicator.
15
   See, however, Romer and Romer’s (1997) response to Leeper.
16
   An important part of this literature was addressed to the “liquidity puzzle,” that is, the failure of some
measures of money supply shocks to produce a negative short-run correlation between the supply of
money and interest rates.

                                                     26
explored the implications of many of the 1990 innovations in studying monetary policy shocks.
Their benchmark model used a particular form of the Cholesky decomposition in which the first
block of variables consisting of output, prices, and commodity prices was assumed not to
respond to monetary policy shocks within the quarter (or month). They called this identification
assumption the “recursiveness assumption.” On the other hand, they allowed contemporaneous
values of the first-block variables to affect monetary policy decisions.      Perhaps the most
important message of the chapter was the robustness of the finding that a contractionary
monetary policy shock, whether measured with the federal funds rate or nonborrowed reserves,
had significant negative effects on output. On the other hand, the price puzzle continued to pop
up in some specifications.


3.2 Some Alternatives to the Standard Model


       Not all research on monetary policy shocks has been conducted in the canonical time-
invariant linear SVAR model. In this section, I briefly highlight some of the research that
generalizes the linear models or uses completely different methods.


3.2.1 Regime Switching Models


       In addition to the switch between interest rate targeting and nonborrowed reserve
targeting (discussed by Bernanke and Mihov (1998)), several papers have estimated regime
switching models of monetary policy. The idea in these models is that monetary policy is driven
not just by shocks but also by changes in the policy parameters. In an early contribution to this
literature, Owyang and Ramey (2004) estimated a regime switching model in which the Fed’s
preference parameters could switch between “hawk” and “dove” regimes. They found that the
onset of a dove regime leads to a steady increase in prices, followed by decline in output after
approximately a year. Primiceri (2005) investigated the roles of changes in systematic monetary
policy versus shocks to policy in the outcomes in the last 40 years. While he found evidence for
changes in systematic monetary policy, he concluded that they are not an important part of the
explanation of fluctuations in inflation and output. Sims and Zha (2006a) also considered regime
switching models and found evidence of regime switches that correspond closely to changes in


                                               27
the Fed chairmanship. Nevertheless, they also concluded that changes in monetary policy
regimes do not explain much of economic fluctuations.


3.2.2 Time-Varying Effects of Monetary Policy


          In their summary of the monetary policy literature in their chapter in the Handbook of
Monetary Economics, Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010) focus on time variation in the estimated
effects of monetary policy. I refer the reader to their excellent survey for more detail. I will
highlight two sets of results that emerge from their estimation of a factor-augmented VAR
(FAVAR), using the standard Cholesky identification method. First, they confirm some earlier
findings that the responses of real GDP were greater in the pre-1979Q3 period than in the post-
1984Q1 period.17 For example, they find that for the earlier period, a 100 basis point increase in
the federal funds rate leads to a decline of industrial production of 1.6 percent troughing at 8
months. In the later period, the same increase in the funds rate leads to a -0.7 percent decline
troughing at 24 months. The second set of results concerns the price puzzle. They find that in a
standard VAR the results for prices are very sensitive to the specification. Inclusion of a
commodity price index does not resolve the price puzzle, but inclusion of a measure of expected
inflation does resolve it in the post-1984:1 period. In contrast, there is no price puzzle in the
results from their FAVAR estimation. Boivin et al. (2010) discuss various reasons why the
monetary transmission mechanism might have changed, such as changes in the regulatory
environment affecting credit and the anchoring of expectations.
          Barakchian and Crowe (2013) estimate many of the standard models, such as by those by
Bernanke and Mihov (1998), CEE (1999), Romer and Romer (2004), and Sims and Zha (2006b),
splitting the estimation sample in the 1980s and showing that the impulse response functions
change dramatically. In particular, most of the specifications estimated from 1988 – 2008 show
that a positive shock to the federal funds rate raises output and prices in most cases.
          Another source of time variation is state-dependent or sign-dependent effects of monetary
shocks on the economy. Cover (1992) was one of the first to present evidence that negative
monetary policy shocks had bigger effects (in absolute value) than positive monetary shocks.
Follow-up papers such as by Thoma (1994) and Weisse (1999) found similar results. Recent

17
     See, for example, Faust (1998), Barth and Ramey (2002) and Boivin and Giannoni (2006).

                                                    28
work by Angrist, Jordà, and Kuersteiner (2013) finds related evidence that monetary policy is
more effective in slowing economic activity than it is in stimulating economic activity. Tenreyro
and Thwaites (2014) also find that monetary shocks seem to be less powerful during recessions.
       Olivei and Tenreyro (2007) estimate important seasonality in the effects of monetary
shocks that is well-explained by sticky wage models. They find that monetary shocks that take
place in the first two quarters of the year have sizeable, but temporary effects, on output whereas
shock that take place in the third and fourth quarters of the year have little effect on output. They
explain these results with evidence on uneven staggering of labor contracts over the year: a
shock that hits near the end of the year has little effect because the bulk of wage contracts are
reset then, so wages can adjust immediately.
       Since fall 2008, the federal funds rate has been near the zero lower bound. Thus, a key
question that has arisen is how to measure shocks in light of this nonlinear constraint. Wu and
Xia (forthcoming) use a multifactor Shadow Rate Term Structure Model to estimate a shadow
federal funds rate. This shadow rate can capture additional features, such as quantitative easing.
Wu and Xia find that unconventional monetary policy has a noticeable impact on the
macroeconomy.


3.2.3 Historical Case Studies


       Given the important impact of Friedman and Schwartz’s (1963) case study of monetary
policy during the Great Depression, it is surprising that more case studies have not been
conducted. Romer and Romer (1989)’s first narrative monetary analysis was designed to be a
quasi-case study in the spirit of Friedman and Schwartz. Their dummy variable series was
assigned to episodes in which the Fed decided to risk a recession in order to reduce inflation.
       Velde (2009) presents one of the most striking case studies of monetary nonneutrality,
based on an episode in 1724 France. In that year, the French government cut the money supply
three times, resulting in a cumulative drop of 45 percent! The action was taken for a variety of
reasons, such as long-term price targeting and worries that soldiers and creditors of the state were
being hurt by the rise in prices during the previous six years. Velde finds that while prices on
foreign exchange markets adjusted instantly, other prices adjusted slowly and incompletely and




                                                 29
industrial output fell by 30 percent. The circumstances of that episode are unusually clean for a
historical case study, so his evidence of monetary nonneutrality is quite compelling.


3.3 Main Identification Challenges


          Several parts of Section 2 discussed some of the challenges to identification in general.
Here, I review the issues that are particular important for the identification of monetary policy
shocks.


3.3.1 The Recursiveness Assumption


          A key assumption used by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999) (CEE) was the
“recursiveness assumption.”          Consider the trivariate model from equation (2.5) in the last
section, rewritten here for convenience:


                                     1       12 2    13 3       1

(3.1)                                2       21 1    23 3       2

                                     3       31 1    32 2       3



CEE include more than three variables in the system, so we should think of each                         as
representing a block of variables:       1
                                             includes output, a general price index, and a commodities
price index;    2
                    is the federal funds rate; and   3
                                                         contains a monetary stock measure such as M1
or M2, nonborrowed reserves, and total reserves. CEE interpret the equation for          2
                                                                                             as the Fed’s
feedback rule and       2   as the monetary policy shock. They assume that current values of the
enter the Fed’s rule, so        21   0, but the money stock and reserves do not enter the rule, so
 23     0. These are still not enough assumptions to identify the monetary policy shock because if
the monetary policy shock can affect output, etc. within the period,      1
                                                                              will be correlated with   2

so we cannot use OLS. CEE thus add the additional recursiveness assumptions that none of the

 1
     variables (output and prices) is affected by the monetary policy shock or the monetary
aggregates within the period, i.e.,             12   13     0. In practice, this is just a Cholesky


                                                     30
decomposition generalized to blocks of variables. Since CEE focused only on the monetary
policy shock, they did not need to make more assumptions to identify shocks within the first and
third block.
       It is important to emphasize, however, the importance of the recursiveness assumption for
identification. All of CEE’s results depend on setting   12   0, meaning that output and prices are
not allowed to respond to changes in the federal funds rate within the period. Note that this
assumption is at odds with some later estimated New Keynesian DSGE models. For example,
Smets and Wouters’ (2007) estimated model implies that output, hours, and inflation should
respond immediately to the monetary policy shock (see Figure 6 of their paper). The estimated
DSGE model of Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) does not imply an immediate
response, but only because they assume that no agents can react to the monetary policy shock
within the period. They make this theoretical assumption because they estimate their model
parameters to match the impulse responses of their VARs which identify the monetary policy
shock with the recursiveness assumption.
       Even research that develops external instruments typically uses the recursiveness
assumption. For example, Romer and Romer (2004) develop a new measure of monetary policy
shocks using narrative methods and Greenbook forecasts, but when they study the effects on
output and prices, they impose the additional constraint that   12     13   0. They do so because
they do not view their estimated shock as being pure, and thus also use the recursivity
assumption as “exogeneity insurance.” Coibion’s (2012) generalization of the Romer and Romer
procedures also imposes the constraint. Barakchian and Crowe (2013) use high frequency
identification from fed funds futures, but nevertheless invoke the recursiveness assumption in
their VARs. The typical FAVAR models, such as those by Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2005)
and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010), use the recursiveness assumption as well.
       Some of the few papers that do not use the recursiveness assumption are those that use
sign restrictions. Uhlig (1997, 2005), Faust (1998), Faust, Swanson, Wright (2004), Arias,
Caldara, Rubio-Ramírez (2015) and Amir and Uhlig (2015) are able to avoid imposing the zero
restriction associated with the recursiveness assumption by instead using sign restriction, also
known as “set identification” or partial identification. For example, Uhlig (1997, 2005) imposes
the restriction that contractionary monetary policy shocks cannot raise prices. Faust, Swanson,
and Wright (2004) constrain       0.1     12   0 for the output and price equations. The sign


                                                31
restriction papers can often yield confidence sets that imply possibly positive effects of
contractionary monetary policy on output (e.g. Uhlig (2005), Faust, Swanson, and Wright (2004),
Amir and Uhlig (2015)).
          In section 3.4, I will investigate the importance of the recursiveness assumption in more
detail.


3.3.2 Foresight Problems


          Section 2.5 discussed how two types of foresight could create problems in identifying
shocks and their effects. Both types of foresight are particularly important for monetary policy,
and significant progress has been made recently both in appreciating their importance and in
developing methods for addressing them.
          The first type of foresight problem is foresight on the part of policymakers. As an
illustration of the problem, suppose the Fed follows a simple policy rule:


(3.2)             1                  2                    ,


where       is the fed funds rate,   is log output, and       is inflation.   is the change in the variable
from t to t+h. The Fed sets interest rates based on its expectations of the future path of output
and inflation because is aware of the lags in the effects of monetary policy. I have modeled this
simply as expectations of changes from t to t+h, but the argument applies for more general
notions of expectations about the path.
          The usual SVAR specification assumes that the Fed’s expectations about the future paths
of output and inflation are adequately captured by the current and lagged values of the (typically)
few macroeconomic variables included in the SVAR. This is a strong assumption. The idea that
identified monetary shocks might be incorrectly mixing systematic responses to the Fed’s
expectations was first highlighted by Sims (1992), who argued that the price puzzle was due to
the Fed observing more information on inflation. He advocated the incorporation of sensitive
commodity prices to address the problem. However, this inclusion does not always get rid of the
price puzzle. Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz’s (2005) Factor-Augmented VARs (FAVARS) are
another method for incorporating more information. The FAVAR, which typically contains over

                                                   32
one hundred series, has the benefit that it is much more likely to condition on relevant
information for identifying shocks. The FAVAR method nonetheless relies on the assumption that
linearly combinations of publicly available series fully capture the Fed’s expectations.
        In a 2000 paper, Romer and Romer presented evidence suggesting that the Fed had
superior information when constructing inflation forecasts compared to the private sector. To see
the problem this asymmetric information presents, rewrite equation (3.2) as:


(3.3)           1                 2                  1




                    2                                    ,


In this equation,    denotes expectations based on private agent information and                denotes
expectations based on the Fed’s information. If information is symmetric and publicly available,
then the two terms in square brackets will be zero and methods that incorporate sufficient
amounts of public information should be able to identify the monetary policy shock             correctly.
If, on the other hand, the Fed has superior information, the terms in brackets will not be zero and
an SVAR or FAVAR will produce an incorrectly identified monetary policy shock,                      that
consists of two components, the true shock as well as a component based on the informational
superiority of the Fed:


(3.4)                   1                                    2                             ,


        Barth and Ramey (2002) suggested that the problem might be corrected by controlling
for Fed forecasts in VARs. They augmented their monetary VARs with Greenbook forecasts of
inflation and output in order to determine whether controls for the Fed’s superior information
would make the price puzzle disappear in their early sample from 1965 to 1979. They found that
even with the controls for the Greenbook forecasts, the price puzzle was still very strong in this
early sample (see Figure 7 of their paper).
        Romer and Romer (2004) (R&R) combined the use of Greenbook forecasts with narrative
methods to construct a new measure of monetary policy shocks. First, they derived a series of

                                                33
intended federal funds rate changes during FOMC meetings using narrative methods. Second, in
order to separate the endogenous response of policy to information about the economy from the
exogenous shock, they regressed the intended funds rate change on the current rate and on the
Greenbook forecasts of output growth and inflation over the next two quarters. They then
converted the estimated residuals based on the FOMC meeting frequency data to monthly and
used them in dynamic regressions for output and other variables. They found very large effects of
these shocks on output.
       John Cochrane’s (2004) NBER EFG discussion of the Romer and Romer paper highlights
how their method can identify movements in monetary policy instruments that are exogenous to
the error term of the model. If the Greenbook forecast of future GDP growth contains all of the
information that the FOMC uses to make its decisions, then that forecast is a “sufficient
statistic.” Any movements in the target funds rate that are not predicted by the Greenbook
forecast of future output can be used as an instrument to identify the causal effect of monetary
policy on output. Analogously, any movements in the target funds rate that are not predicted by
the Greenbook forecast of inflation can be used as an instrument to identify the causal effect of
monetary policy on inflation. The idea is that if the Fed responds to a shock for reasons other
than its effect on future output or future inflation, that response can be used as an instrument for
output or inflation. Cochrane states the following proposition in his discussion:


       Proposition 1: To measure the effects of monetary policy on output it is enough that the
       shock is orthogonal to output forecasts. The shock does not have to be orthogonal to
       price, exchange rate, or other forecasts. It may be predictable from time t information; it
       does not have to be a shock to the agent’s or the Fed’s entire information set. (Cochrane
       (2004)).


Cochrane’s conceptualization of the issue of identifying movements in monetary policy that are
exogenous to the error term in the equation is an important step forward. Note, however, that
what Cochrane calls a “shock” is not the same as the definition of shock that I use in this chapter.
Cochrane’s notion of a shock is not a primitive structural shock, but rather a useful instrument
for estimating the effect of monetary policy on output, etc.




                                                34
       The possibility of asymmetric information between the Fed and the private sector leads to
a further complication, though. If the Federal Reserve has superior information, then any action
or announcement by the Fed presents a signal extraction problem for private agents. Private
agents observe      in equation (3.2) above, but they know that it is composed of the true shock as
well as the systematic component of the Fed’s rule based on the Fed’s informational advantage.
The problem can easily be extended to include the possibility that      also contains time-varying
inflation or output targets that are unobserved the public. Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005)
argue that their estimated negative effects of an unanticipated rise in the federal funds rate on
long-term forward rates can be explained as the response to information revealed by the Fed
action about inflation targets.
       The second type of foresight problem is news about future policy actions. Campbell,
Evans, Fisher, and Justiniano (2012) argue that the Fed has been using forward guidance since
the early 1990s. This means that many changes in the federal funds rate are in fact anticipated in
advance. As discussed in Section 2.5 on foresight, foresight about future movements in policy
variables can lead to a non-fundamental moving average representation. This would imply that
standard VARs typically cannot be used to identify the shocks.
       Fortunately, the monetary literature has developed excellent methods for identifying news
shocks. As discussed in Section 2.3.4, research by many, such as Kuttner (2001), Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2002), Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005), Piazzesi and Swanson (2008),
Barakchian and Crowe (2013), Gertler and Karadi (2015), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2015),
has used the movements of federal funds and other interest rate futures in small windows around
FOMC announcements to identify unexpected Fed policy actions. Exploiting the information in
interest rate futures is an ideal way to construct “news” series. D’Amico and King (2015) study
the effects of anticipated monetary policy by combining information on expectations, as in
Campbell et al. (2012), with sign restrictions in an SVAR. In particular, they identify a monetary
news shock by restricting the responses of the expected short term rate to move in the opposite
direction of expected inflation and expected output.




3.4 Summary of Recent Estimates



                                                35
       Table 3.1 summarizes some of the main results from the literature on the impact of the
identified monetary shock on output, the contribution of monetary shocks to output fluctuations,
and whether the price puzzle is present. Rather than trying to be encyclopedic in listing all
results, I have chosen leading examples obtained with the various identifying assumptions. In
addition, I attempted to standardize the results by normalizing the peak of response of the federal
funds rate to 100 basis points; this standardization does not control for differences in persistence
of the response as I discuss below.
       As the table shows, the standard CEE (1999) SVAR, the Faust, Swanson, Wright (2004)
high frequency identification, Uhlig’s (2005) and Amir and Uhlig’s (2015) sign restrictions,
Smets and Wouters’ (2007) estimated DSGE model, and Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz’s (2005)
FAVAR all produce rather small effects of monetary policy shocks. Also, most are plagued by the
price puzzle to greater or lesser degree. On the other hand, Romer and Romer (2004), Coibion
(2012), Barakchian-Crowe (2013), and Gertler-Karadi (2015) all find larger impacts of a given
shock on output.
       I will also summarize briefly the effects on other variables from some of the leading
analyses. A particularly comprehensive examination for many variables is conducted by Boivin,
Kiley, and Mishkin’s (2010) with their FAVAR. Recall that they obtained different results for the
pre- versus post-1980 period. For the period from 1984m1 – 2008m12, they found that a positive
shock to the federal funds rate leads to declines in a number of variables, including employment,
consumption expenditures, investment, housing starts, and capacity utilization.


3.5 Explorations with Three Types of Monetary Shocks


       I now explore the robustness of the effects of monetary policy shocks using some of the
new methods introduced in the literature to deal with both the foresight problems and the
recursiveness assumption. For reference, I begin by estimating the classic Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans’ (1999) type of specification and then move on to the Romer and Romer
(2004) shock and Gertler and Karadi’s (2015) high frequency identification shock.




                                                36
3.5.1 The Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999) Benchmark


       Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999) presented estimates based on shocks
identified using the recursiveness assumption and showed robust results that were generally
consistent with conventional views on the effect of monetary shocks. Here I study how the
results change when the sample is updated.
       I estimate a specification similar to Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans’ (1999)
specification, but use Coibion’s (2012) macroeconomic variables for the first block. In particular,
I use monthly data and include log industrial production, the unemployment rate, the log of the
CPI, and the log of a commodity price index in the first block. The second block consists of the
federal funds rate. The third block consists of the logs of nonborrowed reserves, total reserves
and M1. Thus, the innovation to the federal funds rate (orthogonal to contemporaneous values of
the first block variables and lags of all of the variables) is identified as the monetary policy shock
       Figure 3.1 shows the estimated impulses for this SVAR. The solid black line and shaded
areas are the point estimates and 90 percent bootstrap confidence bands for the system estimated
over CEE’s sample period, 1965m1 – 1995m6. The responses look like classic effects of
monetary policy shocks. The Federal funds rate jumps up temporarily, but then falls back to 0 by
six months. This temporary blip in the funds rate, however, sets off a prolonged recession.
Industrial production begins to fall in the next month and troughs 21 months later.
Unemployment rises and peaks around 23 months later. Both unemployment and industrial
production return to normal after four years. Prices rise slightly for the first few months, but then
follow a steady path down, settling at new lower level after four years. Nonborrowed reserves,
total reserves and M1 fall and then recover after three years. Nonborrowed reserves display some
unusual oscillations, though. For the most part, these responses look very similar to the ones
shown in Figure 3 of CEE (1999).
       The blue short dashed lines in the same figures show the responses for the sample from
1983m1 – 2007m12. The sample stops in 2007 both to exclude the financial crisis and for the
practical reason that nonborrowed reserves became negative starting in 2008. The results change
dramatically and imply that increases in the federal funds rate lower the unemployment rate.
These results echo those of Barakchian and Crowe (2013), who show that the leading
specifications imply expansionary effects in the sample from 1988 through 2007.


                                                 37
       The red long dashed lines show the results of a simplified model for the sample 1983m1
– 2007m12. This model omits M1, nonborrowed reserves, and total reserves. In this
specification, there is still a small amount of expansionary effect on output and unemployment at
the beginning, but then the more standard contractionary effects take hold. Prices never fall,
however.
       Table 3.2 shows various measures of the importance of monetary policy shocks for
industrial production in CEE’s specification. The first column shows the trough effect on output
of a shock that raises the funds rate to a peak of 100 basis points. Even in CEE’s original sample,
the effects are very modest, less than a -0.5 percent fall. When estimated over the period 1959
through 2007, the effects are less than half. The other columns show the forecast error variance
decompositions at 24 months. These indicate that monetary policy shocks account for less than
seven percent of the forecast error variance in the original sample and less than one percent in
the longer sample. A reasonable interpretation of the decline in the contribution of monetary
shocks to output volatility is improved, less erratic monetary policy.


3.5.2 Greenbook/Narrative Identification of Shocks


       Next, I explore the effects of the shocks identified by Romer and Romer (2004). As
discussed in Section 3.3.2, Romer and Romer (2004) (R&R) sought to overcome the problem of
superior Federal Reserve information by regressing the federal funds target rate on the
Greenbook forecasts at each FOMC meeting date and using the residual as the monetary policy
shock. They find much larger effects of monetary policy than CEE do. Coibion (2012) explores
many possible reasons for the differences and provides very satisfactory and revealing answers.
In particular, he finds that R&R’s main results, based on measuring the effect of their identified
shock using a single dynamic equation, is very sensitive to the inclusion of the period of
nonborrowed reserves targeting, 1979 – 1982, and the number of lags (the estimated impact on
output is monotonically increasing in the number of lags included in the specification). In
addition, their large effects on output are linked to the more persistent effects of their shock on
the funds rate. In contrast, R&R’s hybrid VAR specification, in which they substituted their
(cumulative) shocks for the federal funds rate (ordered last) in a standard VAR, produces results
implying that monetary policy shocks have “medium” effects. Coibion (2012) goes on to show


                                                 38
that the hybrid model results are consistent with numerous other specifications, such as GARCH
estimates of Taylor Rules (as suggested by Hamilton (2010) and Sims-Zha (2006a)) and time-
varying parameter models as in Boivin (2006) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011). Thus, he
concludes that monetary policy shocks have “medium” effects. In particular, a 100 basis point
rise in the federal funds rate leads industrial production to fall 2 – 3 percent at its trough at
around 18 months.
       I thus work with the Coibion version of the R&R hybrid VAR, which is a monthly VAR
with the log of industrial production, the unemployment rate, the log of the CPI, the log of a
commodity price index in the first block, and the cumulative Romer and Romer shock replacing
the federal funds rate. This specification uses the recursiveness assumption as well, placing the
funds rate last in the ordering and thus assuming that the monetary shock cannot affect the
macroeconomic variables within the month.
       Figure 3.2A shows the results, with the solid lines and confidence bands estimated using
the original R&R shocks on the original R&R sample of 1969m3 – 1996m12. These results also
match the classic monetary policy effects. Output falls within a month or two, while
unemployment rises. Prices remain constant until around nine months, when they fall steadily
until they bottom out during the fourth year after the shock. A qualitative difference with the
CEE results is that the response of the federal funds rate is more persistent in the R&R VAR.
       The short dashed blue lines show the responses based on the sample from 1983m1 –
2007m12. I constructed new R&R shocks by re-estimating their FOMC meeting regression for
the later sample, using the updates by Wieland and Yang (2015). I converted these shocks to
monthly and then used them in the VAR estimated over the same later sample. The results are
similar to those found by Barakchian and Crowe (2013): contractionary monetary policy shocks
appear to be expansionary.
       The long dashed red lines show the responses based on the sample from 1969m3 –
2007m12. The R&R shock is based on re-estimating their FOMC meeting regression for the
entire sample. The results for the full sample look more like those for the original R&R sample,
but with more muted effects on output and unemployment.
       Rows 3 and 4 of Table 3.2 show the trough effects and variance decompositions for the
R&R VAR. In their original sample, the trough effect on output is -1.38, which is substantially




                                               39
larger than the results using CEE.18 The forecast error variance decomposition implies that
monetary policy shocks account for 9 percent of the variance for horizons at 24 months.19 As
with most monetary shock specifications, however, the effects are considerably less if we include
more recent periods in the sample.
        An odd feature of the impulse responses shown in Figure 3.2A is the robust rebound of
industrial production after two years of recession. The peak of industrial production at 48 months
is the same magnitude as the trough at 13 months.                  One possible explanation is that
misspecification of the VAR is distorting the estimated impulse responses. One way to assess this
hypothesis is to use Jordà’s (2005) local projection method. As discussed in Section 2.4, the
Jordà method puts fewer restrictions on the impulse responses. Rather than estimating impulse
responses based on nonlinear functions of the reduced form parameters, the Jordà method
estimates regressions of the dependent variable at horizon t+h on the shock in period t and uses
the coefficient on the shock as the impulse response estimate.
        To investigate the results of this less restrictive specification, I estimate the following
series of regressions:


(3.5)


The z is the variable of interest. The control variables include two lags of the R&R shock, the
federal funds rate, the log of industrial production, the unemployment rate, the log of the CPI,
and the log of the commodity price index.20              In addition, to preserve the recursiveness
assumption, I include contemporaneous values of the log of industrial production,
unemployment rate and the logs of the two price indices. The coefficient           gives the response of
z at time t+h to a shock at time t. As discussed in Section 2,            will be serially correlated, so
the standard errors must incorporate a correction, such as Newey-West.



18
   My numbers are slightly different from those of Coibion’s for the original sample because he normalized
by the impact effect on the funds rate rather than the peak response of the funds rate. Emi Nakamura
has suggested that it might be better to compare the integral of the output response to the integral of the
funds rate response because this measure incorporates persistence. I found that this measure sometimes
behaved oddly because of the tendency of some of the variables to oscillate around zero.
19
   Neither Romer and Romer (2004) nor Coibion (2012) conducted forecast error variance decompositions.
Their claim of large or “medium” effects was based on comparing the actual paths of output to the
predicted paths implied by the estimated monetary policy shocks.
20
   The point estimates are similar if more lags are included.

                                                    40
           Figure 3.2B shows the impulse responses estimated using the Jordà method on R&R’s
original sample 1969m3 – 1996m12. The relevant impulse responses are indicated by the black
solid lines. While the responses are somewhat more erratic, they display more coherent
dynamics. In particular, rather than the swing from recession to boom for industrial production
implied by the VAR estimates, the Jordà estimates imply a more persistent decline in output (and
rise in unemployment) that slowly returns to normal.
           As discussed above, the R&R VAR still imposes the recursiveness assumption. If one
believes that the Greenbook forecasts incorporate all relevant information used by the Fed, then
one does not need to impose the additional CEE recursiveness assumption. To determine the
effect of removing the restriction that output and prices cannot respond to the shock within the
month, I re-estimate the Jordà regressions omitting the contemporaneous values of all variables
other than the R&R shock. The results of this estimation are shown by the green dashed lines in
Figure 3.2B. Many aspects of the responses are similar to those obtained with the recursiveness
assumptions. However, there are several key differences. First, the estimates imply that a shock
that raises the funds rate is initially expansionary: industrial production rises and the
unemployment rate falls for the first several months, and the points estimates are statistically
different from zero (not shown). Second, there is a pronounced price puzzle for the first two
years, and most of those estimates are statistically different from zero.
           One possible explanation for these puzzles is a failure of the Greenbook forecasts to
capture all of the information the Federal Reserve uses. To examine whether expanding the
information set helps eliminate the price puzzle, I re-estimate the nonrecursive Jordà model with
the following alternative controls: two lags each of the R&R shock, the federal funds rate, the
dependent variable, and updates of Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin’s (2010) five FAVAR factors.21
The results are shown as the dashed purple line in Figure 3.2B. In this case, the price puzzle is
even worse and the initial expansionary effects on output and unemployment are no better. Thus,
including FAVAR-type factors does not reproduce the results obtained using the recursiveness
assumption.
           The proxy SVAR is another method that can be used to relax the recursiveness
assumption. Kliem and Kriwoluzky (2013) use this method to reconcile VAR monetary shocks
with the Romers’ narrative shocks. They do not, however, explore effects on output, prices, or

21
     I am indebted to Shihan Xie for providing her updates of the Boivin et al. estimated factors.

                                                       41
other variables. To investigate the results using this method, I estimate the reduced form of
Coibion’s system with the federal funds rate substituted for the cumulative R&R shock and with
R&R’s monetary policy shock as an external instrument following Stock and Watson’s (2012)
and Mertens and Ravn’s (2013) proxy SVAR method (see Section 2 for a description).
          Figure 3.2C shows the results for the original sample (1969 – 1996) and the full sample
from 1969 through 2007. The shaded areas are 90% confidence bands using Mertens and Ravn’s
methods for the original sample estimates. In both samples, a shock to monetary policy raises the
federal funds rate, which peaks at 1.4 percent by the month after the shock and falls slowly to 0
thereafter. The response of industrial production is different from the one obtained using the
hybrid VAR (shown as the red long dashed line in Figure 3.2). In particular, industrial production
now rises above normal for about 10 months, then begins falling, hitting a trough at about 29
months. Normalized by the funds rate peak, the results imply that a shock that raises the funds
rate to a peak of 100 basis points first raises industrial production by 0.5 percent at its peak a few
months after the shock and then lowers it by -0.9 percent by 29 months. The unemployment rate
exhibits the same pattern in reverse. After a contractionary monetary policy shock, it falls by 0.1
percentage points in the first year, then begins rising, hitting a peak of about 0.2 percentage
points at month 30. The behavior of the CPI shows a pronounced, statistically significant prize
puzzle.
          In sum, relaxing the recursiveness assumption imposed by Romer and Romer’s hybrid
VAR leads to several puzzles. A contractionary monetary policy shock is now expansionary in its
first year and the price puzzle is very pronounced.
          The most obvious explanation for these results is that the FOMC responds to more
information than even the Greenbook forecast and FAVAR factors captures, and making the R&R
shock orthogonal to current output and prices (i.e. the recursiveness assumption) helps cleanse
the shock of these extra influences. However, this means that even with the R&R shock, one is
forced to make the recursiveness assumption, which does not have a solid economic basis. As
discussed above, leading New Keynesian models, such as Smets and Wouters (2007), imply
immediate effects of monetary policy shocks on output and prices.
          This exploration highlights the importance of additional restrictions imposed in standard
monetary models, as well as the importance of the sample period when estimating the effects of
monetary shocks. Without the additional recursiveness assumption, even narrative methods can


                                                 42
produce puzzling results. Furthermore, as highlighted by Barakchian and Crowe (2013), many of
the methods that produce classic monetary shock results in samples through the mid-1990s
produce puzzles when estimated over later samples. In particular, contractionary monetary
shocks seem to have expansionary effects in the first year and the price puzzle is pervasive. A
plausible explanation for the breakdown in results in the later sample is an identification
problem: because monetary policy has been conducted so well in the last several decades, true
monetary policy shocks are rare. Thus, it is difficult to extract meaningful monetary shocks that
aren’t contaminated by problems with foresight on the part of the monetary authority.


3.5.3 High Frequency Identification Shocks


        As discussed in previous sections, numerous papers have used high frequency
identification methods (HFI) to deal with possible foresight about monetary policy changes. Part
of the literature focuses only on the effects on interest rates and asset prices (.e.g. Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) and Hanson and Stein (2015)). Nakamura and Steinsson (2015)
link their estimated interest rate changes to output effects by calibrating a New Keynesian model.
The strength of the effect, however, depends crucially on the assumed intertemporal elasticity of
substitution. For this reason, it is also important to estimate direct links in the data as well.
        A recent paper by Gertler and Karadi (2015) combines high frequency identification
methods (HFI) with proxy SVAR methods to investigate the effects on macroeconomic variables.
They have two motivations for using these methods. First, they seek to study the effect of
monetary policy on variables measuring financial frictions, such as interest rate spreads. The
usual Cholesky ordering with the federal funds rate ordered last imposes the restriction that no
variables ordered earlier respond to the funds rate shocks within the period. This is clearly an
untenable assumption for financial market rates. Second, they want to capture the fact that over
time the Fed has increasingly relied on communication to influence market beliefs about the
future path of interest rates (“forward guidance”).
        In the implementation, Gertler and Karadi estimate the residuals using monthly data from
1979 to 2012, but then execute the proxy SVAR from 1991-2012 since the instruments are only
available for that sample. Figure 3.3A replicates the results from Gertler and Karadi’s baseline




                                                   43
proxy SVAR for Figure 1 of their paper.22 This system uses the three-month ahead fed funds
futures (ff4_tc) as the shock and the one-year government bond rate as the policy instrument.
The other variables included are log of industrial production, log CPI, and the Gilchrist-
Zakrajsek (2012) excess bond premium spread. The results show that a shock raises the one-year
rate, significantly lowers industrial production, does little to the CPI for the first year, and raises
the excess bond premium. In order to put the results on the same basis as other results, I also
estimated the effect of their shock on the funds rate. The results imply that a shock that raises the
federal funds rate to a peak of 100 basis points (not shown) lowers industrial production by about
-2 percent.
           I explore the robustness of the results by estimating the effects of their shocks in a Jordà
local projection framework. The control variables are two lags of the shock itself, the interest rate
on one-year government bonds, industrial production, the CPI, and the Gilchrist-Zakrajsek
(2012) excess bond premium spread. I do not include current values of these other variables, so I
am not imposing the recursiveness assumption.
           Figure 3.3B shows the results. The impulse responses look very different from those
using the proxy SVAR method. The interest rate rises more slowly, but then remains high for a
much longer time. Output does not respond for a year, but then rises. Prices respond little for
the first 30 months, but then finally fall.
           I then conducted some further investigations of the Gertler-Karadi shock. Several features
emerge. First, the shock is not zero mean. The mean is -0.013 and is statistically different from
zero. Second, it is serially correlated; if I regress it on its lagged value the coefficient is 0.31 with
a robust standard error of 0.11. This is not a good feature since it is supposed to capture only
unanticipated movements in interest rates. In my local projection framework implementation, I
include lagged values of the shock, so my procedure purges the shock of this serial correlation. I
discovered that the serial correlation is induced by the method that Gertler and Karadi use to
convert the announcement day shocks to a monthly series.23 Third, if I used FOMC-frequency
data to regress the shock on all of the Greenbook variables that the Romers used to create their
shock, the R-squared of the regression is 0.21 and I can reject that the coefficients are jointly
zero with a p-value of 0.027.24          Thus, the Gertler-Karadi variable is predicted by Greenbook

22
     The only difference is that I used 90% confidence intervals to be consistent with my other graphs.
23
     See footnote 11 of Gertler and Karadi (2015) for details.
24
     I am indebted to Peter Karadi for sharing with me the announcement date series.

                                                       44
projections. Gertler and Karadi also worried about this issue, but they performed a robustness
check based only on the difference between private forecasts and Greenbook forecasts. They
found a much lower R-squared (see their Table 4). When they use their purged measure, they
find greater falls in industrial production. I explored the effect of using a version of their measure
that was (i) orthogonal to the Romer Greenbook variables; and (ii) converted to a monthly basis
the same way that the Romers converted their data, in the Jordà framework. The results were still
puzzling.
       Why does the Jordà method give such different estimates from the proxy SVAR? One
possible explanation is the different method and sample used to estimate the impulse response
function. Gertler and Karadi’s impulse responses functions are constructed as nonlinear functions
of the reduced-form VAR parameters estimated on data from 1979 through 2012; the Jordà
method estimates are for the 1991 to 2012 sample and are direct projections rather than functions
of reduced-form VAR parameters. Since the estimates of the impact effects on industrial
production are near zero for both methods, the entire difference in the impulse responses is due
to the differences in the dynamics implied by Gertler and Karadi’s reduced form VAR parameter
estimates. A second possible explanation for the difference is that the rising importance of
forward guidance starting in the mid-1990s means that the VAR underlying the proxy SVAR is
misspecified. As discussed in Section 2.5, anticipations of future policy actions can lead to the
problem of a non-fundamental moving average representation. Gertler and Karadi’s fed funds
futures variable captures news well, but they do not include it directly in the SVAR; they only
use it as an instrument.


3.6 Summary of Monetary Shocks


       When Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999) wrote their Handbook chapter, they
provided what became a benchmark framework for identifying monetary policy shocks and
tracing their effects. As long as the recursiveness assumption was incorporated, the results were
quite robust. Since then, the literature has incorporated new methods and faced new challenges.
Researchers now take instrument identification and relevance much more seriously when
estimating monetary policy shocks. New methods, such as FAVARs and Greenbook forecasts,
have improved the conditioning set for estimating monetary policy shocks. Structural VARS,


                                                 45
sign restrictions and regime switching models have provided alternatives to the usual Cholesky
decomposition. Moreover, new measures of monetary shocks have been developed using rich
external data, such as narrative data, Greenbook projections, and high frequency information
from financial markets. Recently published work using shocks estimated with external data
results in similar conclusions. In particular, Coibion’s (2012) reconciliation of the Romer results
with the VAR results suggests that a 100 basis point rise in federal funds rate lowers industrial
production by about -2 percent at 18 months. Those results are based on data from 1969 through
1996. Gertler and Karadi’s (2015) research uses high frequency identification from fed funds
futures and external instruments/ proxy SVAR methods to find very similar results for a later
sample.
       This rosy reconciliation picture disappears, however, when the specifications are
subjected to some robustness tests. My explorations have highlighted several potential issues,
some of which were already noted in the literature. First, the original Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (1999) specification, as well as many other specifications, do not hold up well in later
samples. Second, lifting the recursiveness assumption can lead to estimates that imply
expansionary effects of contraction monetary policy in the short-run. Third, one needs to be very
careful when estimating models in samples where anticipation effects may be important. For
example, it is not clear that HFI shocks should be used as external instruments for otherwise
standard VARs.
       How should we interpret these results? I would argue that the most likely reason for the
breakdown of many specifications in the later sample is simply that we can no longer identify
monetary policy shocks well. Monetary policy is being conducted more systematically, so true
monetary policy shocks are now rare. It is likely that what we now identify as monetary policy
shocks are really mostly the effects of superior information on the part of the Fed, foresight by
agents, and noise. While this is bad news for econometric identification, it is good news for
economic policy.
       What, then, are we to conclude about the output effects of monetary shocks? I would
argue that the best evidence still remains the historical case studies, such as Friedman and
Schwarz, and the times series models estimated on samples that exclude recent decades. Of
course, one worries that the structure of the economy may have changed in the last few decades,
but we simply don’t have enough information to produce estimates with any great certainty.


                                                46
Monetary policy can have big effects, but it is likely that monetary shocks are no longer an
important source of macro instability.




4. Fiscal Shocks


       This section reviews the main identification methods and summarizes existing results
from the empirical literature seeking to identify and estimate the effects of fiscal policy shocks.
It also presents some new results comparing several leading identified shocks.
       In contrast to a monetary policy shock, a fiscal shock is a more straightforward economic
concept. Because the legislative and executive branches of government often make tax and
spending decisions based on concerns that are orthogonal to the current state of the
macroeconomy, the notion of regularly occurring fiscal policy shocks is more plausible than
regularly occurring monetary policy shocks.
       Measuring the empirical effects of changes in government spending and taxes on
aggregate GDP and its components was an active research area for a number of decades. The
large Keynesian models of the 1960s included fiscal variables and numerous academic papers
estimated their effects in behavioral equations. For several decades afterwards, though, research
on the aggregate effects of tax and spending shocks experienced a lull, punctuated by only a few
papers. Most empirical research on shocks during the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s instead focused on
monetary policy. With the onset of the Great Recession and the zero lower bound, however,
research energy immediately shifted to the effects of fiscal policy. The recent literature has built
on and extended the strides made by the few authors working on the topic during the long
dormant period.
       The following sections will discuss some of the literature since 1990 that has sought to
analyze the effects of fiscal shocks. I will begin by considering government spending shocks and
then discuss tax shocks.


4.1 Government Spending Shocks




                                                47
       In this section, I discuss shocks to government spending.             When I use the term
government spending, I mean government purchases, i.e. G in the NIPA identity. In common
parlance, however, government spending typically refers to government outlays, which include
both government purchases and transfer payments. Economists usually consider transfer
payments to be negative taxes. Thus, I will include a discussion of transfer payments in the
section on the effects of tax shocks.


4.1.1 Summary of Identification Methods


       Many of the identification methods summarized in Section 2 are used in the literature that
analyzes the effects of shocks to government spending. These methods include SVARs with
contemporaneous restrictions, sign restrictions, medium horizon restrictions, narrative methods,
and estimated DSGE models.
       Perhaps the first example of what looks like a VAR-type analysis of the effects of fiscal
shocks is Rotemberg and Woodford’s (1992) analysis of the effects of military spending and
employment on macroeconomic variables. Their purpose was to provide evidence in favor of
their counter-cyclical markup model, showing that a “demand” shock would lead to
countercyclical markups. To do this, they estimated systems with military spending, military
employment, and a macroeconomic variable of interest (such as private value added and private
hours worked). They included lags of the variables in the system, but restricted the VAR so that
there was no feedback of the macroeconomic variables onto the military variables. In their
system, identification was achieved as follows. To identify government purchases shocks that
were exogenous to the economy, they followed Hall (1980, 1986) and Barro (1981) who argued
that defense spending is driven by military events rather than macroeconomic events. To identify
unanticipated shocks, they regressed the military variables on their own lags and used the
residuals. This identification strategy assumes that all relevant information for predicting military
spending and employment is contained in lags of military spending and employment. They
showed that their identified shocks to defense spending raised real wages.
       In a paper analyzing the effects of sectoral shifts in the presence of costly mobility of
capital across sectors, Ramey and Shapiro (1998) used narrative techniques to create a dummy
variable capturing major military buildups. They read through Business Week in order to isolate


                                                 48
the political events that led to the buildups in order to create a series that was exogenous to the
current state of the economy. They also used this narrative approach to ensure that the shock was
unanticipated. They stated: “We believe this approach gives a clearer indicator of unanticipated
shifts in defense spending than the usual VAR approach, since many of the disturbances in the
VAR approach are due solely to timing effects on military contracts and do not represent
unanticipated changes in military spending. “ (Ramey and Shapiro (1998), p. 175.) Ramey and
Shapiro (1998) estimated the effects of “war dates” by regressing each variable of interest on
current values and lags of the war dates and lags of the left-hand side variable. A number of
follow-up papers embedded the war dates in VARs, ordered first in the Cholesky decomposition,
creating “Expectational VARs” or EVARs, a term coined by Perotti (2011). These papers include
Edelberg, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (1999), Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (2004), and
Cavallo 2005). Most applications typically found that while government spending raised GDP
and hours, it lowered investment, consumption and real wages. Most of these papers did not
specifically estimate a multiplier, though one can typically back out the implied multiplier from
the impulse responses.
       In contrast, Blanchard and Perotti (2002) used a structural VAR (SVAR) to identify both
government purchases and tax shocks. They assumed that government purchases were
predetermined within the quarter, and identified the shock to government purchases using a
standard Cholesky decomposition with government spending ordered first. They found that
government purchases shocks raised not only GDP, but also hours, consumption and real wages.
Follow-up work, such as by Fatás and Mihov (2001), Perotti (2005), Pappa (2009) and Galí,
López-Salido, and Vallés (2007), found similar results. Mountford and Uhlig (2009) used sign
restrictions and found only weak effects on GDP and no significant effect on consumption.
       In Ramey (2011a), I sought to reconcile why the war dates were producing different
results from the SVARs that used Cholesky decompositions. I argued that most government
spending is anticipated at least several quarters in advance, so that the standard SVAR method
was not identifying unanticipated shocks. In support of this idea, I showed that the shocks from
an SVAR were indeed Granger-caused by the Ramey and Shapiro (1998) war dates. To create a
richer narrative variable to capture the “news” part of government spending shocks, I read
Business Week starting in 1939 and created a quantitative series of estimates of changes in the
expected present value of government purchases, caused by military events. I then embedded the


                                                49
news series in a standard VAR, with the news ordered first in the Cholesky decomposition. In
that work, I found results that were broadly consistent with the estimates based on the simple war
dates.
         In follow-up work, Owyang, Ramey, and Zubairy (2013) and Ramey and Zubairy (2014)
extended the military news series back to 1889. The military news variable tends to have low
instrument relevance for samples that begin after the Korean War, though. In Ramey (2011a), I
augmented my analysis by also considering shocks that were orthogonal to professional forecasts
of future government purchases. Fisher and Peters (2010) created an alternative series of news
based on the excess returns of defense contractor stocks for the period starting in 1958. Recent
work by Ben Zeev and Pappa (forthcoming) uses the medium-horizon identification methods of
Barsky and Sims (2011) to identify news shocks to defense spending from a time series model.
In particular, Ben Zeev and Pappa identify defense spending news as a shock that (i) is
orthogonal to current defense spending; and (ii) best explains future movements in defense
spending over a horizon of five years.
         All of these measures of anticipations have weaknesses, though. First, because they are
associated with military events, there are likely confounding effects (e.g. rationing, price
controls, conscription, patriotic increases in labor supply). Second, as I show below, some of the
shocks suffer from low first-stage F-statistics in some samples, indicating that they might not be
relevant instruments.
         Thus, there are two main differences in the shocks identified across these two classes of
models. First, the SVAR shocks are more likely to be plagued by foresight problems. As I
discussed in Section 2, this problem of foresight can be a serious flaw in SVARs. Second, the
news alternatives are not rich enough in some subsamples and there may be confounding
influences.
         A more structural way to identify shocks to government purchases is through an
estimated DSGE model. For example, one of the shocks identified by Smets and Wouters (2007)
is a government purchases shock. Cogan, Cwik, Taylor and Wieland (2010) also estimate
government spending multipliers in the context of an estimated DSGE model.


4.1.2 Summary of the Main Results from the Literature




                                                50
       Typically, the literature on government spending has sought to answer one or both of two
main questions: (1) Are the empirical results consistent with theoretical DSGE models? (2)
What are the government spending multipliers?
       Let us begin by considering results that shed light on the first question. Most versions of
standard neoclassical theory and standard new Keynesian theory predict that a rise in
government purchases (financed with deficits or lump-sum taxes and not spent on public
infrastructure, etc.) should raise GDP and hours, but should decrease consumption and real
wages. Whether investment initially rises or falls depends on the persistence of the increase in
government spending. It is only when one adds extra elements, such as rule-of-thumb consumers
and off-the-labor supply behavior of workers that one can produce rises in consumption and real
wages in a model (e.g. Galí, López-Salido, Vallés (2006)).
       Both SVARs and expectational VARs (EVARs) that use a news variable produce
qualitative similar results for some variables. For example, both typically estimate an increase in
GDP and hours and a fall in investment (at least after the first year) in response to a positive
government spending shock. In contrast, the SVAR typically implies a rise in consumption and
real wages whereas the EVAR predicts a fall in consumption and real wages.
       The second question the literature seeks to answer is the size of “the” government
purchases multiplier. Unfortunately, most estimates are not for pure deficit financed multipliers
since most rises in government spending are accompanied by a rise in distortionary taxes,
typically with a lag. This caveat should be kept in mind in the subsequent discussion of
multiplier estimates.
       One might assume that SVARs produce bigger multipliers since they predict increases in
consumption. They don’t. In Ramey (2013a), I compared the effects of government spending on
private spending, i.e. GDP minus government spending, of several shocks based on the various
identification methods. If the government spending multiplier is greater than unity, then private
spending must increase. I found that all of the shocks lowered private spending, but that the
Blanchard-Perotti (2002) shocks lowered it more, implying a smaller multiplier.
       The estimated DSGE models of Smets and Wouters (2007) and Cogan, Cwik, Taylor, and
Wieland (2010) produce results that are close to the neoclassical model. In both cases, a shock to
government spending lowers consumption and results in a multipliers below unity.




                                                51
        In my survey of the literature on multipliers in Ramey (2011b), I found that most
estimates of the government spending multiplier in aggregate data were between 0.8 and 1.2. The
only multipliers that were larger were (1) those estimated on states or regions; and (2) some of
those estimated allowing state-dependence. As suggested in my survey, and as shown formally
by Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) and Farhi and Werning (2012), the link between estimates of
multipliers in a fiscal union (e.g. across U.S. states or regions) for aggregate multipliers are not
entirely clear. Most of the cross-state or cross-region studies look at the effect of federal
spending on a locality. Unfortunately, because constant terms or time fixed-effects are included,
these regressions difference out the effects of the financing, since taxes that finance federal
spending are levied at the national level.25 This explains why multipliers on federal spending at
the state level will be higher than the aggregate multipliers. I will discuss the issue of state
dependence in more detail momentarily.
        Since writing that survey, I realized that there were two potential biases in the way that
many researchers calculated their multiplier, and as a result many reported estimates are not
comparable. First, many researchers followed Blanchard and Perotti’s (2002) lead and calculated
multipliers by comparing the peak output response to the initial government spending impact
effect. While comparing values of impulse responses at peaks or troughs is a useful way to
compare impulse responses, it is not a good way to calculate a multiplier. As argued by
Mountford and Uhlig (2009), Uhlig (2010) and Fisher and Peters (2010), multipliers should
instead be calculated as the integral (or present value) of the output response divided by the
integral government spending response. The integral multipliers address the relevant policy
question because they measure the cumulative GDP gain relative to the cumulative government
spending during a given period. In many cases, Blanchard and Perotti’s ratio of peak-to-impact
method gives a higher number for the multiplier than the integral method.                   Second, most
researchers estimating VARs use logarithms of variables. To convert the estimates to multipliers,
they usually multiply the estimates by the sample mean of GDP to government spending ratio.
As Owyang, Ramey,and Zubairy (2013) point out, this can lead to serious biases in samples with
significant trends in the GDP to government spending ratio. In the few cases where I have been



25
   A notable exception is the paper by Clemens and Miran (2012), which identifies exogenous variation in
state-level spending. Interestingly, they find multipliers around 0.5, which is closer to those found at the
national level.

                                                    52
able to adjust the estimates of multipliers to be integral multipliers, I have found that the
multipliers are often below one.
       With this additional caveat in mind, Table 4.1 shows a summary of a few of the estimates
of multipliers for government purchases. Even with the variety of ways of calculating multipliers
from the estimated impulse response functions, most of the estimates are from 0.6 to 1.5.
       A number of researchers and policy-makers have suggested that multipliers may be state
dependent. Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) use a smooth transition vector autoregression
model (STVAR) and find evidence of larger multipliers in recessions. Ramey and Zubairy (2014)
use the Jordà (2005) method (also used by Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013) in a panel of
countries) and find little evidence of state dependence, based on recessions, elevated
unemployment rates or the zero lower bound. They argue that their different finding is not so
much due to the underlying parameter estimates but rather to the additional assumptions that
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) made when transforming those estimates into multipliers.
       Most of the studies I have summarized focus on government purchases that do not
involve infrastructure spending. The reason for the paucity of research on infrastructure spending
is the difficulty of identifying shocks to infrastructure spending, particularly in the U.S. The U.S.
highway system was an important part of government purchases starting in the late 1950s
through the early 1970s. The problem with identifying the aggregate effects is that most of the
spending was anticipated once the highway bill was passed in 1956. Most of the credible
analyses have used clever indirect methods or used variation in cross-state expenditures. Fernald
(1999) provides very strong evidence for a causal effect of the highway system on productivity
by showing its greater effect on vehicle-intensive industries. These estimates do not directly
inform us about aggregate effects, though. Leduc and Wilson (2012) identify news shocks about
highway spending in a panel of U.S. states using the arrival of new information about
institutional formula factors. However, as discussed above, the multipliers they find cannot be
converted to aggregate multipliers.
       Gechert (forthcoming) conducts a meta-analysis of 104 studies of multiplier effects
across a variety of countries, including many different types of analyses from reduced form
empirical to estimated DSGE models. With the caveat that the context and experiment varies
across studies, Gechert finds that public spending multipliers are close to one, while public
investment multipliers are around 1.5.


                                                 53
4.1.3 Explorations with Several Identified Shocks


         I now study the effects of several of the leading identified government spending shocks in
the Jordà local projection framework. This exploration is useful not only for gauging the
robustness of the results to local projection methods, but also for comparing the effects of the
identified shocks using the same data, same specification, and the same way to calculate
multipliers. Thus, any differences in results will be due to the identification methods rather than
differences in data or implementation.
         The three main shocks I study are (i) the shock identified using Blanchard and Perotti’s
(2002) method (which simply orders government spending first in a Cholesky decomposition);
ii) my narrative military news shock, updated in Ramey and Zubairy (2014); and (iii) Ben Zeev
and Pappa’s (forthcoming) defense news shock identified using Barsky and Sims’ (2012)
medium run horizon method.26 I also comment briefly on results using Fisher and Peters’ (2010)
military contractor excess returns.
         In all cases, I use the following data transformations and functional forms. The first set of
transformations is intended to facilitate the direct estimation of multipliers in order to avoid ad
hoc transformation of estimates based on logs, as discussed by Owyang, Ramey, and Zubairy
(2013). One can use either the Hall (2009) and Barro-Redlick (2011) transformation or a
Gordon-Krenn (2010) transformation. The Hall-Barro-Redlick transformation constructs
variables as               1   /   1,   where X is the NIPA variable deflated by the GDP deflator and
   1   is real GDP before the shock hits in period t. The Gordon-Krenn transformation divides all
NIPA variables by “potential GDP,” estimated as an exponential trend. Both methods give similar
results. I follow the Gordon-Krenn procedure, fitting log real GDP to a quadratic trend.27 Thus,
                                                             ∗             ∗
the NIPA variables are transformed to be                 /       , where       is the estimated trend in real
GDP. The impulse responses using this transformation look qualitatively similar to those using
log levels, but often have more narrow confidence bands.



26
   I estimated the Blanchard-Perotti shock using logarithms of real government spending, GDP, and taxes
and four lags. Ben Zeev and Pappa kindly provided me with estimates of their shock.
27
   One could use the CBO estimate of real potential GDP instead. I found, however, that when I used the
CBO estimate, the implied multipliers were noticeably smaller than when I used Hall-Barro-Redlick or
Gordon-Krenn with either a quadratic or quartic log trend.

                                                    54
        The non-NIPA variables are transformed as follows. The average tax rate is federal
current receipts divided by nominal GDP. The hours variable is the log of total hours per capita,
where the total population is used in the denominator. Wages are given by the log of nominal
compensation in the business sector, deflated by the price deflator for private business. The real
interest rate is the 3-month Treasury bill rate minus the rate of inflation calculated using the GDP
deflator.
        The equation used to estimate the impulse responses for each variable z at each horizon h
is given by:


(4.1)                                          1



where z is the variable of interest, shock is the identified shock, y is a vector of control variables,
and         is a polynomial in the lag operator. All regressions include two lags of the shock (to
mop up any serial correlation), transformed real GDP, transformed real government purchases,
and the tax rate. Regressions for variables other than real GDP, government purchases and tax
rates also include two lags of the left-hand side variable. The coefficient     gives the response of
z at time t+h to the shock at time t.
        As discussed above, the correct way to calculate a multiplier is as the integral under the
impulse response of GDP divided by the integral of the impulse response of government
spending. We could compute the multiplier using the following multi-step method: (1) estimate
equation (4.1) for GDP for each horizon and sum the coefficients          up to some horizon H; (2)
estimate equation (4.1) for government purchases for each horizon and sum the coefficients
up to some horizon H; and (3) construct the multiplier as the answer from step (1) divided by the
answer from step (2). Estimating the standard error, however, requires some ingenuity, such as
estimating all of the regressions jointly in a panel estimation.
        Alternatively, we can easily estimate the multiplier estimate and its standard error in one
step if we cumulate the variables and reformulate the estimation problem as an instrumental
variables (IV) estimation. In particular, we can estimate the following equation:


(4.2)   ∑   0                   ∑   0                   1                               ,



                                                   55
where the dependent variable is the sum of real GDP (or other NIPA variable) from t to t+h and
the government spending variable is the sum of the government purchases variable. We use the
identified shock as the instrument for the sum of government purchases. The estimated
coefficient, mh, is the multiplier for horizon h. There are several advantages to this one-step IV
method. First, the standard error of the multiplier is just the standard error of the coefficient mh.28
Second, the shock can have measurement error as long as the measurement error is not correlated
with any measurement error in government spending. Third, formulating the estimation as an IV
problem highlights the importance of instrument relevance.
        Thus, I first consider how relevant each of the identified shocks is as an instrument for
the integral of government spending. The Stock, Wright and Yogo (2002) argue that the first-
stage F-statistic should be above 10 for the IV estimates to be reliable, but their threshold applies
only to first-stage regressions with serially uncorrelated error terms. Fortunately, follow-up work
by Montiel and Pflueger (2013) constructs thresholds for cases with serial correlation. For the
first stage of equation (4.2), the thresholds are 23 for the ten percent level and 37 for the five
percent level.29 F-statistics below those thresholds indicate a possible problem with instrument
relevance.
        Figure 4.1 shows the first-stage F-statistics for the sum of government purchases on each
identified shock for each horizon up to 20 quarters. Values above 50 have been capped at 50 for
ease of viewing. The graph at the left shows the results for the sample starting in 1947 and the
graph on the right shows the results for the sample starting in 1954, after the Korean War.
Several results emerge. First, the Blanchard-Perotti (BP) identified shock always has very high
F-statistics. This is not surprising because the shock is equal to the portion of government
spending not predicted by four lags of government spending, GDP, and taxes. Second, the Fisher-
Peters defense contractor excess returns shock has very low F-statistics for all horizons and both
samples, indicating that the stock return variable is not a good instrument for government
spending. Third, the Ramey and Ben Zeev-Pappa (BZP) news shocks have low relevance for
short horizons, but this is to be expected since those shocks capture news about future
government spending. Fourth, in the full sample at horizons beyond three quarters, the Ramey
news shock has F-statistics above the Montiel-Pflueger thresholds, whereas the Ben Zeev-Pappa

28
   Because of the serial correlation in the errors, any procedures for estimating standard errors should use
methods that account for serial correlation.
29
   These thresholds were derived using Pflueger and Wang’s (2015) “weakivtest” Stata module.

                                                    56
news shock F-statistics lie below them and range between 8 and 14. Fifth, in the sample that
excludes the Korean War, all of the F-statistics are very low except for the Blanchard-Perotti
shock. Thus, the BP shock surpasses the relevance safety threshold for all horizons in both
samples, the Ramey news shock does so for the full sample for horizons at four to 20 quarters,
while the Ben Zeev-Pappa shock may have relevance problems at most horizons and the Fisher-
Peters shock always has very low relevance. I thus exclude the Fisher-Peters shock from the rest
of the analysis.
       Figure 4.2 shows the impulse responses estimated using equation (4.1), with estimates
normalized across specifications to have the same peak in government purchases. The scales in
the graphs of the NIPA variables should be interpreted as dollars; i.e. a rise in government
purchases that peaks at $1 leads to rise in GDP that peaks at 75 cents. The scales of the other
graphs are in percentage points. The confidence bands are 90 percent bands based on Newey-
West corrections of standard errors. They do not, however, take into account that two of the
shocks are generated regressors.
       Consider first the upper left graph in Figure 4.2. Both the Ramey and BZP news variables
imply similar paths of government purchases, with little effect for the first few quarters rising to
a peak around five quarters after the shock. In contrast, the BP shock leads to an immediate rise
in government spending. The graph in the top right shows that in response to all three shocks,
GDP jumps immediately. The response of GDP is greatest for the BZP shock, but GDP begins to
fall back to normal even before government purchases have hit their peak.
       The tax rate series is simply federal receipts divided by GDP. This variable can rise either
because of tax legislation or because higher GDP pushes more households into higher tax
brackets. According to the estimates, tax rates begin to rise immediately for the BZP shock but
only gradually for the Ramey news shock. Tax rates gradually fall after BP shock. Real interest
rates (measured as the 3-month Tbill rate minus inflation) fall after a news shock, but rise
slightly after a BP shock. Examination of the responses of the components of the real interest rate
(not shown) reveals that the fall is due to both a drop in the nominal interest rate and a rise in
inflation. As explained by Ramey (2011a), the rise in inflation is in large part driven by the spike
up in prices at the beginning of the Korean War: with recent memories of WWII, firms thought
that price controls were coming and raised their prices in advance.




                                                57
          Consider now four components of the national income accounts, shown in the middle
graphs in Figure 4.2. Nondurable plus services consumption falls after a Ramey news shock,
responds little after a BZP shock, but rises after a BP shock. In Ramey (2009a), I show using
simulations of a DSGE model that one can estimate a rise in consumption if one treats an
anticipated shock as an unanticipated shock. I argue that the rise in consumption after a BP shock
can be explained by this type of identification problem.
           Durable consumption spikes up initially and then falls after the two news shocks. As in
the cast of prices, this initial spike on the arrival of news is driven mostly by the response of
consumers to the beginning of the Korean War in 1950: with recent memories of WWII,
consumers worried that rationing of durable goods was imminent so they hurried out to buy
durable goods. Nonresidential investment rises in response to the BZP shock, but falls in
response to both the Ramey news and BP shock. Residential investment falls in response to the
two news shocks, but rises after a year in response to the BP shock.
          Finally, both news shocks imply a rise in hours and a fall in the real wage, while the BP
shock predicts very little response of hours, but a rise in the real wage.
          Table 4.2 shows the estimated multipliers for various horizons.30 The impact multipliers
for the two news shocks are negative because output jumps up while government spending falls
slightly. For the next few quarters, the multipliers for the two news shocks are large because
output responds immediately to news of future government spending which has not yet fully
transpired. Once government spending has risen to its peak, the implied multipliers using the
Ramey news shock are just below unity, whereas those using the BZP news shock are above
unity. For example, the BZP news shock multiplier is 1.4 at 8 quarters and 1.1 at 16 quarters. The
responses in Figure 4.2 reveal that the reason for the larger multiplier after a BZP shock is the
large rise in nonresidential investment. It should be noted, though, that the BZP multipliers are
estimated rather imprecisely as evidenced by the standard errors. This is one manifestation of
the possible low instrument relevance of the BZP news shock. On the other hand, the multipliers
implied by the Blanchard and Perotti shock are all low, most below 0.5. However, the estimates
are not precise enough to reject a multiplier of either 0 or 1 at standard significance levels.
          I now consider what each shock implies about the contribution to the forecast error
variance of output. Although one can calculate forecast error variances using the estimated local

30
     These estimates are based on the one-step method shown in equation (4.2).

                                                     58
projection coefficients, I found that the shares sometimes exceeded 100 percent. Thus, for
present purposes I calculate the forecast error variance in a standard VAR with the shock, log
government spending, log real GDP, and log taxes. The shock is ordered first and four lags are
included, along with a quadratic trend.
       Table 4.3 shows the forecast error variance decompositions of each of the three identified
government spending shocks for government spending and output. Despite having the lowest
contribution for government spending, the BZP shock has the highest contribution for output, but
it is still 13 percent or below. The BP and Ramey news contributions tend to be 5 percent of
below. Thus, none of the three shocks is an important contributor to the variance of output.
       To summarize, most of the aggregate analyses find government spending multipliers
between 0.6 and 1.5. The BP shock leads to smaller multipliers, but does imply that government
spending leads to rises in consumption and real wages along with GDP and hours. In contrast,
both the Ramey news and BZP news shocks lead to falls in real wages. Both news shock lead to
an initial spike in durable consumption (due to the consumer fears of rationing), followed by a
decline. The BZP shock produces a temporary blip in nondurable consumption, but then it falls
to 0. The Ramey news shock implies a decline nondurable consumption. None of the methods
suggests that government spending shocks explain an important part of GDP fluctuations.


4.2 Tax Shocks


       I now turn to the literature on tax shocks. Taxes were often an important component of
the big Keynesian econometric models of the 1960s. The public finance literature has analyzed
many details of the effects of taxes. In this section, I will focus on estimates of the effects of
taxes in the macroeconomic literature since the 1990s.


4.2.1 Unanticipated Tax Shocks


4.2.1.1 Summary of the Literature


       Macroeconomists have used both estimated DSGE models and time series models to
estimate the effects of taxes. One of the first systematic analyses of macroeconomic tax effects in


                                                59
an estimated DSGE model was by McGrattan (1994). She extended the Kydland and Prescott
(1982) model to include government consumption, labor income taxes, and capital income taxes
and estimated the parameters using maximum likelihood. She found that the role of technology
in business cycle fluctuations was much reduced, 41 percent rather than Kydland and Prescott’s
75 percent estimate. She found that shocks to government consumption accounted for 28 percent
of the forecast error variance of output, labor income tax shocks for 27 percent, and capital
income tax shocks for 4 percent.
        Among time series approaches, Blanchard and Perotti (2002) used a structural VAR
(SVAR) approach in which they identified tax shocks by imposing the elasticity of net taxes to
GDP estimated from other studies. Returning to the discussion of the simple trivariate model
from Section 2, consider the following system:


                                 1     12 2        13 3       1

(4.4)                            2     21 1        23 3       2

                                 3     31 1        32 2       3



where    1   is the reduced form residual of net taxes,           2   is the reduced form residual of
government spending, and     3   is the reduced form residual of GDP. Blanchard and Perotti (2002)
identify the shock to government spending using a Cholesky decomposition in which
government spending is ordered first (i.e.    21        23   0). They identify exogenous shocks to net
taxes by setting   13   2.08, an outside estimate of the cyclical sensitivity of net taxes. These
three restrictions are sufficient to identify all of the remaining parameters and hence all three
shocks. Blanchard and Perotti’s estimated “impact multipliers” was -0.78. Their impact
multiplier was calculated as the trough of GDP relative to the initial shock to taxes.
        Mountford and Uhlig (2009) use sign restrictions to identify tax and spending shocks.
Their results imply a multiplier of -5 at 12 quarters for a deficit-financed tax cut, when the
multiplier is calculated as the ratio of the present value of the impulse response functions. In
order to compare their results to Blanchard and Perotti, they also calculate “impact multipliers,”
meaning the value of the GDP response at a certain quarter to the initial shock impact on the
fiscal variable. They find that whereas the Blanchard and Perotti method implies a peak-to-



                                                   60
impact multiplier of -1.3 at quarter 7, Mountford and Uhlig’s results imply a peak-to-impact
multiplier of -3.6.
        In the context of the Blanchard and Perotti (2002) model, Caldara and Kamps (2012)
demonstrate how the estimated multiplier depends crucially on their assumption about the
elasticity of net tax revenue to GDP. Particularly important is their demonstration of how a small
change in the assumed cyclical elasticity parameter can result in large changes in the estimated
tax multiplier; to wit, this seems to be a case of a “multiplier multiplier” on the assumed
elasticity. Caldara and Kamps (2012) propose a new method, which involves imposing
probability restrictions on the output elasticities of taxes and spending. When they implement
this method, they find peak-to-impact multipliers of -0.65 for tax shocks and peak-to-impact
multipliers greater than unity for government spending shocks.
        Barro and Redlick (2011) construct a new series of average marginal tax rates using IRS
data and analyze its effects in a system that also considers government spending in annual data
extending back to 1917. In their baseline specification, they find that an increase in the average
marginal tax rate of one percentage point lowers GDP by 0.5 percent. Their calculations indicate
a tax multiplier of -1.1.
        Romer and Romer (2010) (R&R) use narrative methods to identify tax shocks. Based on
presidential speeches and congressional reports, they construct several series of legislated tax
changes and distinguish those series based on the motivation for enacting them. They argue that
tax changes motivated by a desire to pay down the deficit or long-run growth considerations can
be used to establish the causal effect of tax changes on output. When they estimate their standard
dynamic single equation regression of output growth on its lags and on current and lagged values
of the “exogenous” tax changes, they obtain estimates implying tax multipliers of -2.5 to -3 at
three years. Leigh et al. (2010) use a similar narrative method to study fiscal consolidations
across countries.31 Cloyne (2013) uses this method to identify exogenous tax shocks in the U.K.
        Favero and Giavazzi (2012) embed the R&R series in a somewhat restricted VAR and
find smaller multipliers. In a series of papers, Mertens and Ravn (2011b, 2012, 2013, 2014)
exploit the R&R narrative tax information in a way that significantly expands our understanding
of the effects of tax shocks on the economy. I will focus on several of their contributions in this

31
   The Leigh et al attempts to address measurement concerns in the very large literature on the effects of
fiscal consolidations across countries, perhaps best exemplified by Giavazzi and Pagano (1990, 1996),
Alesina and Perotti (1995, 1997), and Alesina and Ardagna (1998, 2010).

                                                   61
subsection and discuss the others in the next subsection. First, Mertens and Ravn (2011b, 2012)
split the Romer and Romer series into anticipated versus unanticipated shocks based on the delay
between the passing of the legislation and the implementation of the legislation. R&R had timed
all of their shocks to coincide with the implementation rather the legislation. I will discuss the
findings using unanticipated shocks here and discuss the findings using anticipated shocks
below. Second, in their 2013 paper, Mertens and Ravn (2013) decomposed the unanticipated
parts of the R&R series into personal income tax changes and corporate income tax changes and
showed the differences in the two types of cuts on the economy. In their 2014 paper, Mertens and
Ravn (2014) reconciled the Blanchard and Perotti SVAR estimates with the narrative estimates
by introducing the proxy SVAR method discussed in detail in previous sections.
       As discussed in Section 2.3.5, Mertens and Ravn’s (2014) proxy SVAR provides a new
method for identifying shocks using external instruments. In particular, they regress the reduced
form residual of GDP,    3   , from equation (4.4) above on the reduced form residual of taxes,                 1   ,
using the R&R shock as an instrument. This leads to an unbiased estimate of                      31   (since it is
assumed that   2   is the structural shock to government spending, which is uncorrelated with the
other structural shocks). We can then use the estimated residual from that regression as one of the
instruments in the regression of    1   on   2   and    3   . This regression identifies   12   and    13 .   When
they implement their method, they estimate             13    3.13 with a 95% confidence band of (2.73,
3.55). Thus, their results suggest that Blanchard and Perotti’s preset estimate of          13        2.08 is too
low. Setting the output elasticity of tax revenue too low results in estimated tax shocks that
include a reverse causality component (i.e. there is a positive correlation between the cyclical
components of taxes and output because of the positive causal effect of output on tax revenues).
This is also an excellent illustration of Caldara and Kamps’ (2012) insight on the link between
the assumed structural tax elasticity and the estimated multipliers. Table 4.4 shows various tax
multiplier estimates from the literature.
       Mertens and Ravn (2013) split the unanticipated Romer shocks into changes in personal
income tax rates versus corporate income tax rates. They find that cuts in either tax rate have
positive effects on output, employment, hours, and the tax base. Interestingly, a cut in the
corporate tax rate does not decrease corporate tax revenues because the corporate income tax
base responds so robustly. Personal income tax cuts tend to raise consumption and investment



                                                       62
more than corporate income tax cuts do. See Figures 2, 9, and 10 of Mertens and Ravn (2013) for
more detail.
        Oh and Reiss (2012) highlight the importance of transfers in the stimulus packages
adopted in response to the Great Recession. They formulate a heterogeneous agent model and
explore the predicted multipliers on transfers. There has been, however, very little empirical
work on the multipliers associated with government transfers.32 A major challenge has been
identifying exogenous movements in transfers. Hausman (forthcoming) studied the large
veteran’s bonus of 1936, equaling two percent of GDP, and found that it led to immediate effects
on consumption spending. His calculations suggest that it led to faster GDP growth in 1936, but
followed by a quick reversal in growth in 1937. Romer and Romer (2015) study the effects of
changes in Social Security benefit payments in aggregate U.S. data. They find very rapid
responses consumption to permanent changes in benefit, but the results dissipate within a few
months. Moreover, there is no clear evidence of effects on aggregate output or employment.
        Gechert (forthcoming) conducts a meta-analysis of various types of multipliers. He finds
that tax and transfer multiplier tend to be around 0.6 to 0.7.


4.2.1.2 Further Explorations


        I now investigate the Mertens and Ravn (2014) reconciliation of the tax results in more
detail. To do this, I first use Mertens and Ravn (2014) specification, data, and sample. The
specification is a trivariate SVAR with federal government spending, output, and federal tax
revenue, all in real per capita logarithms.33 The SVAR includes four lags of the variables in
addition to a quadratic trend and a dummy variable for the second quarter of 1975 (following
Blanchard and Perotti (2002)). The tax shock is Mertens and Ravn’s unanticipated shocks
extracted from the R&R narrative, demeaned as they describe.
        Figure 4.3A shows the impulse responses for tax revenue and output from their proxy
SVAR using their programs.34 The results show that a positive R&R tax shock that has an impact

32
   There is a large literature on the effects of various transfers on individual household consumption and
saving. However, these estimates do not translate directly to aggregate mutlipliers.
33
   Blanchard and Perotti actually used net taxes, meaning taxes less transfers. I follow Mertens and Ravn
and use taxes. One could augment the system to include transfers as a fourth variable and use Romer and
Romer’s (2014) narrative-based transfer shock series as an external instrument.
34
   This is the same as Mertens and Ravn’s (2014) Figure 4 with the signs reversed to examine the effect of
a tax increase.

                                                   63
effect on tax revenues equal to one percent of GDP raises tax revenue for several quarters, and
then lowers it below zero (though not statistically different). Output falls significantly on impact
and troughs around -3 after a year. The magnitude of the results are similar to those found by
R&R (2010) with their entire exogenous series.
       My further investigation reveals some potentially problems with instrument relevance,
though. The first-stage regression of tax revenue on the unanticipated tax shock (controlling for
the lags of the other variables in the VAR) has an F-statistic of 1.6 (based on robust standard
errors), which suggests a possible problem with instrument relevance.35 Stock and Watson
(2012) also noticed problems with first-stage F-statistics of some of these external instruments in
their dynamic factor model.36 Of course, the feedback from GDP to tax revenues is a potential
complication. An exogenous tax increase should raise revenue, holding GDP constant; however,
the decline in GDP exerts a downward effect on tax revenues. Thus, perhaps it is better to think
of the R&R tax shock as an instrument for tax rates. Ideally, one would use statutory rates, since
the actual rate paid is partly endogenous (since a change in income can push an entity into a
different tax bracket). I do not have those data, so I simply construct an average tax rate as
federal tax revenues divided by nominal GDP. I then estimate the first-stage regression described
above with the average tax rate substituted for the log of taxes. The F-statistic on the R&R shock
in this regression is 3.2, twice as high as the previous case but still well below the threshold for
instrument relevance.
       With the caveats about instrument relevance in mind, I further explore the robustness of
Mertens and Ravn’s (2014) results by estimating impulse responses using the Jordà local
projection method and the Romer tax shock. I first estimate the reduced forms. As discussed
earlier, this involves regressing the dependent variable at t+h on the shock at t, controlling for
lags of other variables. To be consistent with Mertens and Ravn’s specification, I use the same
lags and variables in their proxy SVAR. Figure 4.3B shows the impulse responses from the
reduced form. Tax revenue increases in response to the shock initially and then falls below
normal. In response to the tax shock, output falls on impact and then declines further to about -2
at two years, before beginning to recover. The confidence bands are wider, both because the
Jordà method imposes fewer restrictions on the dynamics and because they incorporate the
35
   These additional results are based on the same data definitions and specification as Mertens and Ravn
(2014), but on revised data. The results are similar if I use their original data.
36
   See Lunsford (2015) and Montiel Olea, Stock, and Watson (2015) for discussions of instrument
relevance in the external instruments framework.

                                                  64
uncertainty about the impact of the tax shock on tax revenue. However, the point estimates for
output for the first few years are broadly consistent with both Romer and Romer’s (2010)
original results and Mertens and Ravn’s (2014) proxy SVAR.37 Table 4.5 shows the forecast
error variance decomposition based on a standard VAR.38 Unanticipated tax shocks appear to
account for very little of the forecast error variance of output.
        As Mertens and Ravn (2014) note, however, external instruments tend to have
measurement error, so they should not be used directly in an SVAR. A natural way to adjust for
this in the Jordà set-up is to estimate things as an instrumental variables regression, as discussed
in Section 2. Thus, in a second specification I regress output at t+h on the change in tax revenue
at t, instrumented with the unanticipated part of the Romer tax shock, also controlling for the
same variables as in the proxy SVAR (four lags of output, tax revenue, and government
spending, as well as the deterministic terms). Figure 4.3C shows the estimated impulse response
of output for this specification. The point estimates for these results look very similar to those for
output in panel B. The difference is that the confidence intervals are very wide, always
encompassing zero. Moreover, when I test whether the integral of the response for the first 12
quarters is different from zero, I cannot reject that it is zero.39
        To summarize, the literature on the effects of tax shocks has employed numerous
methods, such as SVARs with calibrated elasticities, narrative approaches, and sign restrictions.
Mertens and Ravn’s (2014) reconciliation of some of the various approaches tends to support
Romer and Romer’s (2010) large estimated elasticities. My robustness checks suggest that while
there might be a problem with instrument relevance, less restrictive ways to estimate impulse
responses also generally support Romer and Romer’s (2010) estimates of tax multipliers of -2 to
-3.


4.2.2 News About Future Tax Changes


4.2.2.1 Summary of the Literature
37
   If I use the Jordà method on Romer and Romer’s original specification and tax shock, I obtain results
that are very close to theirs. This is as one would expect since the do not calculate impulses from a VAR.
38
   As discussed in Section 4.1.3, although one can calculate forecast error variances using the estimated
local projection coefficients, I found that the shares sometimes exceeded 100 percent. Thus, for present
purposes I calculate the forecast error variance in a standard VAR with the shock, log government
spending, log real GDP, and log taxes. The shock is ordered first and four lags are included, along with a
quadratic trend.
39
   Reducing the number of lags or control variables changes the results little.

                                                    65
       Theory predicts that anticipated tax changes should have very different effects from
unanticipated tax shocks (e.g. Yang (2005)). If agents know that tax rates will increase in the
future, they should respond by intertemporally substituting taxable activity into the present.
Moreover, as discussed in Section 2, foresight about future tax changes can lead to identification
problems in a standard SVAR. I will now review some recent results on the effects of anticipated
tax changes on aggregate outcomes and provide some new results.
       Mertens and Ravn (2011b, 2012) explore the effects of anticipated tax changes by
splitting the Romers’ narrative tax shock series into anticipated versus unanticipated shocks
based on the delay between the passing of the legislation and the implementation of the
legislation. Romer and Romer had timed all of their shocks to coincide with the implementation
rather the legislation. Mertens and Ravn argue that the response of macroeconomic variables
should be very different for anticipated versus unanticipated shocks.
       Mertens and Ravn separate out the tax changes that were legislated more than 90 days
before they were implemented. Because there are not a large number of these kinds of tax
changes and because the lags between legislation and implementation vary significantly, Mertens
and Ravn preserve the degrees of freedom in their estimation by combining various anticipated
tax shocks according to the number of quarters left before implementation. Thus, their study does
not trace out the effect of “news” per se; rather, it is more similar to an event study of the
behavior of variables before and after the tax changes are implemented. Mertens and Ravn
(2011) estimate that anticipated and unanticipated tax shocks together account for 20 percent of
the historical variation in output at business cycle frequencies. Particularly interesting is their
finding that the so-called “Volcker” recession was in fact mostly caused by the Reagan tax cuts.
The legislation was passed in summer 1981 but the actual tax cuts were phased in between 1982
and 1984. Mertens and Ravn’s estimates imply that most of the decline in output from the second
half of 1981 through 1982 was due to the negative output effects of anticipated future tax cuts.
       Leeper, Richter and Walker (2011) (LRW) construct an alternative measure of expected
tax changes based on the spread between federal bonds and municipal bonds. They use their new
series to inform their theoretical model, but do not estimate effects of shocks to their series
directly from the data. In the unpublished supplement to their 2013 Econometrica paper, Leeper,




                                                66
Walker, Yang (2013) investigate the effect of their measure on output and show that expectations
of a future tax increase raise output when the news arrives.


4.2.2.2 Further Explorations


       I now explore the effects of several of the leading identified tax news shocks. Figure 4.4
reproduces Mertens and Ravn’s (2011) estimates of the effects of Romer tax shocks that were
anticipated. Quarter 0 is the date of the implementation, negative quarters are quarters between
the arrival of the news and before the implementation, and positive quarters are after the
implementation. The graphs show clear evidence of anticipation effects and intertemporal
substitution. Most variables, including output, hours, investment, and durable goods
consumption expenditures, are higher than average in the interval between the announcement of
a tax increase and its actual implementation. After implementation, all variables fall below
normal, including nondurable consumption. Thus, the behavior of the data is very consistent with
the theory.
       To see how the results compare to Mertens and Ravn’s results, I analyze the effects of
Leeper, Richter and Walker’s (2011) measure of average expected future tax rates from one to
five years forward (AFTR15). Using a Jordà local projection, I estimate several sets of
regressions at each horizon. In particular, I regress the endogenous variable of interest at t+h on
AFTR15 in period t, as well as on four lags of AFTR15, four lags of the endogenous variable and
four lags of the average federal tax rate (total federal receipts divided by GDP) . Because I do not
orthogonalize the shock with respect to current values of any of the other variables, this
identification scheme is similar to the one used by Leeper, Walker, Yang (2013), where they
order the tax news first in the Cholesky decomposition.
       Figure 4.5 shows the estimated responses to “news” that future tax rates will rise. The
results are quite similar to those of Mertens and Ravn’s results, even though the tax news
variable is from a completely difference source and the model is estimated as responses to news
rather than as an event study around the implementation. Output, hours and investment start
rising when news arrives at period 0 that tax rates will increase in the interval between one and
five years. The variables remain high for a while and then fall below normal after a year or so.




                                                67
       Table 4.5 shows the forecast error variance decomposition for the LRW measure of
expected tax changes. These shocks appear to account for more of the variance of output than the
unanticipated tax changes, but still less than six percent.
       In sum, some of the strongest and most robust findings in the fiscal literature are those
associated with news about future tax changes. Expectations that future tax rates will increase
lead to boom now followed by “busts.” This is perhaps some of the strongest evidence that
“news” can drive economic fluctuations.


4.3 Summary of Fiscal Results


       In this section, I have summarized some of the main methods and findings concerning the
effects of fiscal shocks. For both government spending and taxes, the methods that use external
narrative series tend to find bigger effects on output than the more traditional SVAR method. For
both government spending and taxes, anticipation effects are found to be very important.
       Some of the literature has studied the effects of government spending and tax shocks
jointly and made statements about “which” multiplier is larger. Some find larger government
spending multipliers, others find larger tax multipliers. My assessment is that the existing
methods do not yield precise enough and robust enough estimates to be able to make this
comparison.


5. Technology Shocks


       I now review the evidence on the leading non-policy shock: technology shocks. This
section reviews the literature on technology shocks and presents some new results comparing
various shocks from the literature. I will discuss both the classic unanticipated technology shocks
as well as news about future changes in technology. I will also distinguish between neutral and
investment-specific technology shocks.


5.1 Neutral Technology Shocks




                                                  68
        In 1982, Kydland and Prescott (1982) demonstrated the (then) surprising result that one
could produce business cycle movements of key variables from a dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium growth model beset by only one type of shock: variations in the growth rate of
exogenous total factor productivity (TFP). To be concrete, consider the following aggregate
production function:


(5.1)                        ,   ,


where Yt is output, At is total factor productivity (TFP), Lt is labor, and Kt is the capital stock at
the beginning of period t. Neutral technology shocks, or TFP shocks, are shocks to the process
driving At.
        Several empirical regularities supported Kydland and Prescott’s (1982) hypothesis. First,
Solow (1957) showed that 87 percent of the growth in average labor productivity from 1909 to
1949 was due to TFP growth. If TFP growth was so important for growth, why not also for
business cycles? Second, at the time that Kydland and Prescott published their article, a long-
standing stylzed fact was the procyclicality of labor productivity. In fact, this stylized fact was a
problem for Keynesian “aggregate demand” explanations of business cycles, since diminishing
returns would predict countercyclical labor productivity. Typically, the aggregate demand driven-
business cycle literature had to resort to stories of labor hoarding or increasing returns to explain
the procyclicality of labor productivity.
        In follow-up work, Prescott (1986) used the Solow residual as his measure of exogenous
TFP and used the standard deviation of that series along with his model to argue that the bulk of
business cycle fluctuations could be explained by technology shocks. Beginning in the 1990s,
though, several new results emerged that cast doubt on using the Solow residual as an exogenous
technological progress for the purpose of business cycle analysis. First, Evans (1992) showed
that variables such as money, interest rates, and government spending Granger-caused the Solow
residual. Second, Hall (1988, 1990) developed a generalization of the Solow residual framework
that relaxed the assumptions of competition and constant returns to scale. This framework
demonstrated how endogenous components could enter the Solow Residual. Third, a number of
papers, such as Shapiro (1993), Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1995), Basu and Kimball,
(1997) used proxies such as the workweek of capital, electricity, or average hours to adjust the


                                                 69
Solow residual for variations in utilization of labor and/or capital. They found that much of the
procyclicality of the Solow residual disappeared once it was adjusted.
       Two approaches called into question whether technology shocks even led to business-
cycle like movements. Galí (1999) and Basu, Fernald, Kimball (2006) used different methods but
both found results suggesting that a positive technology shock led to a decline in labor inputs,
such as hours. Both of these analyses assumed that all technology shocks were neutral
technology shocks. I will discuss each of the approaches with the follow-up work in turn.
       Galí (1999) used long-run restrictions to identify neutral technology shocks. He argued
that a standard real business cycle (RBC) model predicted that technology shocks were the only
shocks that could have permanent effects on labor productivity. As discussed in Section 2.3.6,
Galí (1999) estimated a bivariate VAR with labor productivity and hours (or employment) and
imposed the long-run restriction that technology shocks were the only shocks that could have a
permanent effect on labor productivity. Francis and Ramey (2005) derived additional long-run
restrictions from the theory and used them as an overidentification test and found that one could
not reject the over-identifying restrictions. Francis and Ramey (2004) constructed new historical
data for the U.S. and extended the analysis back to 1889. They found that a positive technology
shock raised hours in the pre-WWII period but lowered them in the post-WWII period. They
explained the switch with the difference in the serial correlation properties of productivity. In the
early period, an identified technology shock raised productivity immediately, whereas in the later
period an identified technology shock raised productivity more gradually. This gradual rise in the
later period provides an incentive to reduce hours worked in the short-run in anticipation of
higher productivity in the long-run.
       Galí (1999) and Francis and Ramey (2005) both assumed that both (log) labor
productivity and hours had a unit root and that their first differences were stationary. As Section
2.3.6 above demonstrated, imposing long-run restrictions also requires the imposition of
assumptions on stationarity. Christiano, Eichenbaum and Vigfusson (2003) argued that it makes
no sense to model hours per capita as having a unit root since it is bounded above and below.
They showed that if instead one assumes that hours are stationary and then impose the Galí long-
run restriction, a positive technology shock leads to a rise in hours worked. Fernald (2007) noted
the structural break in labor productivity growth, and when he allowed for that feature of the
data, he found that hours fell after a positive technology shock. Francis and Ramey (2009)


                                                 70
argued that the baby boom led to low frequency movements in both labor productivity growth
and hours worked per capita and that failure to correct for these led to the positive correlations
found by Christiano et al. When they corrected for demographics, they found that a positive
technology shock led to a decrease in hours. Gospodinov, Maynard and Pesavento (2011) discuss
various econometric issues that arise in this setting with low frequency movements.
       Building on ideas of Uhlig (2003), Francis, Owyang, Rousch, DiCecio (2014) introduced
a new method of imposing long-run restrictions that overcame many of these problems. They
identify the technology shock as the shock that maximizes the forecast error variance share of
labor productivity at some finite horizon h. Using that scheme, they find that their identified
technology leads to a fall in hours worked. They estimate that technology shocks contribute 15 to
40 percent of the forecast error variance of output at business cycle horizons. A variation by
Barsky and Sims (2011) identifies the technology shock as the one that maximizes the sum of the
forecast error variances up to some horizon h.
       Several papers have questioned Galí’s (1999) basic identifying assumption that
technology shocks are the only shocks that have a long-run effect on labor productivity. Uhlig
(2004) argues that capital taxation and shifts in preferences involving “leisure in the workplace”
can also have long-run effects on labor productivity. He also introduces a “medium run”
identification procedure that anticipates the procedures discussed above. He finds that the impact
effect on hours is zero and that there is a small rise afterward. Mertens and Ravn (2010) include
the Romer and Romer (2010) exogenous tax shocks in a vector error correction model and find
that once taxes are controlled and cointegration is allowed, a positive TFP shock raises hours in
the short-run. They also find that technology shocks account for 50 – 55 percent of the forecast
error variance of output.
       Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006) found that technology shocks were contractionary
using a completely different method. Employing theoretical insights from Basu and Kimball
(1997), they adjusted the annual Solow residual for utilization using hours per worker as a proxy.
When they examined shocks to this purged Solow residual, they found that positive shocks to
technology led to a decline in hours worked. Fernald (2014) has now constructed a quarterly
version of this utilization-adjusted TFP series.40


40
  The series is regularly updated and made available by John Fernald at http://www.frbsf.org/economic-
research/economists/jfernald/quarterly˙tfp.xls .

                                                     71
       Alexopoulos (2011) identified technology shocks by creating an entirely new data series
for measuring technology. Meticulously collecting and counting book publications for several
types of technologies, she constructed several annual series on new technologies. She found that
these series were not Granger-caused by standard macroeconomic variables. Using her new
series in VARs, she found that a positive technology raises output and productivity. Contrary to
the findings of Galí (1999) and Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006), she estimated that a positive
shock to technology raises output, though the effect is weak.
       Table 5.1 summarizes some of the estimates of the contribution of TFP shocks to output
fluctuations at business cycle frequencies, based on approaches that identify technology shocks
in time series models.
       Numerous papers have identified technology shocks through estimated DSGE models.
McGrattan (1994) estimated a neoclassical DSGE model with technology and fiscal shocks.
Smets and Wouters (2007) estimated a New Keynesian DSGE model using Bayesian methods in
order to explore the effects of various shocks. They incorporate a number of different shocks in
the model, including neutral technology shocks, investment-specific technology shocks
(discussed in the next section), monetary shocks, government spending shocks, mark-up shocks,
and risk premium shocks. Their estimates imply that a positive neutral technology shock lowers
hours worked. Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010, 2011) also estimate a New Keynesian
model, but incorporate also investment-specific shocks and marginal efficiency of investment
shocks. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012) estimate a DSGE model which allows all oftheir shocks
to have an unanticipated component and a “news,” or unanticipated, component. Miyamoto and
Nguyen (2015) extend their estimation method by including series on survey expectations in the
estimation. I will discuss these papers in more detail in the sections on investment-specific
technology shocks and news. Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni (2013) estimate a DSGE
model allowing for both “news” and “noise.” Table 5.2 summarizes the estimates from DSGE
models of the contribution of various types of technology shocks to output fluctuations at
business cycle frequencies.


5.2 Investment-Related Technology Shocks




                                                72
         Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huffman (1988) were the first to examine in a DSGE model
Keynes’ idea that shocks to the marginal efficiency of investment could be a source of business
cycle volatility. In follow-up work, Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (2000) used a calibrated
DSGE model to examine the importance of investment-specific technological change in business
cycles. They used the relative price of new equipment to identify the process driving investment-
specific technology shocks and concluded that these shocks could account for 30 percent of
business cycle volatility.
         Fisher (2006) extended Galí’s (1999) analysis of neutral technology shocks by
incorporating additional data and restrictions that separately identify neutral and investment-
specific technology (IST) shocks. In particular, he assumed that only IST shocks affect the
relative price of investment goods in the long-run and only neutral technology and IST
technology shocks affect labor productivity in the long-run. Because of some sample instability,
he estimated his model over two periods: 1955q1 – 1979q2 and 1982q3 – 2000q4. He found that
both technology shocks together accounted for a substantial shared of the forecast error variance
of output, 60 percent at 12 quarters in the early sample, 83 percent in the later sample.
          Justiniano, Primiceri, Tambalotti (2010, 2011) estimate a New Keynesian DSGE model
with a variety of unanticipated shocks. Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambolotti (2011) distinguish
between investment-specific technology shocks and marginal efficiency of investment shocks.
To be concrete, consider simplified versions of two equations from their DSGE model:


(5.2a)
(5.2b)                       1     1


  is the production of investment goods and         denotes the rate of transformation of final goods,
  , into investment goods.        is investment-specific technology (IST) which, according to their
model, should be equal to the inverse of the relative price of investment goods to consumption
goods.      1   is the level of capital at the beginning of period t+1,   is the depreciation rate, and
   is the rate of transformation between investment goods and installed capital, or the marginal
efficiency of investment (MEI). Previous research, such as by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Krusell (2000) and Fisher (2006), had not distinguished IST from MEI and had assumed their
product was equal to the inverse of the relative price of investment goods. Justiniano, Primaceri


                                                   73
and Tambolotti (2011) estimate that (unanticipated) MEI shocks contribute to 60 percent of the
variance of output at business cycle frequencies.
       Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012), Khan and Tsoukalas (2012), and Miyamoto and
Nguyen (2015) estimate DSGE models that incorporate both TFP and IST shocks. An important
focus of their estimation is the distinction between unanticipated technology changes and news
about future changes, so I will discuss their work in the next section on news.
       Although there is a wide range of results, a general pattern that emerges is that when
models include IST and/or MEI shocks, they tend to explain a significant portion of the variation
in output at business cycle frequencies.


5.3 News about Future Technology Changes


       Both Pigou (1927) and Keynes (1936) suggested that changes in expectations about the
future may be an important driver of economic fluctuations. Beaudry and Portier (2006) reignited
interest in the idea by providing time series evidence that news about future productivity could
explain half of output fluctuations over the business cycle. Furthermore, their estimates implied
that hours and output rose when the news arrived, thus creating business-cycle type
comovements. They identified news shocks using two methods; both involved identifying shocks
that moved stock prices immediately, but affected productivity only with a lag. Beaudry and
Lucke (2009) and Kurmann and Otrok (2013) used other techniques to reach similar conclusions.
More recently, however, Barsky and Sims (2011) and Barsky, Basu and Lee (2014) have used
medium run restrictions and series on consumer confidence to identify news shocks and found
that news shocks did not generate business cycle fluctuations. In particular, hours fell when news
arrived. Fisher (2010), Kurmann and Mertens (2014), and Forni, Gambetti, and Sala (2014) have
highlighted problems with Beaudry and Portier’s identification method. For example, Kurmann
and Mertens (2014) show that the larger VECM in Beaudry and Portier’s (2006) paper is not
identified. Forni, Gambetti and Sala (2014) argue that the small-scale SVARs are affected by the
“non-fundamentalness” problem discussed in Section 2.5.       Thus, the empirical work based on
time series identification is in flux. Beaudry and Portier (2014) present a comprehensive
summary of the literature.




                                                74
       I would add that another potential problem with Beaudry and Portier’s (2006) method for
identifying TFP news shocks is the implicit assumption they make about stock prices. They
assume that the future profits from the TFP shock will show up in current stock prices. It is not
clear that this assumption holds for major innovations. Greenwood and Jovanovic (1999) and
Hobijn and Jovanovic (2001) present theory and evidence that major technological innovations
(such as information technology) actually lead to a temporary decline in stock market values
because they lower the value of the existing technology. Revolutionary innovations usually arise
in private companies and claims to future dividend streams only show up in stock prices after the
initial public offerings. Thus, we should not necessarily see positive effects of news about future
TFP on stock prices.
       Ben Zeev and Khan (2015) identify both unanticipated investment-specific technology
(IST) shocks and IST news shocks. To do this, they extend Barsky and Sims (2011) medium
horizon restriction method for identifying news and employ Fisher’s (2006) assumptions linking
IST and the relative price of investment goods. They find that IST news shocks explain 73% of
the forecast error variance of output at a horizon of 8 quarters. They show that the IST shocks
originally identified by Fisher (2006) were a combination of the unanticipated IST shocks and
news about IST. Ben Zeev and Khan’s paper thus corroborates Fisher’s finding that IST shocks
are the major source of fluctuations, but goes on to show that it is the news part that is the most
important.
       Another strategy for identifying news is through estimation of a DSGE model, as
pioneered by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012). This approach achieves part of its identification
by assuming particular lags between the arrival of news and the realization of the change.
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012) allow for a variety of unanticipated and news shocks for
variables such as TFP, investment-specific technology, and wage markups. They estimate that all
news variables combined (including nontechnology shocks such as wage markup shocks)
account for 50 percent of output fluctuations according to their estimates. An extension by
Miyamoto and Nguyen (2015) uses actual survey forecasts for the expectations variables.
       Khan and Tsoukalas (2012) estimate a New Keynesian DSGE model with both
investment-specific technology and marginal efficiency of investment shocks, and allow for both
unanticipated changes and news shocks. They find that unanticipated marginal efficiency of
investment shocks contribute an important part of the variance of output (47%), but that


                                                75
technology news shocks are not important at all. Nontechnology news shocks do, however,
contribute to the variance decomposition of hours. In particular, wage markup shocks account for
over 40 percent of the variance of hours. Thus, their results on the importance of unanticipated
technology shocks contrast with those of Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012), but their results on
the importance of news about wage markups is consistent with their findings. The estimates of
the importance of technology news are summarized in Table 5.2.


5.4 Explorations with Estimated Technology Shocks


       I now study the relationship between some of the leading shocks and explore the effects
of a few of them in the Jordà local projection framework. I re-estimate the Galí (1999),
Christiano, Eichenbaum, Vigfusson (2004) (CEV), and Beaudry and Portier (2006) systems
using updated data. In each case, I used a simple bivariate system. Both the Galí and CEV shocks
use long-run restrictions, with the former assuming a unit root in hours per capita and the latter
assuming a quadratic trend in hours. I use Beaudry and Portier’s shock estimated with the short-
run restriction, i.e., it is the shock to stock prices that does not affect TFP on impact; the
correlation of this shock with their shock estimated using long-run restrictions is 0.97. The
Fernald shocks are simply the growth rate of Fernald’s (2014) utilization-adjusted TFP for the
aggregate economy or for the investment goods sector. The rest of the estimated shocks were
kindly provided by Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio (2014) (medium-horizon restrictions),
Barsky and Sims (2011) (medium-run restrictions, consumer confidence), Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambolotti (2011) (estimated DSGE model), Ben Zeev and Khan (2015) (SVAR with
medium-run restrictions), and Miyamoto and Nguyen (2015) (estimated DSGE model with
forecast data). The joint sample is 1955q2 – 2006q4, except for the TFP news sample, which is
limited to 1961q1 – 2006q4 by the Barsky and Sims shock availability. Correlations between
subsets of shocks that are available over longer samples are similar to those reported for the joint
sample. Table 5.3 shows the correlations, broken down according to whether the shock is to TFP
or IST (or MEI) and whether it is unanticipated or is news.
       Table 5.3, Panel A shows the results for unanticipated TFP shocks, which have received
the most attention. Most of the shocks have a correlation above 0.6 with the shock estimated
using Galí’s (1999) method. The exception is the Miyamoto and Nguyen (2015) permanent TFP


                                                76
shock. It is surprising that the Miyamoto and Nguyen stationary TFP shock has a higher
correlation than the permanent TFP shock, since the Galí method only identifies permanent TFP
shocks.
          Panel B shows news shocks about TFP. The correlation between Beaudry and Portier’s
(2006) shock estimated using short-run restrictions and Barksy and Sims’ (2011) shock estimated
using medium horizon restrictions is only 0.25. The correlations of both of those SVAR-based
shocks with the Miyamoto and Nguyen (2015) DSGE-based shocks are essentially 0.
          Panel C shows correlations of various estimates of unanticipated investment-specific
technology (IST) or marginal efficiency of investment (MEI) shocks. The correlations between
the various estimates are quite low. For example, the correlation between Fernald’s utilization-
adjusted TFP for the investment goods sector and Justiniano et al.’s (2011) IST shock is only
0.19 and is -0.27 for Justianiano et al.s’ MEI shock. The highest correlation of 0.49 is between
Justiniano et al.’s IST shock and Ben Zeev and Khan’s (2015) IST shock. The higher correlation
is not surprising since both methods associate the IST shock with the inverse of the relative price
of equipment.
          Panel D shows correlations of various estimates of IST news shocks. There is essentially
no correlation between Ben Zeev and Khan’s (2015) SVAR-based estimates and Miyamoto and
Nguyen’s (2015) DSGE-estimated shocks.
          If we were simply trying to develop instruments for estimating structural parameters, it
would not matter if various instruments had low correlation.41 If, however, we are trying to
estimate shocks in order to determine their importance for macroeconomic fluctuations, a low
correlation across various estimates is troubling. The large number of low correlations across
methods and the widely-varying results reported across papers suggest that we are still far from a
consensus on the nature and importance of technology shocks. The problem is not one of lack of
consensus of estimated DSGE vs. SVAR methods. Even within each class of method, the results
vary widely, as evidenced in Tables 5.1 and 5.2.
          Moreover, many of the estimated shocks do not satisfy the property that they are
unanticipated or news. Table 5.4 shows the p-values from two sets of tests. The first one tests for
serially correlation of the shock by regressing the shock on its own two lags and testing their
joint significance. The SVAR estimated shocks do well on this test, but quite a few of the DSGE-

41
     Sims (1998) made this argument in his discussion of Rudebusch’s (1998) monetary shock critique.

                                                     77
estimated shocks fail this test. The second set of tests is for Granger-Causality (Granger (1969)).
To conduct these tests, I augment this regression with two lags each of log real GDP, log real
consumption and log real stock prices. I chose consumption and stock prices because those
variables have forward-looking components to them. Half of the shocks fail this test. Of course,
the Galí and CEV shocks were estimated using a simple bivariate model. Had I augmented those
systems with these variables, the shocks would have passed the tests by construction. The
Francis et al., Beaudry and Portier, and Ben Zeev and Kahn shocks pass this test, as do about half
of the DSGE-estimated shocks.
        I explore the effects of a few of the estimated shocks on several macroeconomic variables
in a Jordà local projection framework. To do this, I estimate the following series of regressions:


(5.3)                                         1



The z is the variable of interest. The control variables include two lags each of the shock (to mop
up any serial correlation in the shocks), log real GDP per capita, log real stock prices per capita,
log labor productivity (equal to real GDP divided by total hours worked), and the dependent
variable. The coefficient    gives the response of z at time t+h to a shock at time t. As discussed
in Section 2,          will be serially correlated, so the standard errors must incorporate a
correction, such as Newey-West.
        Figure 5.1 shows the responses of real GDP, labor productivity hours, stock prices,
consumption and nonresidential investment to three different measures of unanticipated TFP
shocks: the Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio (2014) (FORD) measure, which uses medium
run restrictions; Fernald’s (2014) utilization-adjusted TFP growth, and Justiniano, Primiceri, and
Tambalotti’s (2011) (JPT) estimate from their DSGE model. The responses to the FORD and JPT
shocks are quite similar: GDP, labor productivity, stock prices, and consumption all jump
immediately and significantly. Hours fall for a few quarters before rising. The Fernald shock
implies a more hump-shaped response of GDP, hours, stock prices, consumption and investment.
Labor productivity rises immediately but then returns to normal at around 16 quarters. The
Fernald shock also shows an initial decline in hours before they rise.
        Figure 5.2 shows the effects of the Ben Zeev and Khan (2015) investment-specific
technology (IST) news shock. Recall that this shock is an extension of Fisher’s (2006) method,


                                                  78
estimated using the Barsky-Sims (2011) medium-horizon method combined with information on
relative prices of investment. This shock appears to generate a classic business cycle pattern.
GDP, hours, stock prices, consumption, and nonresidential investment increase with a prolonged
hump shape. Labor productivity does nothing for about 6 quarters, falls around 9 quarters, and
then rises.
        Figure 5.3 shows the effects of JPT’s marginal efficiency of investment shock, estimated
from their DSGE model. While this shock leads to temporary rises (for a year or less) in real
GDP, labor productivity, consumption, and nonresidential investment, it leads to a fall in stock
prices, which is puzzling.
        Table 5.5 shows the forecast error variance decompositions for these five shocks for both
output and hours. The decompositions are calculated from a standard VAR with the shock, and
log per capita values of real GDP, hours, stock prices, consumption, and nonresidential
investment. Although some of the unanticipated TFP shocks can account for up to 16 percent of
output, none accounts for much of the variance of hours. In contrast, the Ben Zeev and Khan
investment-specific technology news shock accounts for well over a third of the forecast error
variance of both output and hours. Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti’s marginal efficiency of
investment shock accounts for large fractions on impact, 50 percent for output and 26 percent for
hours, but the effects dissipate fairly quickly.


5.5 Summary of Technology Shocks


        The literature investigating the effects of technology shocks has moved far beyond the
simple Solow residual. Various methods have been introduced to deal with changes in measured
TFP that are due to variable utilization. Moreover, the literature has moved beyond neutral
technology shocks to recognize the potential importance of investment-specific technology
shocks and marginal efficiency of investment shocks. In addition, recent contributions have
investigated the importance of news shocks.
        My analysis shows, however, that some of the estimated shocks are not highly correlated
with other versions. Moreover, many of the shocks are serially correlated or Granger-caused by
other variables. This suggests that more research needs to be done to refine these shock
measures. One of the shocks that seems to be promising both for generating business-cycle


                                                   79
comovement and for contributing significant amounts to the variance of output is the shock that
captures news about investment-specific technological change.


6. Additional Shocks


       So far, this chapter has focused on only three types of shocks – monetary, fiscal, and
technology shocks. There are numerous other candidates for potentially important
macroeconomic shocks. Here I will briefly review a few.
       One obvious additional candidate for a macroeconomic shock is oil shocks. Hamilton
(1983) argued that oil supply shocks were a major driver of economic fluctuations. Since then a
large literature has examined the effects of oil supply shocks. One of the major themes of the
literature is the changing estimated effects of oil price shocks, identified by ordering oil prices
first in a linear VAR. In particular, after the 1970s oil price changes seemed to have smaller
effects. One potential explanation is asymmetries. Several analyses, such as by Davis and
Haltiwanger (2001) and Hamilton (2003), argued that oil price increases have larger effects than
oil price decreases. Subsequent research, however, found that there was not strong evidence of
asymmetry (e.g. Kilian and Vigfusson (2011)). A second potential explanation for the changing
effects of oil supply shocks is that the oil price increases in earlier periods were accompanied by
price controls, which led to many distortions (Ramey and Vine (2011)). When they constructed
an implicit cost of oil that incorporated a proxy for the distortion costs, they did not find much
evidence of changing effects. A third explanation was by Kilian (2009), and was a critique of
standard identification methods. He argued that many of the changes in oil prices are driven now
driven by demand shocks, not supply shocks, so a standard Cholesky decomposition with oil
prices ordered first does not properly identify oil supply shocks. Stock and Watson’s
(forthcoming) chapter in this Handbook uses oil shocks as a case study of their methods. They
find that oil supply shocks, identified using Kilian’s (2009) method, do not account for a
significant fraction of the forecast error variance of output.
       Credit shocks are another possible candidate for a macroeconomic shock. There is huge
literature analyzing the importance of credit and credit imperfections in economic fluctuations
and growth. Most of this literature focuses on credit as an important propagation and
amplification mechanism (e.g. “the credit channel” of monetary policy), rather than as an


                                                  80
important independent source of shocks. Gilchrist and Zakrajsek’s (2012) recent analysis of the
effects of innovations to their new excess bond premium variable can be interpreted as an
analysis of credit market shocks. They showed that innovations to the excess bond premium that
were orthogonal to the current state of the economy had significant effects on macroeconomic
variables. They interpret a negative “shock” to this variable as signaling a reduction in the
effective risk-bearing capacity of the financial sector.
       The role of uncertainty in the business cycle has received heightened attention recently.
In addition to standard firm-level uncertainty and financial uncertainty, recent work has
suggested a possible role for policy uncertainty. More research needs to be done to untangle
uncertainty as an endogenous propagation mechanism versus uncertainty as an independent
source of macroeconomic shocks. Bloom and Davis’ (forthcoming) chapter in this Handbook
reviews the literature on the role of uncertainty in the macroeconomy.
       Labor supply shocks are yet another possible source of macroeconomic shocks. It is well-
known that cyclical variations in the “labor wedge” are an important component of business
cycles. Shapiro and Watson (1988) estimated an SVAR with long-run restrictions and found that
labor supply shocks were the dominant driver of business cycles. In estimated DSGE models
with many shocks, wage markup shocks are often found to play an important role. This is
particularly the case for news about wage markups. For example, both Kahn and Tsoukalas
(2012) and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2012) find that wage markup news shocks account for 60
percent of the variance share of hours. A key question is whether exogenous shocks to the labor
market are an important part of fluctuations or whether we are accidentally identifying an
internal propagation mechanism as an exogenous shock.


7. Summary and Conclusions


       This chapter has summarized the new methods and new findings concerning
macroeconomic shocks and their propagation. Identification is particularly challenging in
macroeconomics because researchers ask questions for which dynamics are all-important,
general equilibrium effects are crucial, and expectations have powerful effects.
       The literature has made substantial progress in thinking seriously about identification of
shocks since the early days of Cholesky decompositions. It now exploits new data sources, such


                                                  81
as narrative records, survey expectations, and high frequency financial data, and combines theory
with extra data series (e.g. the relative price of investment goods), and incorporates that
information in estimated DSGE models and structural vector autoregressions.
       The introduction to this chapter posed the question: Are we destined to remain forever
ignorant of the fundamental causes of economic fluctuations? I would argue “no.” Although we
still have far to go, substantial progress has been made since Cochrane (1994) asked that
question.
       In support of my answer, I offer the following forecast error variance decomposition that
combines some of the leading shocks I have discussed in this chapter. I specify a VAR that
contains the shocks as well as some macroeconomic variables. In particular, it contains (in this
order) Ben Zeev and Pappa’s (forthcoming) military news shock, Leeper, Richter, and Yang
(2012) news about future taxes from bond prices, the Romer and Romer’s (2010) unanticipated
tax shocks (as constructed by Mertens and Ravn (2012)), Francis et al.’s (2014) medium-horizon
restriction TFP shock, Ben Zeev and Khan’s (2015) investment-specific technology news shock,
and Justiniano et al.’s (2011) marginal efficiency of investment shock. The macroeconomic
variables include the logs real per capita values of GDP and total hours, as well as the log of
commodity prices and the GDP deflator. Ordered last is the federal funds rate. Four lags are used
and a quadratic trend is included.
       Table 6.1 shows the forecast error variance decomposition of log real GDP per capita and
log hours per capita. Because of data limitations on some of the shocks, the sample starts after
the Korean War. It should not be surprising, then, that the government spending shocks are not
very important. The tax news shocks contribute a small amount, less than ten percent. The
unanticipated tax shocks are unimportant.
       Which shocks are important? The most important, both for output and hours is Ben Zeev
and Khan’s (2015) news about investment-specific technology change. This variable contributes
an important part of the forecast error variance of both output and hours. For example, at 8
quarters the contribution to hours is 40 percent. The 90 percent confidence interval (not shown in
the table) is (25, 54). Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti’s (2011) marginal efficiency of
investment shock contributes 42 percent on impact, with a 90 percent confidence interval of
(34,50), but this falls to 24 percent by one year. If we associate the innovations to the federal




                                               82
funds rate with monetary policy shocks, then monetary policy shocks contribute up to 8 percent
of the variance of output, but up to 18 percent of the variance in hours.
       In sum, the three fiscal shocks, the three technology shocks, and the federal funds rate
shock contribute 63 to 79 percent of the variances of output and hours at horizons of 4 to 20
quarters. While much more work should be done exploring the plausibility of the identifying
assumptions, testing the robustness of these shock estimates, and making sure that they do satisfy
the properties a shock should satisfy, these results suggest that we are indeed closer to
understanding Slutsky’s random shocks that drive macroeconomic fluctuations.




                                                 83
                                          References


Alesina, Alberto, and Silvia Ardagna, 1998, “Tales of Fiscal Adjustment,” Economic Policy, Vol.
       13, No. 27, pp. 487–545.

Alesina, Alberto, and Silvia Ardagna, 2010, “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes versus
       Spending,” Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 24, ed. by Jeffrey R. Brown (Cambridge,
       Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti, 1995, “Fiscal Expansions and Fiscal Adjustments in
       OECD Countries,” Economic Policy, Vol. 10, No. 21, pp. 205–248.

Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti, 1997, “Fiscal Adjustments in OECD Countries:
       Composition and Macroeconomic Effects,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 44 (June), pp. 210–48.

Alexopoulos, Michelle. "Read all about it!! What happens following a technology shock?." The
      American Economic Review 101.4 (2011): 1144-1179.

Amir Ahmadi, Pooyan and Harald Uhlig, “Sign Restrictions in Bayesian FAVARs with an
      Application to Monetary Policy Shocks,” NBER Working paper 21738, November 2015.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, "The Credibility Revolution in Empirical
       Economics: How Better Research Design is Taking the Con out of Econometrics,"
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24 (Spring 2010): 3-30.

Angrist, Joshua D., Òscar Jordà, and Guido Kuersteiner (2013), “Semiparametric Estimates of
       Monetary Policy Effects: String Theory Revisited,” NBER working paper 19355.

Arias, Jonas E., Diego Caldara, and Juan F. Rubio-Ramirez, “The Systematic Component of
       Monetary Policy in SVARS: An Agnostic Identification Procedure,” January 2015
       working paper.

Arias, Jonas E., Juan F. Rubio-Ramirez, and Daniel F. Waggoner, “Inference Based on SVARs
        Identified with Sign and Zero Restrictions: Theory and Applications, November 2015
        working paper.

Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
      Policy.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2): 1-27.

Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2013. “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and
      Expansion” Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis, eds. Alberto Alesina and Francesco
      Giavazzi, University of Chicago Press.

Bagliano, Fabio C., and Carlo A. Favero. 1999. “Information from Financial Markets and VAR
       Measures of Monetary Policy.” European Economic Review 43 (4–6): 825–37.


                                              84
Barakchian, S. Mahdi and Christopher Crowe, “Monetary Policy Matters: Evidence from New
      Shocks,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 60, Issue 8, November 2013, Pages
      950–966.

Barro, Robert J., “Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the United States.” The
       American Economic Review Vol. 67, No. 2 (Mar., 1977), pp. 101-115.

Barro, Robert J., “Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in the United States.”
       Journal of Political Economy Vol. 86, No. 4 (Aug., 1978), pp. 549-580.

Barro, Robert J., and Charles J. Redlick. 2011. “Macroeconomic Effects from Government
       Purchases and Taxes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 51-102.

Barsky, R. B., and E. R. Sims (2011): “News shocks and business cycles," Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 58(3), 273-289.

Barsky, Robert. B. and Eric Sims, “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of Innovations
       in Consumer Confidence," American Economic Review, 102(4), 2012.

Barsky, Robert B., Susanto Basu, and Keyoung Lee. 2014. "Whither News Shocks?" NBER
       Working Paper 20666. November.

Barth III, Marvin J., and Valerie A. Ramey. "The cost channel of monetary transmission." NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Volume 16. MIT Press, 2002. 199-256.

Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball. Cyclical productivity with unobserved input variation. No.
       w5915. National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997.

Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball. "Are Technology Improvements
      Contractionary?." The American Economic Review (2006): 1418-1448.

Baumeister, Christiane and James D. Hamilton, “Sign Restrictions, Structural Vector
      Autoregressions, and Useful Prior Information,” Econometrica 83 (September 2015):
      1963-1999.

Beaudry, Paul and Frank Portier, “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations," American
      Economic Review, 2006, 96(4), 1293-1307.

Beaudry, Paul and Frank Portier, ”News Driven Business Cycles: Insights and Challenges,”
      Journal of Economic Literature 2014, 52(4), 993–1074.

Beaudry, Paul, and Bernd Lucke. 2010. "Letting Different Views about Business Cycles
      Compete." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, 24: 413-455. University of Chicago
      Press.



                                              85
Beaudry, Paul, Patrick Fève, and Alain Guay. When is Nonfundamentalness in VARs a Real
      Problem? An Application to News Shocks. No. W21466. National Bureau of Economic
      Research, 2015.

Ben Zeev, Nadav and Hashmat Khan, “Investment-Specific News Shocks and U.S. Business
      Cycles,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47 (October 2015): 1443-1464.

Ben Zeev, Nadav and Evi Pappa, “Chronicle of a War Foretold: The Macroeconomic Effects of
      Anticipated Defense Spending Shocks,” forthcoming Economic Journal.

Bernanke, Ben S. “Alternative explanations of the money-income correlation” Carnegie-
      Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 25, Autumn 1986, Pages 49–99.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Alan S. Blinder, “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of Monetary
      Transmission,” The American Economic Review Vol. 82, No. 4 (Sep., 1992), pp. 901-
      921.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Ilian Mihov, “Measuring Monetary Policy,” The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics Vol. 113, No. 3 (Aug., 1998), pp. 869-902.

Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin and Piotr Eliasz, “Measuring the Effects of Monetary Policy: A
      Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, Volume 120, Issue 1, 2002, Pp. 387-422.

Blanchard, Olivier and Mark W. Watson, “Are All Business Cycles Alike?” in The American
      Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, ed. Robert J. Gordon, NBER 1986.

Blanchard, Olivier and Danny Quah, “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and Supply
      Disturbances,” American Economic Review, 79 (4): September 1989, 655-673.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti, “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects
      of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 117 (2002), 1329-1368.

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Daniel Leigh. 2013. "Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers."
      American Economic Review, 103(3): 117-20.

Blanchard, Olivier J., Jean-Paul L'Huillier, Guido Lorenzoni, 2013. "News, Noise, and
      Fluctuations: An Empirical Exploration," American Economic Review, vol. 103(7), pages
      3045-70, December.

Bloom, Nicholas and Steven Davis, “Measuring Risk and Uncertainty ,” forthcoming Handbook
      of Macroeconomics, eds. John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig.

Boivin, Jean. 2006. “Has U.S. Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from Drifting Coefficients
       and Real-Time Data.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38 (5): 1149–73.



                                              86
Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni. "Has monetary policy become more effective?" The Review
       of Economics and Statistics 88.3 (2006): 445-462.

Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederick S. Mishkin, “How Has the Monetary Transmission
       Mechanism Evolved Over Time?” Handbook of Monetary Economics. 2010.

Boschen, John F. and Leonard O. Mills (1995). “The Relation between Narrative and Money
      Market Indicators of Monetary Policy,” Economic Inquiry, Volume 33, Issue 1, pages 24–
      44.

Brückner, Markus, and Evi Pappa. "Fiscal Expansions, Unemployment, and Labor Force
      Participation: Theory and Evidence,” International Economic Review 53.4 (2012): 1205-
      1228.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. "Capital utilization and returns to
       scale." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1995, Volume 10, pp. 67-124. MIT Press, 1995.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jonas Fisher, “Fiscal Shocks and their Consequences,”
       Journal of Economic Theory, 115 (2004), 89-117.

Caldara, Dario and Christophe Kamps, “The Analytics of SVARs: A Unified Framework to
       Measure Fiscal Multipliers,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series Divisions of
       Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.,
       2012-20.

Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas DM Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano.
     "Macroeconomic effects of federal reserve forward guidance." Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity (2012): 1-80.

Canova, Fabio, and Gianni De Nicolo. "Monetary disturbances matter for business fluctuations
      in the G-7." Journal of Monetary Economics 49, no. 6 (2002): 1131-1159.

Canova, Fabio, and Joaquim Pires Pina. "What VAR Tell us about DSGE Models?." In New
      Trends in Macroeconomics, pp. 89-123. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005.

Canova, Fabio and Luca Sala, “Back to Square One: Identification Issues in DSGE Models,”
      Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (May 2009): 431-449.

Chang, Pao Li, and Shinichi Sakata. "Estimation of impulse response functions using long
      autoregression." The Econometrics Journal 10.2 (2007): 453-469.

Chari, VV, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Are Structural VARs with Long-Run
       Restrictions Useful in Developing Business Cycle Theory?” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 2008.




                                             87
Christiano, Lawrence J., and Martin Eichenbaum. "Liquidity Effects and the Monetary
        Transmission Mechanism." The American Economic Review 82.2 (1992): 346.

Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum, Charles L. Evans, “What Have We Learned and To
        What End?” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. Michael Woodford and John D.
        Taylor, 1999.

Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum, Charles L. Evans, “Nominal Rigidities and the
        Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 113,
        No. 1, February 2005.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson. 2003. "What Happens after
        a Technology Shock?" NBER Working Paper Series 9819. Cambridge, MA: National
        Bureau of Economic Research.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson (2007). "Assessing
        Structural VARs," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006. Cambridge and London:
        MIT Press, pp. 1-72.

Cloyne, James, “Discretionary Tax Changes and the Macroeconomy: New Narrative Evidence
      from the United Kingdom,” The American Economic Review, Volume 103, Number 4,
      June 2013, pp. 1507-1528(22).

Cochrane, John, “Shocks,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 41
      (December 1994): 295-364.

Cochrane, John, “Comments on ‘A new measure of monetary shocks: Derivation and
        implications’ By Christina Romer and David Romer.” July 17 2004, presented at NBER
        EFG meeting .
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/talk_notes_new_measure_2.pdf

Cochrane, John and Monika Piazzesi, 2002. "The Fed and Interest Rates - A High-Frequency
      Identification." American Economic Review, 92(2): 90-95.

Cogan, John F., Tobias Cwik, John B. Taylor, and Volker Wieland. "New Keynesian versus old
      Keynesian government spending multipliers." Journal of Economic dynamics and control
      34, no. 3 (2010): 281-295.

Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2011. “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation, and the
       Great Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation.” American Economic Review 101 (1):
       341–70.

Coibion, Olivier, “Are the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks Big or Small?” American
       Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Volume 4, Number 2, April 2012, pp. 1-32(32).




                                              88
Cook, Timothy., (1989). “Deterrminants of the Federal Funds Rate: 1979-1982,” Federal
      Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, 75: 3-19.

Cook, Timothy. and T.Hahn (1989). “The Effect of Changes in the Federal Funds Rate Target on
       Market Interest Rates in the 1970s, Journal of Monetary Economics, 24: 331-351.

Cover, James Peery, “Asymmetric Effects of Positive and Negative Money-Supply Shocks,” The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 107, No. 4 (Nov., 1992), pp. 1261-1282 .

Crafts, Nicholas and Terence C. Mills. 2012. “Rearmament to the Rescue? New Estimates of the
        Impact of ‘Keynesian’ Policies in 1930s’ Britain.” October Working Paper.

Crouzet, Nicolas and Oh, Hyunseung, “What Do Inventories tell us about News-Driven Business
      Cycles?” Columbia University, November 2013.

D’Amico, Stefania and Thomas B. King, “What Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Do?” Federal
     Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2015-10, November 2015.

Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger. "Sectoral job creation and destruction responses to oil
       price changes." Journal of monetary economics 48.3 (2001): 465-512.

Eichenbaum, Martin S. (1992) “Comment on Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts:
      The Effects of Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review 36(5): 1001-1011.

Elliott, Graham. "On the robustness of cointegration methods when regressors almost have unit
         roots." Econometrica (1998): 149-158.

Erceg, Christopher J., Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust, “Can Long-Run Restrictions
       Identify Technology Shocks?” Journal of the European Economic Association, Volume
       3, Issue 6, pages 1237–1278, December 2005.

Evans, Charles L. "Productivity shocks and real business cycles." Journal of Monetary
      Economics 29.2 (1992): 191-208.

Evans, Charles L. and David A. Marshall, “Fundamental Economic Shocks and the
      Macroeconomy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 41, No. 8 (December
      2009).

Farhi,, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, “Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency Unions,”
        NBER Working Paper No. 18381, September 2012.

Faust, Jon and Eric M. Leeper, “When Do Long-Run Identifying Restrictions Give Reliable
       Results?” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics Volume 15, Issue 3, 1997 .

Faust, Jon. (1998). “The Robustness of Identified VAR Conclusions about Money. Carnegie-
       Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 49:207-244.


                                              89
Faust, Jon, Eric T. Swanson, and Jonathan H. Wright (2004), “Identifying VARS based on high
        frequency futures data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 51, Issue 6, September
        2004, Pages 1107–113.

Favero, Carlo and Francesco Giavazzi, 2012.”Measuring Tax Multipliers: The Narrative Method
       in Fiscal VARs,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(2), 69–94.

Fernald, John G. "Roads to prosperity? Assessing the link between public capital and
       productivity." American Economic Review (1999): 619-638.

Fernald, John G. "Trend breaks, long-run restrictions, and contractionary technology
       improvements." Journal of Monetary Economics 54.8 (2007): 2467-2485.

Fernald, John G. “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity,” Federal
       Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-19, April 2014.

Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Juan Rubio-Ramirez, Thomas J. Sargent, and Mark W. Watson. "A,
      B, Cs (and Ds) of Understanding VARs." American Economic Review 97, no. 3 (2007).

Fisher, Jonas DM. "The dynamic effects of neutral and investment specific technology shocks."
        Journal of political Economy 114.3 (2006): 413-451.

Fisher, Jonas D.M. 2010. “Comment on ‘Letting Different Views of the Business Cycle
       Compete’” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Vol. 4, 457-474.

Fisher, Jonas D.M., and Ryan Peters, “Using Stock Returns to Identify Government Spending
        Shocks,” The Economic Journal, 120 (May 2010): 414-436.

Forni, Mario, Luca Gambetti, Luca Sala, “No News in Business Cycles,” The Economic Journal
       124 (December 2014): 1168-1191.

Francis, Neville and Valerie A. Ramey, “The Source of Historical Fluctuations: An Analysis
       using Long-Run Restrictions,” with Neville Francis, NBER International Seminar on
       Macroeconomics 2004, eds. Richard Clarida, Jeffrey Frankel, Francesco Giavazzi, and
       Kenneth West, pp. 17-49

Francis, Neville, and Valerie A. Ramey. "Is the technology-driven real business cycle hypothesis
       dead? Shocks and aggregate fluctuations revisited." Journal of Monetary Economics 52.8
       (2005): 1379-1399.

Francis, Neville, and Valerie A. Ramey. "Measures of per Capita Hours and Their Implications
       for the Technology Hours Debate." Journal of Money, credit and Banking 41.6 (2009):
       1071-1097.




                                               90
Francis, Neville, Michael T. Owyang, Jennifer E. Rousch, and Ricardo DiCecio , “A Flexible
       Finite-Horizon Alternative to Long-Run Restrictions with an Application to Technology
       Shocks,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, October 2014, 96(4): 638–647.

Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States: 1867-1960,
      National Bureau of Economic Research, 1963.

Friedman, Milton, “The Role of Monetary Policy, ”American Economic Review, 58(1): (March
      1968).

Frisch, Ragnar, “Propagation Problems and Impulse Problems in Dynamic Economics,”
       Economic essays in honor of Gustav Cassel (1933), pp. 171–205 (London).

Galí, J., 1999. Technology, employment, and the business cycle: Do technology shocks explain
        aggregate fluctuations, American Economic Review 89, 249-271.

Galí, Jordi, J. David López Salido, and Javier Vallés. "Understanding the effects of government
        spending on consumption." Journal of the European Economic Association 5.1 (2007):
        227-270.

Gechert, Sebastian, “What Fiscal Policy is Most Effective? A Meta Regression Analysis,”
      forthcoming Oxford Economic Papers.

Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi, “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic
        Activity,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1) (January 2015) 44–76.

Giavazzi, Francesco, and Marco Pagano, 1990, “Can Severe Fiscal Consolidations Be
      Expansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries,” NBER Macroeconomics
      Annual, Vol. 5 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Giavazzi, Francesco, and Marco Pagano, 1996, “Non-Keynesian Effects of Fiscal Policy
      Changes: International Evidence and the Swedish Experience,” Swedish Economic Policy
      Review, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 67–103.

Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajšek. 2012. “Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations.”
       American Economic Review 102 (4): 1692–1720.

Gospodinov, Nikolay, Ana María Herrera, and Elena Pesavento. "Unit Roots, Cointegration, and
      Pretesting in Var Models." VAR Models in Macroeconomics–New Developments and
      Applications: Essays in Honor of Christopher A. Sims. Emerald Group Publishing
      Limited, 2013. 81-115.

Gordon, Robert J. and Robert Krenn. 2010. “The End of the Great Depression: VAR Insight on
      the Roles of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” NBER Working Paper 16380, September.




                                              91
Granger, C.W.J., “Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross-spectral
      Methods,” Econometrica Vol. 37, No. 3 (Aug., 1969), pp. 424-438 .

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huffman. "Investment, capacity utilization,
      and the real business cycle." The American Economic Review (1988): 402-417.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. "Long-run implications of investment-
      specific technological change." The American Economic Review (1997): 342-362.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. "The role of investment-specific
      technological change in the business cycle." European Economic Review 44.1 (2000): 91-
      115.

Greenwood, Jeremy, and Boyan Jovanovic. "The Information-Technology Revolution and the
      Stock Market." American Economic Review (1999): 116-122.

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack and Eric Swanson, “The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest
      Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models,”
      American Economic Review, Vol. 95, No. 1 (Mar., 2005), pp. 425-436.

Hall, Robert E. "Labor supply and aggregate fluctuations." Carnegie-Rochester Conference
       Series on Public Policy. Vol. 12. North-Holland, 1980.

Hall, Robert E. "The role of consumption in economic fluctuations." The American business
       cycle: Continuity and change. University of Chicago Press, 1986. 237-266.

Hall, Robert E., “The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry,” JPE, October
       1988, 96(5), 921-947.

Hall, Robert E., “Invariance Properties of Solow’s Productivity Residual,” in Peter Diamond
       (ed.), Growth/ Productivity/Unemployment: Essays to Celebrate Bob Solow’s Birthday,
       MIT Press, 71-112, 1990.

Hall, Robert E. 2009. “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More Output?”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2 (2009): 183-231.

Hamilton, James D., "Oil and the Macroeconomy Since World War II," Journal of Political
      Economy, April 1983, pp. 228-248.

Hamilton, James D., "Historical Causes of Postwar Oil Shocks and Recessions," Energy Journal,
      January 1985, pp. 97-116.

Hamilton, James D. “What Is an Oil Shock?” Journal of Econometrics, April 2003, vol. 113, pp.
      363-398.




                                             92
Hamilton, James D. “Macroeconomics and ARCH.” In               Volatility and Time Series
      Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Robert Engle, edited by Tim Bollerslev, Jeffrey
      Russell, and Mark Watson, 79-96, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent, “Two Difficulties in Interpreting Vector
      Autoregressions,” in Rational Expectations Econometrics, ed. Lars Peter Hansen and
      Thomas J. Sargent. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1991, 77-119.

Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein. "Monetary policy and long-term real rates." Journal of
      Financial Economics 115.3 (2015): 429-448.

Hausman, Joshua K., "Fiscal Policy and Economic Recovery: The Case of the 1936 Veterans'
     Bonus" forthcoming American Economic Review.

Hobijn, Bart, and Boyan Jovanovic. "The Information-Technology Revolution and the Stock
       Market: Evidence." American Economic Review 91.5 (2001): 1203-1220.

Hoover, Kevin D. and Stephen J. Perez, “Post hoc ergo propter once more an evaluation of ‘does
      monetary policy matter?’ in the spirit of James Tobin,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
      Volume 34, Issue 1, August 1994, Pages 47–74.

House, Christopher L., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2006. "Phased-In Tax Cuts and Economic
      Activity." American Economic Review, 96(5): 1835-1849.

Ilzetski, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, Carlos A. Végh, "How Big (Small?) are Fiscal
        Multipliers?" 2013. "How big (small?) are fiscal multipliers?," Journal of Monetary
        Economics, Elsevier, vol. 60(2), pages 239-254.

Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo, “Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?"
      American Economic Review, 99(4) 2009, 1097-1118.

Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections.”
       American Economic Review 95 (1): 161-82.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, “Investment shocks and
        business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 57, Issue 2, March 2010,
        Pages 132–145.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, “Investment shocks and the
        relative price of investment,” Review of Economic Dynamics, Volume 14, Issue 1,
        January 2011, Pages 102–121.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London:
      Macmillan.




                                             93
Khan, Hashmat and John Tsoukalas, 2012, The quantitative importance of news shocks in
      estimated dsge models, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44(8), 1535-1561.

Kilian, Lutz. "Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in
        the Crude Oil Market." The American Economic Review (2009): 1053-1069.

Kilian, Lutz, and Robert J. Vigfusson. "Are the responses of the US economy asymmetric in
        energy price increases and decreases?." Quantitative Economics 2.3 (2011): 419-453.

King, Robert, Charles Plosser, James Stock and Mark W. Watson (1991), “Stochastic Trends and
       Economic Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 81 (4) September 1991, 819-840.

Kliem, Martin, and Alexander Kriwoluzky. "Reconciling narrative monetary policy disturbances
       with structural VAR model shocks?" Economics Letters 121.2 (2013): 247-251.

Komunjer, Ivana and Serena Ng, “Dynamic Identification of DSGE Models,”Econometrica, Vol.
     79, No. 6 (November, 2011), 1995-2032.

Koop, Gary, M. Hashem Pesaran, and Simon M. Potter. "Impulse response analysis in nonlinear
      multivariate models." Journal of econometrics 74.1 (1996): 119-147.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on
       Interest Rates,”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2011.

Kurmann, André and Elmar Mertens, “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations:
     Comment,” American Economic Review " 104.4 (2014): 1439-1445.

Kuttner, Kenneth N., “Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed funds
       futures market,” Journal of Monetary Economics Volume 47, Issue 3, June 2001, Pages
       523–544.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
      Econometrica Vol. 50, No. 6 (Nov., 1982), pp. 1345-1370.

Lakdawala, Aeimit, “Changes in Federal Reserve Preferences,” Michigan State University
      working paper, April 2015.

Leduc, Sylvain and Daniel Wilson. "Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory and
       Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment,” (NBER Macroeconomics
       Annual 27, no. 1 (2012), pp. 89-142..

Leeper, Eric M., “Narrative and VAR Approaches to Monetary Policy: Common Identification
       Problems,” Journal of Monetary Economics 40 (1997): 641-657.

Leeper, Eric M., Alexander Richter, and Shu-Chun Susan Yang, “Quantitative Effects of Fiscal
       Foresight,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2): 1-27.


                                              94
Leeper, Eric M., Todd B. Walker, Shu-Chun Susan Yang, “Fiscal Foresight and Information
       Flows,” Econometrica 81 (3) May 2013: 1115-1145. (Also, unpublished supplement at:
       https://www.econometricsociety.org/sites/default/files/8337_extensions_0.pdf .

Leigh, Daniel, P.Devries, C.Freedman, Jaime.Guajardo, D.Laxton, Andrea.Pescatori "Will It
       Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation" Chapter 3, World Economic
       Outlook, IMF, October 2010.

Litterman, Robert B. and Laurence Weiss, “Money, Real Interest Rates, and Output: A
       Reinterpretation of Post-War Data,” Econometrica, Vol. 53, No. 1 (Jan., 1985), pp. 129-
       156.

Lundsford, Kurt G., “Identifying Structural VARs with a Proxy Variable and a Test for a Weak
      Proxy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper, 15-28, December 2015.

Marcellino, Massimo, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson, “A comparison of direct and
       iterated multistep AR methods for forecasting macroeconomic time series,” Journal of
       Econometrics, 2006.

McCallum, Bennett T., "A Reconsideration of Sims' Evidence Concerning Monetarism,"
      Economics Letters, 1983, 13 (2-3), 167-71.

McGrattan, Ellen R. "The macroeconomic effects of distortionary taxation." Journal of Monetary
      Economics 33.3 (1994): 573-601.

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn, 2011a “Technology-Hours Redux: Tax Changes and the
      Measurement of Technology Shocks,” NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics
      2010.

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn, 2011b, “Understanding the Aggregate Effects of
      Anticipated and Unanticipated Tax Policy Shocks,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
      Volume 14:1, January 2011.

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2012. "Empirical Evidence on the Aggregate Effects of
      Anticipated and Unanticipated US Tax Policy Shocks." American Economic Journal:
      Economic Policy, 4(2): 145-81.

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2013. "The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate
      Income Tax Changes in the United States." American Economic Review, 103(4): 1212-47.

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn., “A Reconciliation of SVAR and Narrative Estimates of
      Tax Multipliers,” Journal of Monetary Economics 68 (2014): S1-S19.

Miyamoto, Wataru and Nguyen, Thuy Lan, “News Shocks and Business Cycles: Evidence from
     Forecast Data,” Columbia University, Nov. 2013.


                                             95
Montiel Olea, Jose Luis and Carolin Pflueger, 2013. “A Robust Test for Weak Instruments.”
      Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 31(3): 358–369.

Montiel Olea, Jose Luis, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson, “Uniform Inference in SVARs
      with External Instruments,” December 2015 manuscript.

Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig, “What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks? Journal of
      Applied Econometrics 24 (September/October 2009): 960-992.

Nakamura, Emi, and Steinsson, Jón. (2014). Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence
     from US Regions. The American Economic Review, 104(3), 753-792.

Nakamura, Emi, and Steinsson, Jón, “High Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-
     Neutrality,” October 2015 working paper.

Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, “A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity
      and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix,” Econometrica, 1987, vol. 55, 3, pp.
      703-708.

Oh, Hyunseung, and Ricardo Reis. "Targeted transfers and the fiscal response to the great
      recession." Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (2012): S50-S64.

Olivei, Giovanni, and Silvana Tenreyro. "The timing of monetary policy shocks." The American
        Economic Review (2007): 636-663.

Owyang, Michael and Garey Ramey, “Regime switching and monetary policy measurement,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 51, Issue 8, November 2004, Pages 1577–1597.

Owyang, Michael T., Valerie A. Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy. "Are Government Spending
     Multipliers Greater during Periods of Slack? Evidence from Twentieth-Century Historical
     Data." The American Economic Review 103.3 (2013): 129-134.

Pappa, Evi. "The Effects of Fiscal Shocks on Employment and the Real Wage,” International
       Economic Review 50.1 (2009): 217-244.

Perotti, Roberto, “Expectations and Fiscal Policy: An Empirical Investigation,” 2011 Bocconi
        working paper.

Perron, Pierre. "The great crash, the oil price shock, and the unit root hypothesis." Econometrica:
       Journal of the Econometric Society (1989): 1361-1401.

Pflueger, Carolin E., and Su Wang. "A robust test for weak instruments in Stata." Stata Journal
       15, no. 1 (2015): 216-225.




                                                96
Piazzesi, Monika and Eric T. Swanson (2008), “Futures prices as risk-adjusted forecasts of
       monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 55, Issue 4, May 2008, Pages
       677–691.

Pigou, Arthur C. 1927. Industrial fluctuations. London: Macmillan.

Poterba, James M. "Explaining the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt bonds: The role
       of expected tax policy." Studies in state and local public finance. University of Chicago
       Press, 1986. 5-52.

Prescott, Edward C., “Theory Ahead of Business-Cycle Measurement,” Carnegie-Rochester
       Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 25, Autumn 1986, Pages 11–44.

Primiceri, Giorgio, “Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary Policy,”
       Review of Economic Studies (2005) 72 (3): 821-852.

Ramey, Valerie A. and Matthew Shapiro, “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects of
      Government Spending,” Carnegie Rochester Conference on Public Policy (1998).

Ramey, Valerie A., “Defense News Shocks, 1939-2008: An Analysis Based on News Sources,”
      UCSD manuscript, 2009a.
      http://econ.ucsd.edu/~vramey/research/Defense_News_Narrative.pdf .

Ramey, Valerie A., “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,” NBER
      Working Paper No. 15464, October 2009. 2009b.

Ramey, Valerie A., “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 126 (February 2011a): 1-50.

Ramey, Valerie A. "Can government purchases stimulate the economy?." Journal of Economic
      Literature 49, no. 3 (2011b): 673-685.

Ramey, Valerie A. “Government Spending and Private Activity,” Fiscal Policy After the
      Financial Crisis eds. Alberto Alesina and Francesco Giavazzi, University of Chicago
      Press. 2013a.

Ramey, Valerie A., “Discussion of ‘Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory and
      Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment’” by Sylvain Leduc and
      Daniel Wilson 2012 NBER Macroeconomics Annual Conference, 2013b.

Ramey, Valerie A., and Daniel J. Vine. "Oil, Automobiles, and the US Economy: How Much
      Have Things Really Changed?." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, Volume 25.
      University of Chicago Press, 2011. 333-367.

Ramey, Valerie A. and Sarah Zubairy, “Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and in
      Bad: Evidence from 20th Century Historical Data,” November 2014 working paper.


                                              97
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the
      Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz,” NBER Macroeconomic Annual 1989.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “Identification and the Narrative Approach: A Reply
      to Leeper,” Journal of Monetary Economics 40 (1997): 659-665.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, “Federal Reserve Information and the Behavior of
      Interest Rates.” American Economic Review, June 2000, 90(3), pp. 429–57.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, “A New Measure of Monetary Policy Shocks:
      Derivation and Implications,” American Economic Review, 94(4) (September 2004):
      1055-84 .

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
      Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review, 100
      (June 2010): 763-801 .

Rotemberg, Julio, and Woodford, Michael, “Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of Aggregate
      Demand on Economic Activity,” Journal of Political Economy, 100 (1992), 1153–1297.

Rudebusch, Glenn, “Do Measures of Monetary Policy in a VAR Make Sense?” International
      Economic Review , Vol. 39, No. 4, Symposium on Forecasting and Empirical Methods in
      Macroeconomics and Finance (Nov., 1998), pp. 907-931.

Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2012), “What’s News in Business Cycles?”
       Econometrica, Volume 80, Issue 6, pages 2733–2764, November 2012.

Shapiro, Matthew D. and Mark W. Watson (1988), “The Sources of Business Cycle
       Fluctuations,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1988.

Shapiro, Matthew D. "Cyclical productivity and the workweek of capital." The American
       Economic Review (1993): 229-233.

Shapiro, Matthew D., “Federal Reserve Policy: Cause and Effect,” in Monetary Policy ed. N.
       Gregory Mankiw, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1994.

Sims, Christopher A. “Money, Income, and Causality,” American Economic Review, Vol. 62, No.
       4 (Sep., 1972), pp. 540-552.

Sims, Christopher A. 1980a. “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica. 48, pp. 1-48.

Sims, Christopher A. 1980b. “Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles: Monetarism
       Reconsidered,” The American Economic Review Vol. 70, No. 2, (May, 1980), pp. 250-
       257.



                                             98
Sims, Christopher A. "Interpreting the macroeconomic time series facts: The effects of monetary
       policy." European Economic Review 36.5 (1992): 975-1000.

Sims, Christopher A., James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson. "Inference in linear time series
       models with some unit roots." Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society (1990):
       113-144.

Sims, Christopher A., “Discussion of Glenn Rudebusch, ‘Do Measures of Monetary Policy in a
       VAR Make Sense?”” International Economic Review , Vol. 39, No. 4, Symposium on
       Forecasting and Empirical Methods in Macroeconomics and Finance (Nov., 1998), pp.
       907-931

Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha, (2006a) “Were there Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary
      Policy?” American Economic Review, Vol. 96, No. 1 (Mar., 2006), pp. 54-81.

Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha, (2006b), “Does Monetary Policy Generate Recessions?”
      Macroeconomic Dynamics, 10 (2) April 2006: 231-272.

Slutzky, Eugen, “The Summation of Random Causes as the Source of Cyclic Processes,”
       Econometrica, Vol. 5, No. (2) (April 1937), pp. 105-146.

Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model
       of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economics Association, Volume 1, Issue 5,
       pages 1123–1175, September 2003.

Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A Bayesian
       DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3) June 2007: 586-606.

Solow, Robert M., “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” The Review of
       Economics and Statistics Vol. 39, No. 3 (Aug., 1957), pp. 312-320.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Forecasting Using Principal Components From a Large
       Number of Predictors,” Journal of the American Statistical Association Volume 97, Issue
       460, 2002.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, NBER Summer Institute Minicourse 2008: What’s New
       in Econometrics–Time Series, Lecture 7: Structural VARs,” Cambridge, Mass.: National
       Institute for Economic Research. www.nber.org/minicourse_2008.html.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007–09 Recession,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2012.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Factor Models and Structural Vector Autoregressions in
       Macroeconomics,” forthcoming Handbook of Macroeconomics, eds. John B. Taylor and
       Harald Uhlig.



                                              99
Stock, James H., Jonathan H. Wright, and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. “A survey of weak instruments
       and weak identification in generalized method of moments.” Journal of Business &
       Economic Statistics 20 (4): 518–29.

Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo. "Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression."
       Identification and inference for econometric models: Essays in honor of Thomas
       Rothenberg (2005).

Strongin, Steven, “The identification of monetary policy disturbances explaining the liquidity
       puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 35, Issue 3, June 1995, Pages 463–
       497.

Tenreyro, Silvana and Gregory Thwaites, Gregory (2013) “Pushing on a string: US monetary
       policy is less powerful in recessions,” CEP Discussion Papers, CEPDP1218. Centre for
       Economic Performance, London School of Economics and Political Science, London,
       UK.

Thoma, Mark A., “Subsample instability and asymmetries in money-income causality,” Journal
      of Econometrics, Volume 64, Issues 1–2, September–October 1994, Pages 279–306.

Uhlig, Harald. 1997. "What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an
       agnostic identification procedure." Tillburg University Manuscript.

Uhlig, H., 2003. What drives GNP? Unpublished manuscript, Euro Area Business Cycle
       Network.

Uhlig, Harald. "Do technology shocks lead to a fall in total hours worked?." Journal of the
       European Economic Association (2004): 361-371.

Uhlig, Harald. "What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an agnostic
       identification procedure." Journal of Monetary Economics 52.2 (2005): 381-419.

Uhlig, Harald. "Some fiscal calculus." The American Economic Review (2010): 30-34.

Uhlig, Harald, “Economics and Reality,” Journal of Macroeconomics 34 (March 2012): 29-41.

Velde, François R. "Chronicle of a Deflation Unforetold." Journal of Political Economy 117.4
       (2009): 591-634.

Weise, Charles L.,“The Asymmetric Effects of Monetary Policy: A Nonlinear Vector
      Autoregression Approach,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 31, No. 1 (Feb.,
      1999), pp. 85-108.

Wieland, Johannes and Mu-Jeung Yang, “Financial Dampening,” September 2015 working
      paper.



                                             100
Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia, “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy
       at the Zero Lower Bound,” forthcoming Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.

Yang, Shu-Chun Susan. "Quantifying tax effects under policy foresight." Journal of Monetary
       Economics 52.8 (2005): 1557-1568.




                                            101
                 Table 3.1. Summary of Monetary Policy Shock Effects on Output and Prices

Paper                Method, sample         Trough effect of          % of output        Price Puzzle?
                                            100 basis point           explained by
                                            funds peak                shock
Christiano,          SVAR, 1965q3 –          -0.7% at 8 quarters.     4.4% at 2 years    Yes, but very
Eichenbaum,          1995q3                                                              small
Evans (1999) –
FFR identification
Faust, Swanson,      HFI, 1991m2 –          -0.6% at 10 months
Wright (2004)        2001m7

Romer and            Narrative/Greenbook    -4.3% at 24 months        Major part         No, but prices
Romer (2004)         1970m1 – 1996m12                                                    don’t change for
                                                                                         22 months
Uhlig (2005)         Sign restrictions,     Positive, but not         5 – 10% at all     No (by
                     1965m1 – 1996m12       statistically different   horizons.          construction)
                                            from 0
Bernanke, Boivin,    FAVAR, 1959m1 –        -0.6% at 18 months        5% at 5 years      Yes
and Eliasz (2005)    2001m7

Smets-Wouters        Estimated DSGE         -1.8 at 4 quarter         10% at 1 year      No
(2007)               model                  trough                    (trough)
                     1966Q1 – 2004Q4
Boivin, Kiley,       FAVAR, 1962m1-         -1.6% at 8 months in                         Only in the early
Mishkin (2010)       79m9, 1984m1-          early period,                                period.
                     2008m12                -0.7% at 24 months
                                            in later period
Coibion (2012)       “Robust” Romer-        -2 % at 18 months         “Medium” part      Yes, sometimes
                     Romer methods,
                     1970m1 – 1996m12
Barakchian-          HFI, Romer hybrid     -5 % at 23 months            50% at 3 years   Yes
Crowe (2013)         VAR, 1988m12-
                     2008m6
Gertler-Karadi       HFI-Proxy SVAR,       -2.2 % at 18 months           ?               No
(2015)               1979m7 – 2012m6
                     (1991m1-2012m6
                     for instruments)
Amir-Uhlig           Bayesian FAVAR        -1.3% at 9 months          7% at 24 months    No (by
(2015)               with sign                                                           construction)
                     restrictions, 1960m2-
                     2010m6




                                                   102
           Table 3.2. Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks on Industrial Production: My Estimates

Method & sample                                   Trough effect of 100         Forecast Error Variance
                                                  basis point funds peak       Decompositions
                                                  (%)                          (percentages) 24 months

CEE: 1965m1 – 1996m6                              -0.48                        6.6
CEE: 1959m1 – 2007m12                             -0.20                        0.5
R&R VAR: 1969m3 – 1996m12                         -1.38                        8.8
R&R VAR: 1969m3 – 2007m12                         -0.83                        2.7
R&R, Jordà method: 1969m3 – 1996m12               -0.83
R&R, Jordà method, no recursiveness               -0.90
assumption: 1969m3 – 1996m12
Gertler-Karadi, proxy SVAR: 1990m1 – 2012m6          -2.2
Gertler_Karadi Jordà method: 1990m1 – 2012m6         -1, but then rises to +4
Notes: See text for the description of the CEE (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999)), R&R (Romer and
Romer (2004)) VARs, and Gertler-Karadi proxy SVARs.




                                                  103
         Table 4.1. Summary of Government Spending Multiplier Estimates for the Aggregate U.S.
Study                         Sample             Identification                     Implied spending
                                                                                    multiplier
Barro (1981), Hall (1986),    Annual             Use military spending as           0.6 - 1
Hall (2009), Barro-Redlick    historical         instrument for government
(2011)                        samples.           spending.
Rotemberg-Woodford            Quarterly, 1947    Residuals from regression of       1.25
(1992)                        - 1989             military spending on own lags
                                                 and lags of military
                                                 employment
Ramey-Shapiro (1998),         Quarterly, 1947    Ramey-Shapiro dates, which         0.6 – 1.2, depending
Edelberg, Eichenbaum,         – late 1990s or    are based on narrative             on sample &
and Fisher (1999),            2000s              evidence of anticipated            whether calculated
Eichenbaum-Fisher (2005),                        military buildups                  as cumulative or
Cavallo (2005)                                                                      peak.
Blanchard-Perotti (2002)      Quarterly, 1960    SVARS, Choleski                    0.9 to 1.29,
                              - 1997             decomposition with G ordered       calculated as peak
                                                 first                              multipliers.
Mountford-Uhlig (2009)        Quarterly, 1955    Sign restrictions on an SVAR       0.65 for a deficit-
                              - 2000                                                financed increase in
                                                                                    spending.
Romer-Bernstein (2009)        Quarterly          Average multipliers from           Rising to 1.57 by the
                                                 FRB/US model and a private         8th quarter
                                                 forecasting firm model
Cogan, Cwik, Taylor,          Quarterly, 1966    Estimated Smets-Wouters            0.64 at peak
Wieland (2010)                – 2004             Model
Ramey (2011)                  Quarterly, 1939    VAR using shocks to the            0.6 to 1.2, depending
                              - 2008 and         expected present discounted        on sample.
                              subsamples         value of government spending
                                                 caused by military events,
                                                 based on narrative evidence
Fisher-Peters (2010)          Quarterly, 1960    VAR using shocks to the            1.5 based on
                              – 2007             excess stock returns of military   cumulative effects.
                                                 contractors
Auerbach-Gorodnichenko        Quarterly, 1947    SVAR that controls for             Expansion: -0.3 to
(2011)                        - 2008             professional forecasts, Ramey      0.8
                                                 news.                              Recession: 1 to 3.6
                                                                                    (uses a variety of
                                                 Key innovation is regime           ways to calculate
                                                 switching model                    multipliers)
Ben Zeev and Pappa            Quarterly, 1947-   Shock that (i) is orthogonal to    2.1 based on integral
(forthcoming                  2007               current defense spending; and      multiplier at 6
                                                 (ii) best explains future          quarters.
                                                 movements in defense
                                                 spending over a horizon of
                                                 five years.




                                                 104
Table 4.2. Multiplier Estimates (HAC standard errors in parenthesis)

Horizon (in quarters)        Blanchard-Perotti             Ramey news                   Ben Zeev-Pappa news

0                            0.65 (0.24)                   -7.53 (7.26)                  -7.37 (5.85)
4                            0.37 (0.23)                   1.37 (0.33)                   2.91 (1.13)
8                            0.39 (0.32)                   0.80 (0.25)                   1.41 (0.61)
12                           0.39 (0.44)                   0.77 (0.27)                   1.24 (0.71)
16                           0.40 (0.58)                   0.60 (0.36)                   1.10 (1.01)
20                           0.44 (0.63)                   0.69 (0.48)                   1.17 (1.46)
Notes: Multipliers estimated using equation (4.2). All regressions also include two lags of the shock (to mop up any
serial correlation), real GDP (divided by potential GDP), real government purchases (divided by potential GDP), the
tax rate, and a quadratic trend.




Table 4.3. Shock Contribution to the Forecast Error Variance of Government Spending and Output

                 Blanchard-Perotti                 Ramey news                        Ben Zeev-Pappa news
Horizon
(in quarters)    Government                        Government                        Government
                 Spending        Output            Spending          Output          Spending        Output
             0           100.0               5.5               1.0             2.2             1.4              5.6
             4            96.2               3.3              31.8             2.6            14.0             10.1
             8            90.5               2.9              50.2             2.9            27.0             12.6
           12             86.5               2.5              50.5            2.5             29.8             12.1
           16             83.1               2.4              46.7            2.4             29.4             11.8
            20             80.2                2.3              43.0        2.2         28.7           11.7
Notes: Based on standard VAR with the shock, log output, log government spending, log taxes, and a quadratic
trend. The shock is ordered first and 4 lags of the variables are included.




                                                        105
                Table 4.4. Summary of Some Tax Multiplier Estimates for the Aggregate U.S.

Study                      Main sample         Identification                     Implied tax multiplier
Evans (1969)               Quarterly, 1966-    Based on estimates of              -0.5 to -1.7, depending
                           1974                equations of Wharton, Klein-       on horizon, type of tax,
                                               Goldberger, and Brookings          and model
                                               models
Blanchard-Perotti          Quarterly, 1960 -   Assumed output elasticities in     -0.78 to -1.33 (peak to
(2002)                     1997                an SVAR. “Taxes” are actually      impact)
                                               taxes less transfers.
Mountford-Uhlig            Quarterly, 1955 -   Sign restrictions on a VAR.        -5 for a tax increase that
(2009)                     2000                Use same variables as BP.          reduces the deficit.
Romer-Romer (2010)         Quarterly, 1947 –   Legislated tax changes driven      -3, based on peak effect.
                           2007                by an inherited government         Romer-Romer (2009)
                                               budget deficit or to promote       show that these tax
                                               future growth, based on            shocks do not raise
                                               narrative evidence.                government spending
                                                                                  significantly, so these are
                                                                                  close to pure tax shocks.
Barro-Redlick (2011)       Annual, 1917 -      Average marginal income tax        -1.1
                           2006 and            rate
                           subsamples
Favero-Giavazzi            Quarterly, 1950-    Romer-Romer shocks                 -0.5
(2011)                     2006                embedded in an SVAR
Caldara and Kamps          Quarterly, 1947-    SVAR using outside                 -0.65 (peak to impact)
(2012)                     2006                elasticities
Mertens-Ravn (2014)        Quarterly, 1950 –   Proxy SVAR using Romer-            -3 at 6 quarters
                           2006                Romer unanticipated shocks


Table 4.5. Tax Shock Contribution to the Forecast Error Variance of Output

Horizon (in quarters)               Romer-Romer unanticipated            Leeper, Richter, Walker (2012)
                                                                         anticipated tax series
0                                   1.6                                  0.4
4                                   0.4                                  5.7
8                                   0.5                                  4.8
12                                  1.1                                  4.4
16                                  1.8                                  4.3
20                                  2.1                                  4.3
Notes: Based on standard VAR with the shock, log output, log government spending, log taxes, and a quadratic
trend. The shock is ordered first and 4 lags of the variables are included.




                                                    106
Table 5.1. Estimated Importance of Technology Shocks in SVAR Models
Study                      Method                                    Type News? % of output
                                                                                explained
Galí (1999), Francis-      Long-run restrictions, hours in first     TFP No     Very little
Ramey (2005)               differences
Christiano,                Long-run restrictions, hours in           TFP     No        31 – 45% for horizons
Eichenbaum, Vigfusson      levels                                                      up to 20 quarters
(2004)
Christiano,                Long-run restrictions, hours in first     TFP     No        1 – 17% for horizons
Eichenbaum, Vigfusson      differences                                                 up to 20 quarters
(2004)
Basu, Fernald, Kimball     Utilization and effort adjusted TFP       TFP     No        17 to 40% from 1 to 3
(2006)                                                                                 years
Beaudry and Portier        Short-run or long-run restrictions        TFP     Yes       50%
(2006)
Fisher (2006)              Long-run restrictions involving both      TFP     No        32% at 12 quarters (see
                           labor productivity and investment                           papers for more
                           goods prices                                                details)
Fisher (2006)              Long-run restrictions involving both      IST     No        26% (49%) at 12
                           labor productivity and investment                           quarters in early (late)
                           goods prices                                                sample
Mertens and Ravn           Long-run restrictions, cointegration,     TFP     No        50 – 55% at business
(2010)                     include taxes                                               cycle frequencies
Barsky and Sims            Medium horizon restrictions               TFP     Yes       9 – 43 % for horizons
(2011)                                                                                 up to 24 quarters.
Barsky and Sims            Medium horizon restrictions               TFP     No        6 – 20 % for horizons
(2011)                                                                                 up to 24 quarters
Francis, Owyang,           Medium horizon restrictions               TFP     No        15 – 40% for horizons
Roush, and DiCecio                                                                     up to 32 quarters.
(2014)
Francis, Owyang,           Long-run restrictions                     TFP     No        40 – 55% for horizons
Roush, and DiCecio                                                                     up to 32 quarters
(2014)
Ben Zeev and Khan          Medium horizon restrictions               IST     Yes       73% at 8 quarters
(2015)
Ben Zeev and Khan          Medium horizon restrictions               IST     No        Very little
(2015)
Ben Zeev and Khan          Medium horizon restrictions               TFP     No        10% at 8 quarters
(2015)
Notes: TFP denotes neutral total factor productivity technology, IST denotes investment-specific technology, MEI
denotes marginal efficiency of investment.




                                                      107
Table 5.2. Estimated Importance of Technology Shocks in DSGE Models

Study                Model Features                        Type       News? % of output explained
                                                                            at business cycle
                                                                            frequencies

Prescott (1986)      Calibrated neoclassical DSGE          TFP        No     75%
                     model
McGrattan (1994)     Neoclassical model with               TFP        No     41%
                     distortionary taxes and government
                     spending
Greenwood,           Calibrated DSGE model,                IST        No     30%
Hercowitz, Krusell   technology identified with relative
(2000)               price of investment
Smets and Wouters    New Keynesian model with many         TFP        No     15 % - 30% from
(2007)               types of shocks                                         horizon 1 – 10 quarters

Justiniano,          New Keynesian model with many         TFP        No     25%
Primiceri,           types of shocks
Tambalotti (2011)
Justiniano,          New Keynesian model with many         IST        No     0%
Primiceri,           types of shocks
Tambalotti (2011)
Justiniano,          New Keynesian model with many         MEI        No     60%
Primiceri,           types of shocks
Tambalotti (2011)
Schmitt-Grohe and    Distinguishes unanticipated vs.       TFP        No     25%
Uribe (2012)         anticipated, TFP versus investment
                     specific, no sticky prices
Schmitt-Grohe and    Distinguishes unanticipated vs.       TFP        Yes    3%
Uribe (2012)         anticipated, TFP versus investment
                     specific, no sticky prices
Schmitt-Grohe and    Distinguishes unanticipated vs.       IST        No     21%
Uribe (2012)         anticipated, TFP versus investment
                     specific, no sticky prices
Schmitt-Grohe and    Distinguishes unanticipated vs.       IST        Yes    7%
Uribe (2012)         anticipated, TFP versus investment
                     specific, no sticky prices
Khan and Tsoukalas   New Keynesian model,                  TFP        No     24%
(2012)               distinguishes unanticipated vs.
                     anticipated
Khan and Tsoukalas   New Keynesian model,                  MEI        No     47%
(2012)               distinguishes unanticipated vs.
                     anticipated
Khan and Tsoukalas   New Keynesian model,                  IST        No     1.2%
(2012)               distinguishes unanticipated vs.
                     anticipated
Khan and Tsoukalas   New Keynesian model,                  TFP +      Yes    1.4%
(2012)               distinguishes unanticipated vs.       MEI +
                     anticipated                           IST


                                                 108
Miyamoto and           Extends Schmitt-Grohe-Uribe              TFP         No        19%
Nguyen (2015)          analysis by using data on
                       expectations
Miyamoto and           Extends Schmitt-Grohe-Uribe              TFP         Yes       7%
Nguyen (2015)          analysis by using data on
                       expectations
Miyamoto and           Extends Schmitt-Grohe-Uribe              IST         No        27%
Nguyen (2015)          analysis by using data on
                       expectations
Miyamoto and           Extends Schmitt-Grohe-Uribe              IST         Yes       12%
Nguyen (2015)          analysis by using data on
                       expectations

Notes: TFP denotes neutral total factor productivity technology, IST denotes investment-specific technology, MEI
denotes marginal efficiency of investment.




                                                      109
Table 5.3. Correlation of Various Estimated Technology Shocks (Sample is 1955q2 – 2006q4)

A. Unanticipated TFP Shocks
             gali-tfp  cev-tfp       jf-tfp         ford-tfp       bzk-tfp         jpt-tfp        mn-tfp-p      mn-tfp-s
 gali-tfp         1.00
 cev-tfp          0.62      1.00
 jf-tfp           0.68      0.42           1.00
 ford-tfp         0.75      0.62           0.62           1.00
 bzk-tfp          0.67      0.78           0.54           0.63            1.00
 jpt-tfp          0.68      0.69           0.53           0.54            0.63            1.00
 mn-tfp-p         0.17      0.16           0.20           0.28            0.08            0.16           1.00
 mn-tfp-s         0.52      0.59           0.47           0.52            0.58            0.62           0.10        1.00

B. TFP News Shocks
             bp-news       bs-news        mn-p-n4         mn-p-n8         mn-s-n4            mn-p-n8
 bp-news          1.00
 bs-news          0.25          1.00
 mn-p-n4          0.08          0.12             1.00
 mn-p-n8          0.05          0.00             0.29             1.00
 mn-s-n4          0.04         -0.04             0.53            -0.14             1.00
 mn-p-n8          0.05          0.00             0.29             1.00            -0.14           1.00

C. Unanticipated IST or MEI Shocks
            jf-ist      bzk-ist   jpt-mei          jpt-ist         mn-ist-p         mn-ist-s
 jf-ist            1.00
 bzk-ist           0.17      1.00
 jpt-mei         -0.27       0.05      1.00
 jpt-ist           0.19      0.49     -0.01               1.00
 mn-ist-p          0.03      0.31      0.17               0.20             1.00
 mn-ist-s        -0.13       0.11      0.27               0.14            -0.06            1.00

D. IST News Shocks
              bzk-news      mn-p-n4           mn-p-n8        mn-s-n4         mn-s-n8
 bzk-news           1.00
 mn-p-n4            0.15           1.00
 mn-p-n8            0.02           0.18            1.00
 mn-s-n4            0.12           0.07            0.12            1.00
 mn-s-n8            0.08           0.01            0.02            0.28             1.00


Abbreviations:
ist = investment-specific technology             tfp = total factor productivity               mn = Miyamoto and Nguyen
mei = marginal efficiency of invest.             gali = Gali                                   p = permanent
jpt = Justiniano, Primiceri, Tambolotti          bzk = Ben Zeev and Khan                       s = stationary
cev= Christiano, Eichenbaum, Vigfusson           bp = Beaudry-Portier                          n4 = news with 4 quarter lead
ford = Francis, Owyang, Roush, DiCecio           bs = Barsky Sims                              n8 = news with 8 quarter lead
                                                 jf = John Fernald




                                                             110
Table 5.4 Tests for Serial Correlation and Granger Causality

                  P-value                               P-value
                  Test for significance of own lags     Test for Granger Causality
 gali-tfp                       0.986                              0.020
 cev-tfp                        0.986                              0.000
 jf-tfp                         0.718                              0.001
 jf-ist                         0.644                              0.000
 ford-tfp                       0.991                              0.855
 bp-tfp-news-sr                 0.999                              0.910
 bs-tfp-news                    0.834                              0.935
 bzk-ist-news                   0.724                              0.049
 bzk-ist                        0.981                              0.740
 bzk-tfp                        0.949                              0.992
 jpt-tfp                        0.101                              0.000
 jpt-mei                        0.006                              0.000
 jpt-ist                        0.941                              0.854
 mn-tfp-p                       0.133                              0.000
 mn-ist-p                       0.000                              0.287
 mn-tfp-s                       0.010                              0.008
 mn-ist-s                       0.000                              0.024
 mn-tfp-p-n4                    0.000                              0.001
 mn-tfp-p-n8                    0.000                              0.087
 mn-ist-p-n4                    0.000                              0.924
 mn-ist-p-n8                    0.000                              0.076
 mn-tfp-s-n4                    0.098                              0.134
 mn-tfp-s-n8                    0.353                              0.783
 mn-ist-s-n4                    0.000                              0.497
 mn-ist-s-n8                    0.000                              0.052

Notes: The tests for serial correlation are conducted by regressing the shock on its own two lags and testing the joint
significance. The tests for Granger Causality are conducted by regressing the shock on its own two lags, as well as
two lags of log real GDP, log real consumption, and log real stock prices. The test is on the joint significance of the
lags of the three additional variables.

Abbreviations:
ist = investment-specific technology            tfp = total factor productivity     mn = Miyamoto and Nguyen
mei = marginal efficiency of invest.            gali = Gali                         p = permanent
jpt = Justiniano, Primiceri, Tambolotti         bzk = Ben Zeev and Khan             s = stationary
cev= Christiano, Eichenbaum, Vigfusson          bp = Beaudry-Portier                n4 = news with 4 quarter lead
ford = Francis, Owyang, Roush, DiCecio          bs = Barsky Sims                    n8 = news with 8 quarter lead
                                                jf = John Fernald




                                                         111
Table 5.5 A. TFP Shock Contribution to the Forecast Error Variance of Output and Hours

                     FORD TFP                           Fernald TFP                       JPT TFP
 Horizon
 (in
 quarters) Output            Hours             Output           Hours          Output          Hours
         0           16.2               10.5              6.1           10.5             28.2        1.0
         4           13.1                2.0              2.0             2.4            15.1        0.9
         8           14.3                1.9              2.8             1.3            15.9        1.6
        12           14.3                1.6              3.1             1.2            16.3        1.6
        16           14.0                1.5              3.1             1.5            16.0        1.6
        20           13.7                1.5              3.0             2.0            15.7        1.9
Notes: Based on standard VAR with the shock, output, hours stock prices, consumption, and nonresidential
investment. The shock is ordered first. 4 lags are included, along with a quadratic trend.




Table 5.5 B. Investment-Related Technology Shock Contribution to the Forecast Error Variance of Output
and Hours

                           Ben Zeev-Khan IST News                               JPT MEI
Horizon
(in quarters)       Output                     Hours                    Output                  Hours
                0                        7.8                      6.9                      49.6       26.4
                4                      33.2                      31.3                      19.8       20.9
                8                      36.8                      38.5                      11.9       12.1
               12                      36.8                      38.8                      11.4       10.5
               16                      36.4                      37.9                      11.3       10.1
               20                      35.9                      36.8                      11.1        9.8
Notes: Based on standard VAR with the shock, output, hours stock prices, consumption, and nonresidential
investment. The shock is ordered first. 4 lags are included, along with a quadratic trend.




                                                   112
Table 6.1 Combined VAR
Shock Contribution to the Forecast Error Variance of Output and Hours: 1954q3 – 2005q4.

    A. Output

Horizon      bzp-gov       lrw           rrtaxu        ford-tfp      bzk-ist-news       jpt-mei       ffr
0            5.5           0.1           2.4           15.8          11.8               42.1          0.0
4            1.6           5.6           1.6           15.1          28.8               23.9          2.0
8            1.4           4.8           1.5           13.9          26.9               16.3          6.1
12           3.0           4.8           1.2           12.6          22.1               13.6          8.1
16           4.4           6.9           1.2           11.2          19.6               12.5          7.8
20           4.9           8.5           1.2           10.7          18.6               11.9          7.4


    B. Hours

Horizon      bzp-gov        lrw           rrtaxu       ford-tfp      bzk-ist-news          jpt-mei      ffr
0            2.3            0.8           0.3          17.6          13.2                  20.5         0.0
4            0.5            6.6           0.8          3.7           38.3                  22.1         3.2
8            0.9            6.3           0.9          2.4           39.5                  14.2         10.9
12           4.1            5.2           0.7          1.8           33.4                  11.5         16.8
16           7.3            6.0           0.7          1.7           28.6                  10.6         18.3
20           8.9            7.0           0.8          2.0           26.7                  10.2         18.1


Notes: These results are from a standard VAR with 4 lags and a quadratic trend estimated from 1954q3 – 2005q4.
The variables are as follows, in this order: Bzp-gov, lrw, rrtaxu, ford-tfp, bzk-ist-news, jpt-mei, log real GDP per
capita, log total hours per capita, log commodity prices, log GDP deflator, federal funds rate.



Abbreviations:

lrw = Leeper, Richter, Walker anticipated future tax       ford = Francis, Owyang, Roush, DiCecio
rrtaxu = Romer-Romer unanticipated tax                     bzk = Ben Zeev and Khan
tfp = total factor productivity                            Jpt = Justiniano, Primiceri, Tambolotti
ist = investment-specific technology                       bzp = Ben Zeev and Pappa
mei = marginal efficiency of invest.                       ffr = federal funds rate




                                                        113
                                        Figures




All confidence bands shown on impulse responses are 90% confidence bands.




                                         114
Figure 3.1. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999) Identification
1965m1-1995m6 full specification: solid black lines; 1983m1-2007m12 full specification: short
dashed blue lines; 1983m1-2007m12, omits money and reserves: long dashed red lines)

                              Federal Funds Rate                                        Industrial Production
    -.2 0 .2 .4 .6




                                                               -.4-.3-.2-.1 0 .1
                                                                                            1983-2007
                              1965-95




                     0   10        20    30        40   50                         0   10    20         30      40     50


                                Unemployment                                                      CPI
                                                                                            1983-2007, omits money &
    .05 .1




                                                               -.4-.3-.2-.1 0 .1
    -.05 0




                     0   10        20    30        40   50                         0   10    20         30      40     50




                              Commodity Prices                                         Nonborrowed Reserves
                                                               -.8-.6-.4-.2 0 .2
    .5
    0
    -1 -.5




                     0   10        20    30        40   50                         0   10    20         30      40     50


                                Total Reserves                                                    M1
    -3 -2 -1 0 1




                                                               -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                     0   10        20    30        40   50                         0   10    20         30      40     50




                                                         115
Figure 3.2. Romer & Romer Monetary Shock

A. Coibion VAR 1969m3–1996m12: solid black lines; 1983m1-2007m12: short dashed blue
lines; 1969m3-2007m12: long dashed red lines.

                         Target Federal Funds Rate                                   Industrial Production
    0 .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                     1983-2007




                                                                .5
                                 1969-2007




                                                                0
                                                                                                            1969-96




                                                                -.5
                     0    10     20      30   40     50                          0   10     20         30        40   50


                               Unemployment                                                      CPI
    -.1 0 .1 .2




                                                                -.6-.4-.2 0 .2



                     0    10     20      30   40     50                          0   10     20         30        40   50



   B. Jordà Local Projection Method, 1969m3–1996m12 Recursiveness assumption: solid
   black lines; No recursiveness assumption: dashed green lines; No recursiveness assumption,
   FAVAR controls: dashed purple lines.

                            Federal Funds Rate                                       Industrial Production
    -1 0 1 2 3




                                                                -3 -2 -1 0 1




                     0    10     20      30   40     50                          0   10     20         30        40   50


                               Unemployment                                                      CPI
                                                                -3 -2 -1 0 1
    -.2 0 .2 .4 .6




                     0    10     20      30   40     50                          0   10     20         30        40   50



                                                          116
C. Proxy SVAR 1969m3–1996m12: solid black lines; 1969m3-2007m12: long dashed red lines.

                     Federal Funds Rate                                                Industrial Production
    1 1.5




                                                          -1.5-1 -.5 0 .5 1
    .5
    -.5 0




            0   10      20      30        40   50                             0   10       20         30       40   50


                       Unemployment                                                             CPI




                                                          1 1.5
    .4
    .2




                                                          .5
    0




                                                          -.5 0
    -.2




            0   10      20      30        40   50                             0   10       20         30       40   50




                                                    117
Figure 3.3 Gertler-Karadi’s Monetary Shock

A. Gertler-Karadi’s Monetary Proxy SVAR, VAR from 1979m7-2012m6, instrument from
1991m1–2012m6


                                     One Year Rate                                                               Industrial Production
    -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3




                                                                                .2
                                                                                -.6 -.4 -.2 0
                         0   10        20     30        40   50                                        0   10         20         30      40    50


                                  Excess Bond Premium                                                                      CPI
    -.05 0 .05 .1 .15




                                                                                -.2-.15-.1-.05 0 .05




                         0   10        20     30        40   50                                        0   10         20         30      40    50




Figure 3.3B Gertler-Karadi Monetary Shock, Jordà 1990m1-2012m6

                                     One-Year Rate                                                              Industrial Production
                                                                        1 1.5
    -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                        .5
                                                                        -.5 0




                         0   10       20      30        40   50                                        0   10       20         30       40    50


                                  Excess Bond Premium                                                                    CPI
    .1 .2




                                                                        -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2
    -.2 -.1 0




                         0   10       20      30        40   50                                        0   10       20         30       40    50




                                                                  118
Figure 4.1. First-Stage F-Statistics for Government Spending Shocks



                       A. 1947q1 - Latest                                 B. 1954q1 - Latest
          50




                                                             50
                                                                          Blanchard-Perotti
          40




                                                             40
                        Ramey
     F-statistic




                                                        F-statistic
             30




                                                                30
     20




                                                        20
                                 Ben Zeev-
                                 Pappa
                                                                                 Fisher-Peters
          10




                                                             10
          0




                                                             0
                   0   5      10      15     20                       0   5       10      15     20
                            horizon                                             horizon



Note: The F-statistics are based on the regression of the sum of government spending from t to
t+h on the shock at t, plus the lagged control variables. Values above 50 have been capped at 50.
The horizontal dashed lines are the Montiel-Pflueger (2013) 5 % (upper line) and 10% (lower
line) thresholds.




                                                  119
Figure 4.2 Comparison of the Effects of Government Spending Shocks
(BP: Blanchard-Perotti; BZP: Ben Zeev-Pappa)

                               Government Purchases                                                      GDP
     1.5




                                                                              1 1.5
                    BP
                                                           Ramey news
     1




                                                                              .5
     .5




                                                                              -1 -.5 0
     0




                            BZP
     -.5




                0          5              10               15       20                   0   5            10              15   20


                                       Tax Rate                                                    Real Interest Rate
     1




                                                                              1
                                                                              0
     .5




                                                                              -1
     0




                                                                              -2
     -.5




                0          5              10               15       20        -3         0   5            10              15   20


                         Nondurable + Services Consumption                                       Durable Consumption
     .4




                                                                              .4
     .2




                                                                              .2
     0




                                                                              0
     -.2




                                                                              -.4 -.2
     -.4




                0          5              10               15       20                   0   5            10              15   20


                               Nonresidential Investment                                         Residential Investment
     .4




                                                                              .4
                                                                              .2
     .2




                                                                              0
     0




                                                                              -.4 -.2
     -.2
     -.4




                0          5              10               15       20                   0   5            10              15   20


                                        Hours                                                        Real Wages
     1 1.5




                                                                              1
                                                                              .5
     .5




                                                                              0
     -1 -.5 0




                                                                              -.5
                                                                              -1




                0          5              10               15       20                   0   5            10              15   20




                                                                        120
Figure 4.3 Effects of Unanticipated Romer Tax Shock, Trivariate VAR, 1950q1 – 2006q4

   A. Mertens-Ravn (2014) Proxy SVAR

                    Tax Revenue                                                    Output




                                                             2.5
   10
   5




                                                             0
                                                             -2.5
   0
   -5




                                                             -5
            0   5        10        15         20                    0       5         10         15        20



   B. Jordá Local Projection, Reduced Form


                    Tax Revenue                                                 Output
   10




                                                        4
                                                        2
   5




                                                        0
   0




                                                        -2
   -5




                                                        -4




            0   5       10        15         20                0        5        10         15        20



   C. Jordá Local Projection, IV Regression of Output on Tax Revenue

                         Output
  4
  2
  0
  -2
  -4




        0       5            10         15              20




                                                  121
Figure 4.4 Effects of News of Future Tax Increases, Mertens-Ravn Estimates based on
Romer-Romer Narrative, 1950q1–2006q4 (90% confidence intervals)


                                 Output                                         Hours




                                                      4
      -3 -2 -1 0 1 2




                                                      2
                                                      0
                                                      -2
                                                      -4
                       -5   0    5   10 15 20                        -5    0   5   10 15 20


                       Nondurable Consumption                             Durable Consumption
      1




                                                      5
                                                      -15 -10 -5 0
      0
      -1
      -2




                       -5   0    5   10 15 20                        -5    0   5   10 15 20


                                Investment
      5 10
      -15 -10 -5 0




                       -5   0    5   10 15 20




                                                122
Figure 4.5 Effect of News of Future Tax Increase, Leeper, Richter, Walker (2011) Measure,
Jordà local projection, 1954q1 – 2005q4.



                                         Output                                                     Hours




                                                                  -30 -20 -10 0 10 20
       10
       0
       -10
       -20




                            0        5     10     15   20                               0      5     10     15       20


                    Nondur. + Services Consumption                20 40                     Durable Consumption
     5
     0
     -15 -10 -5




                                                                  -40 -20 0




                            0        5    10      15   20                               0      5     10     15       20


                                Nonresidential Investment                                   Residential Investment
       -40 -20 0 20 40 60




                                                                  50
                                                                  0
                                                                  -100 -50




                            0        5     10     15   20                               0      5     10     15       20




                                                            123
Figure 5.1. Effects of TFP Shock, Jordà local projection, various samples.
Francis, Owyang, Roush, DiCecio (FORD): blue lines with circles; Fernald utilization-adj TFP:
dashed red lines; Justiniano, Primiceri, Tambalotti (JPT) DSGE TFP: solid green lines)


                                         Real GDP                                        Labor Productivity
                               JPT




                                                                    .6
                                                     FORD
      -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                    .4
                                                                    .2
                                 Fernald




                                                                    0
                           0         5      10      15   20                          0    5     10     15     20


                                          Hours                                            Stock Prices
      -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6




                                                                    -6 -4 -2 0 2 4




                           0         5      10      15   20                          0    5     10     15     20


                                     Consumption                                     Nonresidential Investment
                                                                    2
      0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                    1
                                                                    0
                                                                    -2 -1




                           0         5      10      15   20                          0    5     10     15     20




                                                              124
Figure 5.2 Effects of News of Investment-Specific Technolgy Shocks, Ben Zeev-Khan (2015)
Measure, Jordà local projection, 1952q1 – 2012q1.



                                Real GDP                                         Labor Productivity
      0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                           -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
                        0   5      10      15   20                           0    5     10     15     20


                                 Hours                                             Stock Prices
      1




                                                           6
                                                           4
      .5




                                                           2
      0




                                                           0
      -.5




                                                           -2




                        0   5      10      15   20                           0    5     10     15     20


                            Consumption                                      Nonresidential Investment
      0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                           3
                                                           2
                                                           1
                                                           -1 0




                        0   5      10      15   20                           0    5     10     15     20




                                                     125
Figure 5.3. Effects of Marginal Efficiency of Investment Shock, Justiniano, Primiceri, and
Tambalotti (2011) Measure, Jordà local projection, 1954q3 – 2009q1.



                                     Real GDP                                        Labor Productivity
      .2




                                                                .1
                                                                .05
      .1




                                                                0
      0




                                                                -.05
      -.1




                             0   5      10      15   20                          0    5     10     15     20


                                      Hours                                            Stock Prices
                                                                .5
      -.1-.05 0 .05 .1 .15




                                                                0
                                                                -.5
                                                                -1




                             0   5      10      15   20                          0    5     10     15     20


                                 Consumption                                     Nonresidential Investment
      -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1




                                                                -.2 0 .2 .4 .6




                             0   5      10      15   20                          0    5     10     15     20




                                                          126
