                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      HEALTH CAPACITY TO WORK AT OLDER AGES:
                        EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM

                                             James Banks
                                            Carl Emmerson
                                            Gemma Tetlow

                                         Working Paper 21980
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21980


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016


This paper is part of the National Bureau of Economic Research’s International Social Security (ISS)
Project, which is supported by the National Institute on Aging (grant P01 AG012810). The authors
are grateful to Richard Blundell and to the other participants of that project for useful comments and
advice. We are grateful to the ESRC-funded Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy
at IFS (grant number RES-544-28-5001) for providing funding for this project. We are also grateful
to Rowena Crawford, Richard Disney and George Stoye for useful comments. Data from the Labour
Force Survey (LFS) and the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA) were made available by
the UK Data Archive, while data on mortality probabilities were made available by the Office for National
Statistics. ELSA was developed by a team of researchers based at the National Centre for Social Research,
University College London and the Institute for Fiscal Studies. The data were collected by the National
Centre for Social Research. The funding is provided by the National Institute of Aging in the United
States, and a consortium of UK government departments co-ordinated by the Office for National Statistics.
Responsibility for interpretation of the data, as well as for any errors, is the authors’ alone. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21980.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by James Banks, Carl Emmerson, and Gemma Tetlow. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health Capacity to Work at Older Ages: Evidence from the United Kingdom
James Banks, Carl Emmerson, and Gemma Tetlow
NBER Working Paper No. 21980
February 2016
JEL No. I14,J21,J22,J26

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper estimates how much additional work capacity there might be among men and women aged
between 55 and 74 in the United Kingdom, given their health, and how this has evolved over the last
decade. The objective is not to suggest how much older people should work but rather to shed light
on how much ill-health (as opposed to other constraints and preferences) constrains older individuals’
ability to work. We present two alternative methods, both of which rely on constructing a ‘counterfactual’
employment rate for older people based on the behaviour of other similarly healthy individuals. Both
methods suggest that there is significant additional capacity to work among older men and women,
but that this has been declining over recent years for women (and possibly also for men). This latter
finding suggests that the increase in employment rates among older people seen over the last decade
are more rapid than would have been expected based on the improvements seen in health alone.


James Banks                                         Gemma Tetlow
Arthur Lewis Building-3.020                         Institute for Fiscal Studies
School of Social Sciences                           7 Ridgmount Street
The University of Manchester                        WC1E 7AE London
Manchester M13 9PL                                  United-Kingdom
United Kingdom                                      gemma_t@ifs.org.uk
and Institute for Fiscal Studies
j.banks@ifs.org.uk

Carl Emmerson
Institute for Fiscal Studies
7 Ridgemount Street
London WC1E 7AE
ENGLAND
cemmerson@ifs.org.uk
      1. Introduction

Over recent years there has been growing enthusiasm among policymakers to increase employment
rates of older people in the UK. This has been driven by concerns about the financial sustainability of
publicly funded support for older people and the adequacy of private pension saving. 1 A number of
policies have been implemented with the explicit intention of enabling or encouraging people to
work for longer – such as increasing the state pension age, increasing normal pension ages in public
sector occupational pension schemes, and abolishing mandatory retirement ages. The government
has also now committed to holding regular reviews of the state pension age, with future increases in
the state pension age being ‘based on the principle that people should spend a given proportion of
their lives receiving a State Pension’ (DWP 2015). However, one concern that is often raised about
such policies is that there are some people who are unable to work because of their health. 2

In this paper we present two approaches to try to understand whether and how many older people
in England have sufficiently good health to be able to work and thus whether there appears to be
potential (on the grounds of health alone) to increase employment rates among this group. Each
approach endeavours to estimate a counterfactual employment rate for current older people based
on employment rates seen among a similarly healthy group of people – either in earlier years or at a
younger age. We are interested in understanding how health affects the ability to work, and thus
how we might expect employment rates to change over time as the health of successive cohorts
changes, under the maintained assumption that health is the only factor determining employment.

Clearly health is not the only factor that determines whether or not people actually do work. Some
people may not work for other reasons. For example, some may be unable to work because of other
calls on their time, such as caring responsibilities. Some may want to work but be unable to find
suitable employment, either because of a general lack of labour demand or because of specific
discrimination against older workers. By focussing here on health, our objective is not to diminish
the importance of these other factors, nor to draw firm conclusions about how much people should
work, but rather to suggest how much they could work given their health. In other words, the aim is
to help policymakers understand how much health constrains the ability of (different groups of)
older people to work. If it does, policymakers interested in increasing employment rates may need
to devote time and energy to understanding and (possibly) addressing this constraint. If it does not,
then it suggests that other factors should perhaps instead be focussed on.

We present results from two alternative approaches. Both approaches aim to estimate how much
current older people could work, given their health, by finding another group of people, who have
very similar health, and looking at how many of them work. In other words, we attempt to construct
a counterfactual employment rate. The first approach uses data from earlier years to compare
employment rates of current older people to the employment rates of people with the same level of
health in an earlier year – if the former is lower than the latter, we conclude that there is ‘additional
work capacity’ among the current older population. The second approach uses data on younger
individuals at the same point in time. In this case, spare work capacity is measured as the difference
between the employment rate of older people and the employment rate of similarly healthy
younger people. The other chapters in this volume present similar analysis for other countries.

1
    See, for example, Pensions Commission (2005).
2
    See, for example, Department for Work and Pensions (2010).

                                                      2
Results from the different countries can, therefore, be compared to construct a third type of
counterfactual – using similarly healthy individuals in different countries to estimate how much
older people in the UK could work if they had the same health-specific employment rate as people in
another country.

Health is a complex concept with many different facets. It is difficult to measure health
comprehensively and it is hard to find consistent measures of health over time and/or across
countries. A further difficulty arises in understanding how health (and different aspects of it) affects
ability to work. These issues make the current endeavour challenging and explains why we take two
alternative approaches to addressing the question, each of which has its own strengths and
weaknesses.

Our first approach takes a simple measure of health but one which is – without any doubt – defined
in the same way over time and across countries. This is the one-year death rate of people of a
specific age. We examine how the employment rates of men and women with a given probability of
death have changed over long periods of time. This is an approach presented by Banks et al. (2012)
and also by Milligan and Wise (2012). The strength of this method is that we can be confident that
this measure of health – which is readily available for long time periods – is defined in the same way
in each year. The weakness is that this measure of ‘health’ may not be a particularly relevant one for
determining whether or not someone is able to work: there are many conditions which may not
affect one’s immediate survival probability very much but which heavily impact one’s ability to work,
and vice versa.

The second approach – based on a method proposed by Cutler et al (2012) – uses a much more
comprehensive set of measures of individuals’ health from the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing
(ELSA) and examines how these are related to employment rates. The strength of this approach is
that we are able to include a much richer set of indicators of health that may impact on work
capacity. The weakness of this approach is that it relies on the assumption that the impact of health
on work capacity does not vary by age. We are also limited in the application of this approach
because the data required are only available for England from 2002 onwards, meaning that we
cannot look at a very long time period.

Both the methods we use rely on finding a comparison group for whom health is the only reason for
them not working. This assumption is more problematic for women, especially when using the
Milligan-Wise method since the tendency for women to be out of the labour market for reasons not
related to their health was particularly large in the past. Therefore, for women we present two
alternative sets of results for each method. First, we present results by comparing women to other
women with the same observed health (i.e. analogous to the approach we use for men). Second, we
compare women to men with the same observed health.

We present results separately for men and women and for those with different skill levels in order to
highlight heterogeneity in currently under-utilised work capacity. We focus on those aged between
55 and 74. We use a measure of ‘skills’ that is not defined on the basis of the job that an individual is
currently doing because we want to be able to compare similar individuals who are and are not in
work. Therefore, we split people into skill groups based on the age that they left full-time education.
However, this poses a challenge when looking over long periods of time because average levels of
education have risen significantly over time – suggesting that those leaving education at very young

                                                    3
ages become an increasingly selected group of (very low skilled) people in later cohorts. This point
was noted for the United States by Bound et al (2014) and is also apparent for the United Kingdom in
Figure 1, which shows the age of leaving full-time education for people reaching age 50 in each year
from 1975 to 2015. Figure 1 shows clearly two significant reforms to the compulsory school leaving
age that affected people who have reached age 50 over the last 40 years. The school leaving age was
first raised from age 14 to age 15 (in April 1947, affecting those reaching age 50 from 1983
onwards), and then raised from age 15 to age 16 (in September 1972, affecting those reaching age
50 from 2008 onwards). Therefore, in order to compare similar groups of people across time, we
define ‘education quartiles’ within year of birth – that is, grouping together the ‘highest skilled’
quarter of the population born in a given year, and so on. 3 We define these quartiles separately for
men and women to allow for time-varying differences in the education opportunities afforded to
men and women, although this actually has relatively little effect on the grouping of individuals for
the cohorts we examine here.

Throughout this paper we will abstract from the possibility that work and/or retirement may have a
direct causal effect on individuals’ health. This is a potentially important concern and our results
should be interpreted with this caveat in mind. A multitude of theoretical reasons have been
postulated for why work, and hence exits from work, might directly affect physical and/or mental
health and well-being. These theoretical reasons, which are reviewed in more detail by Banks,
Chandola and Matthews (2015), suggest that there may be substantial heterogeneity in how work
(and exits from work) affect health, with work potentially having positive effects in some instances
and negative in other. Empirical evidence on the effect of retirement on health is mixed. A number
of studies have shown strong correlations between exits from work and health but there is
heterogeneity in whether retiring from work is found to be associated with better or worse health.
More robust causal analyses are rarer in the literature and find weaker effects (particularly for
physical health) and mixed results.

Both the methods we use suggest that there is currently significant additional health capacity to
work at older ages among both men and women in the United Kingdom. Looking at individuals in the
past who had similar levels of health, and also looking at currently younger individuals with similar
health, it seems that – for the majority of people – health is not a significant factor limiting capacity
to extend working lives. However, our estimates also suggest that capacity to work is not 100 per
cent among those aged 55–74 and so there are a significant minority of this group for whom our
results suggest health does limit their capacity to work.

Exactly how much additional capacity to work there is found to be depends on the counterfactual
used. In particular, using the Milligan-Wise method, additional work capacity is found to be larger
the further back in time one looks to construct the counterfactual. In this paper we have gone back
as far as 1977. Comparing to 1977, we find that men had 9.2 years of additional work capacity
between the ages of 55 and 74 in 2013, compared to 2.0 years when we instead compare 2013 to
1995. Were we to go back further than 1977, we would be very likely to conclude that there was
even more capacity to work among current older people. What is clear, however, is that there is
additional work capacity. The method proposed by Cutler et al (2012) also confirms this. Using this

3
 From Figure 1 it is clear that some of the quartile splits fall in the middle of a group. In these cases we
randomly assign people within that group to one or other of the quartiles in question in order to achieve four
equally sized groups.

                                                       4
method, we find that there is little heterogeneity in additional work capacity by skill level among
men but that there appears to be significantly more spare work capacity among high skilled women
than among low skilled women.

The Milligan-Wise method also suggests that the increases in employment rates seen among older
women since the mid-1990s are entirely in line with the estimated growth in work capacity over the
same period. In other words growth in employment has not led to a change in the estimated amount
of additional work capacity.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes briefly how employment
rates and health have evolved in the United Kingdom over the last few decades. Section 3 describes
the method and presents the results for the first empirical approach we have used. Section 4
describes the second empirical approach. Section 5 concludes.

       2. Changes in health and employment rates over time

Advances in medicine, improvements in living conditions and greater understanding of the adverse
effects of behaviours such as smoking have led to rapid improvements in life expectancy and many
objective measures of health across virtually all developed economies, including the United
Kingdom, over the last half a century. For example, as Figures 2 and 3 show, the chance of dying at
any given age has fallen steadily over time, with the reductions in mortality being particularly large
at older ages. Figure 2 shows, for example, that men aged 60 in 1970 had a 2.1 per cent chance of
dying in the next year, while in 2015 this mortality chance was not reached until about age 71. The
improvements in mortality have been slightly smaller for women (shown in Figure 3): women aged
60 in 1970 had a 1.1 per cent chance of dying in the next year, which is a mortality probability not
reached until age 69 in 2015.

However, other measures of ‘health’ that have been collected over long time periods and which may
be more closely related than mortality to capacity to work tend not to show this same sort of
improvement. Figure 4 shows that the fraction of people at any age reporting that they were in
‘poor’ health changed little between the period 1991–1999 and 2004–2012, even though there were
significant reductions in mortality over this period. Figure 5 confirms that this lack of time variation
is also present among individual education groups (where the education quartiles are defined in the
way described above). Banks et al. (2012) document that this is also the case in the United Kingdom
over longer time periods and using various other measures of health, such as reporting having a
limiting long-standing illness.

This lack of time trend is in spite of the fact that all of these measures show systematic variation by
age and education level in cross-section. For example, Figure 6 shows that – pooling years of data
together – there is a systematic relationship between age and ill-health, and between education and
ill-health. Within each education group, older individuals are more likely to report being in poor
health. Furthermore, at a given age, those with higher levels of education report being in better
health than those with lower levels of education. The latter fact is consistent with the extensive
literature that has documented – but not universally agreed on the causes of – the relationship
between socioeconomic status and health. 4


4
    For a review of the literature, see Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2006).

                                                          5
The discrepancy between lack of improvement over time in self-assessed measures of health but
improvements in mortality could be for at least two reasons. First, there are many facets of ill-health
that might not increase mortality but nonetheless would impact on self-assessed health – in other
words, it may be true that some measures of health (including, perhaps, those that are relevant for
capacity to work) have not been improving over time in the same way as mortality. Second, self-
assessed health could be affected by reporting biases – that is, people’s true health has been
improving but this is not reflected in the way they answer questions about their health. To help to
disentangle this we would ideally like to examine a wider range of more objective measures of
people’s health over the same time periods. However, such data has only been collected on a
systematic and consistent basis in the England in recent years – for example, in ELSA. Therefore,
such data cannot be used to look at developments in the 20th century. There is some evidence
though that reporting bias is important to some extent. Disney and Webb (1991) found that self-
reported disability was related to labour market conditions. Banks et al. (2009) find that differences
in reporting styles can account for large differences across countries in reported problems with pain
(a leading cause of work disability) despite limited differences in the prevalence of conditions that
cause pain and limited differences in the use of medication and technologies to reduce pain.
Kapteyn, Smith and van Soest (2007) also find that differences in reporting styles can explain a
significant part of differences in reported prevalence of work disability between the United States
and the Netherlands.

Changes in employment rates among older people have diverged from trends in health (when
measured using either mortality rates or self-reported health). As Figure 7 shows, employment rates
of older men fell sharply between the 1970s and mid-1990s, before rising steadily over the last 20
years. Employment rates of older women also declined somewhat between the 1970s and mid-
1980s before rising steadily thereafter (Figure 8). In other words, while health appears to have
steadily increased over time (at least when measured using mortality data, and still not have to have
fallen when measured using self-reported health), employment rates initially fell (suggesting that
health capacity to work of those out of work probably grew) and then started to rise again
(suggesting that more recently employment rates may have kept pace with, or possibly out-stripped,
growing health capacity to work).

Earlier research highlighted the importance of financial incentives from public and employer-
sponsored pension schemes in incentivising early retirement in the United Kingdom and elsewhere
(Gruber and Wise, 1999, 2004). Others have also demonstrated the importance of disability benefits
in facilitating exit from the labour market, particularly during periods of weak economic activity
(Benitez-Silva, Disney and Jimenez-Martin, 2010). The increases in employment rates in the United
Kingdom since the mid-1990s likely reflect a reversal of some of these factors. For example, early
retirement options in employer-provided pension schemes have become less easily available, the
state pension has been reformed (including removing the earnings test on pension receipt) to
reduce incentives to leave work, and there have been substantial reforms aimed at reducing on-flow
to, and increasing off-flow from, disability benefits. However, empirical evidence on some of these
factors is limited – for example, Chandler and Tetlow (2014) provide a description of these changes
in employment rates, while Banks, Blundell and Emmerson (2015) provides an initial descriptive
evaluation of the effect of disability benefit reforms on employment rates.



                                                   6
This section has shown that – on some measures at least – health improved significantly between
the 1970s and 2010s and yet employment rates of older people have perhaps not kept pace. This
appears to be particularly true among men, for whom employment rates are now around the same
level as they were at in the late 1970s despite large improvements in many dimensions of health. It
is also clear that employment rates drop sharply between those in their late 50s and those in their
late 60s, even though there does not appear to be a similar steep decline in health. Both these facts
suggest that there may be unused potential for older people to work. In the next two sections we
present two approaches to quantifying this extra potential. Both approaches attempt to identify how
health affects the capacity to work by finding a group whose actual employment is assumed to be
only affected by their health and then using this information to predict work capacity for other
groups. The first method (which was proposed by Milligan and Wise (2012)) does this by looking
back in time. The second method (which adapts the approach taken by Cutler, Meara and Richards-
Shubik (2012)) looks to a younger age group at the same point in time.

    3. Using mortality as an indicator of health (the Milligan-Wise approach)

The probability that someone of a given age and sex dies within the next year is an indicator of the
average health of that particular group, which can be measured accurately and consistently across
time and across countries. Milligan and Wise (2012) therefore suggest using this measure of health
to examine how the relationship between ‘health’ and the probability of being in paid work has
changed over time.

To do this for the United Kingdom we use two data sources. Mortality probabilities are taken from
official life tables from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). These are calculated based on official
death records and are available by sex and single year of age for every calendar year since 1951.
Employment rates are taken from the Labour Force Survey (LFS), which was collected in 1975, 1977,
1981, annually from 1983 to 1991, and quarterly since 1992. These data allow us to calculate
employment rates by sex and single year of age in each year for which there are data. On average,
among individuals aged 55 to 74 we have around 2,000 individuals of each age/sex combination in
each year; the sample size increases over time (in particular, it is smaller before 1992 and larger
after). We define as being ‘in employment’ those who are in paid employment either as an
employee or through self-employment.

The basic idea of the Milligan-Wise approach is to compare employment rates of groups of
individuals in different years who had the same mortality rate as one another. So, for example, in
order to estimate ‘work capacity’ for men in 2013 (our most recent year of data) on the basis of the
behaviour of men in 1995, we do the following. First, we take men of a given age (a) in 2013 and find
their one-year mortality probability from the ONS data (which we will denote m(a,2013)). We then
estimate what age group (a’) in 1995 had that same one-year mortality probability. As an example,
Figure 9 shows that men aged 64 in 2013 had a 1.1 per cent chance of dying in the next year, which
was very similar to the mortality probability of men aged 59 in 1995. We then compare the
employment rates of these two groups, and estimate additional work capacity as the gap between
them – as shown in Equation 1. In the case of the example just set out, men aged 64 in 2013 had an
employment rate of 44 per cent, compared to 58 per cent among men aged 59 in 1995: suggesting




                                                    7
(perhaps) additional work capacity of 15 percentage points in 2013. 5 Figure 13 shows the share of
men employed in 2013, the predicted share employed (shown by the full height of the stacked bars)
based on men with a similar mortality probability in 1977, and the difference between these, which
we term the estimated additional work capacity. The figure splits the results by age group. This
suggests that there are particularly large amounts of additional work capacity among men aged just
over the state pension age, which is consistent with the large drop in employment observed at the
state pension age being due to factors other than deteriorating health.

         𝑆𝐶𝑎,𝑡 = Pr�𝑤𝑎′ ,𝑡 = 1� − Pr (𝑤𝑎,2013 = 1) 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑚(𝑎′ , 𝑡) = 𝑚(𝑎, 2013)                     (1)

We conduct the equivalent exercise for women. However, since employment rates of earlier cohorts
of women were lower for reasons that are not related to their health, we also conduct a second
simulation for women. That is, we simulate work capacity of women using the observed historical
employment rates of men with similar mortality probabilities. So, for example, we compare 69 year
old women in 2013 to women aged 62 in 1977 (as shown in Figure 10). Among this group the
employment rate was 22.7 per cent. The actual employment rate among 69 year old women in 2010
was 11.5 per cent, implying additional work capacity of 11.2 percentage points. However, comparing
to men with similar mortality probabilities in 1977 suggests much higher spare work capacity among
69 year old women, at 79.1 percentage points. The estimated variation in additional work capacity
among women in different age groups is shown in Figure 14 (from comparing the employment rates
of women in 2013 to those of women in 1977 who are similar in terms of their mortality probability)
and in Figure 15 (from comparing the employment rates of women in 2013 to those of similar men
in 1977).The procedure outlined in Equation 1 provides an estimate of the percentage of individuals
of a given age (a) in 2013 who could have worked (but did not), under the assumption that they
could work as much as those with the same mortality probability in year t (Sa,t). We then estimate
the average years of spare work capacity between ages 55 and 75 by summing these percentages
over𝑎 ∈ [55,74], as shown in Equation 2. The results are summarised in Figre 11 (with the results of
an equivalent exercise, but instead looking at ages 55 to 69, are shown in Figure 12). 6 For men these
results are particularly sensitive to the choice of base year: comparing current employment rates by
mortality to those in the recent past suggests some (but relatively little) spare work capacity. In
other words, recent increases in employment rates among older men by age are almost sufficient to
match the improvements in one-year mortality rates at those ages over the same period. But, if we
go further back, this is no longer the case: employment rates by a given level of one-year mortality
probability have fallen significantly since the late 1970s. For example in 2013, compared to 1977,
there is an average of 8.6 years of spare work capacity between the ages of 55 and 74.

                                         𝑆𝐶𝑡 = ∑74
                                                𝑎=55 𝑆𝐶𝑎,𝑡          (2)

For women the results are sensitive to whether women are compared to the employment rates of
women with similar mortality probabilities in the past or to the employment rates of men with
similar mortality probabilities in the past. Women’s employment rates are now rather similar to
those for men. However, this was not the case in the past, as Figures 7 and 8 show. These

5
  In the majority of cases where there is not a group with exactly the same mortality probability in the two
years, we use a linear interpolation between two adjacent age groups.
6
  We also present alternative results summing over ages 55 to 69, for comparison with results from other
countries presented in this volume.

                                                       8
differences in employment rates between men and women in the past are unlikely to be due
differences in health between men and women. Rather it seems more likely that there were other
factors that led to fewer women than men working in the past, some of which have changed over
recent decades leading to a rapid increase in women’s employment rates. Therefore, it is interesting
to compare currently older women’s employment rates not only to the employment rate of similarly
health women in the past but also to that is similarly healthy men in the last. Comparing to women
with similar mortality probabilities in the past, we find that there is relatively little spare work
capacity among current older women (a little over 2 years when comparing 2013 to 1977). However,
when we compare to similarly healthy men in the past, the estimates suggest considerable spare
work capacity – for example as much as 11.8 years when older women in 2013 are compared to men
in 1977. In both cases, however, the results suggest that spare capacity among women has not been
changing over the last 15 years – suggesting that increases in female employment rates over this
period have been sufficient to keep pace with declines in mortality.

    4. Using a comprehensive set of health indicators (the Cutler-Meara-Richards-Shubik
       approach)

A drawback of the approach adopted in Section 3 is that mortality is a crude indicator of the health
conditions that are likely to be important for determining someone’s ability to work. An alternative
approach, therefore, is to make use of more detailed information on the health of older workers and
non-workers. This is possible in more recent years using data from ELSA. Since 2002–03, ELSA has
(biennially) collected data on the health, economic behaviour and a range of other circumstances of
a representative sample of the household population aged 50 and over in England. This allows us to
look more closely at how a wide variety of health conditions and limitations have been related to
employment of older people over the last decade and produce an alternative estimate of spare work
capacity.

A second advantage of using these data to explore this question, rather than the approach used in
section 3, is that we can examine whether there is heterogeneity within age/sex groups – in
particular, across education groups. This was not possible using the approach adopted in section 3
because detailed data are not available in the UK on how mortality varies across education groups
over time.

Following an approach originally suggested by Cutler, Meara and Richards-Shubik (2012), in this
section we estimate the potential work capacity of those aged 55–74 on the basis of the relationship
between health and employment observed among those aged 50–54. Under the (potentially strong)
assumptions that: (i) health is the only factor that prevents anyone aged 50–54 from working, and
(ii) a given health condition constrains older people’s capacity to work in the same way as it does
younger people’s capacity, we can use the relationship between health and employment among
those aged 50–54 to estimate capacity to work among those aged 55–74, based on their observed
health.

To do this we estimate regressions of the form shown in Equation 3 for the sub-sample of ELSA
respondents who were aged between 50 and 54 in any of the first six waves of ELSA (from 2002–03
to 2012–13). We then use the coefficients from this regression, combined with the observed health
of the older group, to predict work capacity for those aged 55–74.


                                                 9
                                     𝑊𝑖 = 𝛾𝐻𝑖 + 𝑋𝑖′ 𝛽 + 𝜀𝑖               (3)

Wi is an indicator equal to 1 if someone is engaged in paid employment or self-employment and 0
otherwise, Hi is a set of indicators of an individual’s health, and Xi are other characteristics (including
a time dummy). We estimate regressions separately for men and women as linear probability
models. To estimate these regressions we pool data from the first six waves of ELSA; this provides
approximately 3,000 male and 4,300 female person-year observations for use in the regression. As
each individual may be included in the data more than once, we cluster the standard errors at the
individual level.

The indicator of health that we use is based on the first principal component of 23 health indicators
from the ELSA data. This is a summary measure of health that was first suggested by Poterba, Venti
and Wise (2011, 2013; henceforth PVW); the 23 indicators we include are those that most closely
approximate the measures used by PVW. We have also estimated Equation 3 including each health
indicator separately, rather than using the index. We find that estimated work capacity is virtually
identical following both approaches and so do not report results from the latter approach here. 7

Deciding which variables to include in Xi is complicated and ultimately a matter of judgment on the
basis of untestable assumptions. Since the ultimate objective is to use the coefficients from these
regressions to predict work capacity out of sample, we would ideally like to ensure that all relevant
measures of health (and how health constrains employment) are included but that we are not
including any other factors that determine employment but are not health related. For example, we
definitely would not want to include in Xi whether or not an individual is eligible for pension income,
since this is not health-related but is likely to be strongly predictive of work. However, while there
are some indicators that clearly do not capture health and some that clearly do, there is also a grey
area of characteristics that may reflect additional information on health (i.e. information that is not
already controlled for in the PVW index) but may equally well capture other non-health-related
factors. On the one hand, omitting such factors risks biasing the coefficient on the health measure.
On the other hand, including such measures if they are not in fact related to health runs the risk that
the predictions of work capacity will pick up not only health capacity but also other factors.

Bearing in mind this trade-off, we include in our regressions indicators for being non-white, and for
having a partner. Both of these have been shown to be related to differences in health outcomes,
even after controlling for quite detailed measures of observed health status. We also control for
education level. This is because the way that health constrains work capacity may depend on the
type of work that someone has the skills to do, which we proxy by their education level. 8

Tables 1a and 1b present summary statistics on the health and employment of men and women
(respectively) aged 50–74 in the first six waves of ELSA. These show that – in many dimensions –
health deteriorates with age. The second row of the table summarises the PVW health index. This
measure of health is expressed as a percentile ranking of individuals – with 100 being the healthiest

7
 Results are available from the authors on request.
8
 We also estimated separate regressions for each education group to allow for the fact that the effect of the
health measure on employment may be different for each education group. However, since the results were
quantitatively and qualitatively similar to those obtained from simply including a dummy indicator for
education level, we only present the latter results here. Results of the fully interacted model are available from
the authors on request.

                                                       10
person and 0 being the least healthy person – where individuals are ranked among all those aged
50–74. Table 1a suggests that, among men, those aged 50–54 are on average at the 66th percentile
of the health distribution, while men aged 70–74 are on average at the 49th percentile; this suggests
that health does decline quite significantly on average between ages 50–54 and 70–74. Women’s
health is slightly worse on average than men’s at all ages: women aged 50–54 are on average at the
61st percentile, while women aged 70–74 are on average at the 41st percentile.

The rest of Tables 1a and 1b show how specific measures of health differ across the age groups. For
example, 23 per cent of men and 22 per cent of women aged 50–54 report that they are in excellent
health, while this is true of only 12 per cent of men and women aged 70–74. The fraction of men
(women) with at least one physical limitation rises from 32 per cent (45 per cent) among those aged
50–54 to 58 per cent (72 per cent) among those aged 70–74.

The fraction of men who have never smoked is highest among the youngest age group (38 per cent
of men aged 50–54, compared to 26 per cent of men aged 70–74), while for women the peak in
smoking prevalence seems to have happened somewhat later – with 47 per cent of those aged 50–
54 being non-smokers compared to 42 per cent of those aged 60–64 and 45 per cent of those aged
70–74.

Overall Tables 1a and 1b suggest that health does deteriorate on average with age. This suggests
that there will be less capacity to work among older people than there is among younger people.
Our simulation results – presented below – quantify the scale of this.

The results from our regressions are shown in Table 2. These show that there is a large and
statistically significant association between health (as measured by the PVW index) and employment
for both men and women. The coefficients shown in Table 2 suggest that a 10 percentage point
increase in the index (for example, being at the 60th percentile of health, rather than at the median)
would be associated with a 6 percentage point increase in employment rates among men and a 5
percentage point increase among women. The results also show that, conditional on other measures
of health, more highly educated women are more likely to be in work, as are married men and white
women.

Figures 16 and 17 show the results of our simulation exercise for men and women aged 55–74.
These figures show the share employed, the predicted share employed (shown by the full height of
the stacked bars) and the difference between these, which we term the estimated additional work
capacity. Based on their health status, we estimate that 80 per cent of men aged 60–64 have the
capacity to work, while 56 per cent of them are actually working – suggesting that there is additional
work capacity of 25 per cent of men in this age group. This compares to spare work capacity of 37
per cent estimated for 60–64 year old men in 2013 using the Milligan-Wise approach and comparing
to behaviour in 1977 (as shown in Figure 13), or 10 per cent when comparing to 1995 (not shown).

Predicted work capacity declines somewhat with age for both men and women. Predicted work
capacity declines from 82 per cent among 55–59 year old men to 76 per cent among 70–74 year old
men – a drop of 6 percentage points. Among women the decline is from 75 per cent to 69 per cent –
also a drop of 6 percentage points. However, actual employment rates decline much more sharply
across these age groups. For men, employment rates drop from 76 per cent at ages 55–59 to 11 per
cent at ages 70–74 – a decline of 66 percentage points. For women, employment rates drop by 62

                                                 11
percentage points (from 67 per cent to 5 per cent). Consequently additional work capacity rises
sharply with age – for example, from 6 per cent among men aged 55–59 to 65 per cent among men
aged 70–74.

Figure 18 shows an alternative set of results for women – using the coefficients from the male
regression, coupled with women’s observed health, to predict additional work capacity among
women. These results are very similar (particularly for the 65+ age group) to the results shown in
Figure 17. This similarity suggests that, since 2002, the relationship between health and employment
is similar among men and women in their early fifties. This is in contrast to the results from the
Milligan-Wise method, which suggested that the relationship between mortality and employment
had been very different for men and women in earlier decades.

Figures 19 and 20 show how additional work capacity differs across education groups. The first thing
to note is that – as has been documented elsewhere (for example, Chandler and Tetlow (2014)) –
more highly educated people are more likely to be in employment at ages 55–74 than less highly
educated people. However, these figures also show that predicted work capacity is lower among less
educated groups: this reflects the fact that they are in poorer health on average than more highly
educated people. 9 As a result, predicted additional work capacity is actually similar across all
education groups for men. For example, among men aged 65–69, additional work capacity is
estimated to be 56 per cent for the most educated quartile and 55 per cent for the least educated
quartile. Among women, the more highly educated are estimated to have greater additional work
capacity than the less highly educated – suggesting that the difference in employment rates seen
between the high and low educated are not as large as the better health of the more educated
group would imply. For example, among women aged 65–69, additional work capacity is estimated
to be 61 per cent for the most educated quartile, compared to 53 per cent for the least educated
quartile.

    5. Conclusions

This paper has presented two alternative methods for estimating how much current older people
could work, given their health. The idea behind both methods is to find a comparison group, whose
employment rate is constrained only by their health, and use this group to construct an estimate of
‘work capacity’ for current older people. The first method we have presented (the Milligan-Wise
method) uses data on employment rates of men and women in earlier years to estimate what
fraction of those with a particular one-year mortality probability could work. The second method
(the Cutler-Meara-Richards-Shubik approach) instead uses data on employment rates of younger
people at the same point in time.

Exactly how much additional work capacity there is thought to be among current older people
depends on which group we compare them to, and which measure of health we use. However, all
the various comparisons presented in this paper suggest that older people do, on average, have
capacity to work more than they currently do, given their health. Estimated spare work capacity is
particularly large if we compare the behaviour of current older men and women to that of similarly


9
 For example, among men aged 50–54, those in the highest education quartile are on average at the 73rd
percentile of the health distribution, while those in the lowest education quartile are on average at the 58th
percentile.

                                                       12
healthy older men in the late 1970s. Were we to extend our analysis even further back in time, we
would likely conclude that there was even more spare capacity.

Among men, the amount of spare work capacity is found to be similar across those with different
skill levels. However, among women, we find that there is significant heterogeneity in spare capacity
across the skill distribution. High skilled women have greater spare work capacity than low skilled
women.

References

Banks, J., R. Blundell, A. Bozio and C. Emmerson (2012), ‘Disability, health and retirement in the
United Kingdom’, in D.A. Wise (ed.), Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World:
Historical Trends in Mortality and Health, Employment, and Disability Insurance Participation and
Reforms, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012.

Banks, J., R. Blundell and C. Emmerson (2015), ‘Disability Benefit Receipt and Reform: Reconciling
Trends in the United Kingdom’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 173–190.

Banks, J., T. Chandola and K. Matthews (2015), ‘Retirement and health’, in James D. Wright (ed).
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences. 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier; 2015. p.
598-601.

Banks, J., A. Kapteyn, J. Smith and A. van Soest (2009), ‘Work Disability is a Pain in the ****:
Especially in England, the Netherlands, and the United States’, in D.M. Cutler and D.A. Wise (eds.),
Health at Older Ages: The Causes and Consequences of Declining Disability among the Elderly,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Benitez-Silva, H., R. Disney and S. Jimenez-Martin (2010) ‘Disability, Capacity for Work and the
Business Cycle: An International Perspective’, Economic Policy, 63, pp.483–536.

Bound, John, Arline Geronimus, Javier Rodriguez, and Timothy A. Waidmann (2014). “The
Implications of Differential Trends in Mortality for Social Security Policy,” Michigan Center for
Retirement Research Working Paper 2014-314.

Chandler, D. and G. Tetlow (2014), ‘Retirement in the 21st Century’, IFS Report, R98,
http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7384.

Cutler, David M. and Lleras-Muney, Adriana (2006), ‘Education and health: Evaluating theories and
evidence’, NBER Working Paper, No.12352.

Cutler, David M., Ellen Meara, and Seth Richards-Shubik (2012). ’Health and Work Capacity of Older
Adults: Estimates and Implications for Social Security Policy’, mimeo.

Department for Work and Pensions (2010), When should the state pension age increase to 66?,
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/184776/spa-inc-
to-66-call-for-evidence.pdf




                                                   13
Department for Work and Pensions (2015), ‘2010 to 2015 government policy: State Pension age’,
Policy Paper, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/2010-to-2015-government-policy-state-
pension-age/2010-to-2015-government-policy-state-pension-age.

Disney, R. and S. Webb (1991), ‘Why are there so many long-term sick in Britain?’, Economic Journal,
101(405), pp.252–262.

Gruber, J. and D. Wise, eds. (1999) Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gruber, J. and D. Wise, eds. (2004) Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World:
Microestimation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kapteyn, Arie, James P. Smith, and Arthur van Soest (2007), ‘Vignettes and self-reports of work-
disability in the United States and the Netherlands’, American Economic Review, 97 (1), pp.461–473.

Milligan, Kevin S. and David A. Wise (2012a). “Health and Work at Older Ages: Using Mortality to
Assess the Capacity to Work Across Countries,” NBER Working Paper 18229.

Pensions Commission (2005), A New Pension Settlement for the Twenty-First Century: The Second
Report of the Pensions Commission,
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http:/www.dwp.gov.uk/publications/dwp/2005/pensi
onscommreport/main-report.pdf

Poterba, J.M., S.F. Venti, and D.A. Wise (2011). Family status transitions, latent health, and the post-
retirement evolution of assets. In D.A. Wise (ed.), Explorations in the Economics of Aging, University
of Chicago Press: Chicago; 23–69.

Poterba, J.M., S.F. Venti, and D.A. Wise (2013). Health, education, and the post-retirement evolution
of household assets. NBER Working Paper 18695.




                                                   14
Figures and Tables

Figure 1. Distribution of age of leaving full-time education, by cohort

                                         100
                                             90
                                             80
                                             70
   % of population




                                             60                                                                                                                                                      19+
                                                                                                                                                                                                     18
                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                     <=14
                                             10
                                             0
                                                  1975
                                                         1977
                                                                1979
                                                                       1981
                                                                              1983
                                                                                     1985
                                                                                            1987
                                                                                                   1989
                                                                                                          1991
                                                                                                                 1993
                                                                                                                        1995
                                                                                                                               1997
                                                                                                                                      1999
                                                                                                                                             2001
                                                                                                                                                    2003
                                                                                                                                                           2005
                                                                                                                                                                  2007
                                                                                                                                                                         2009
                                                                                                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                                                                                       2013
                                                                                                                                                                                              2015
                                                                                                          Year reach age 50


Source: Based on sample of all individuals born between 1925 and 1960 observed in the Health Survey for England (1991–
2012).

Figure 2. Probability of dying in the next 12 months, by age and year (men)

                                         9
                                                                 1970
                                         8                       1975
   % chance of dying in next 12 months




                                         7                       1980
                                                                 1985
                                         6                       1990
                                         5                       1995
                                                                 2000
                                         4                       2005
                                         3                       2010
                                                                 2015
                                         2

                                         1

                                         0
                                             50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                                                                           Age


Source: Office for National Statistics.




                                                                                                                           15
Figure 3. Probability of dying in the next 12 months, by age and year (women)

                                         9
                                                       1970
                                         8             1975
   % chance of dying in next 12 months




                                         7             1980
                                                       1985
                                         6             1990
                                         5             1995
                                                       2000
                                         4             2005
                                         3             2010
                                                       2015
                                         2

                                         1

                                         0
                                             50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                                  Age


Source: Office for National Statistics.

Figure 4. Changes in self-assessed health over time

                                         50
                                         45
                                         40
   Percentage in poor health




                                         35
                                         30
                                         25
                                         20
                                         15
                                         10
                                                                                                              1991-1999
                                         5
                                                                                                              2004-2012
                                         0
                                              50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                                  Age


Notes: “Poor” health includes anyone reporting fair, bad or very bad self-assessed general health.
Source: Health Survey for England, 1991–2012.




                                                                                  16
Figure 5. Self-assessed health, by age, year and education quartile

                                             a. Lowest education quartile                                                                    b. Quartile 2

                                       60                                                                                     60
           Percentage in poor health




                                                                                                  Percentage in poor health
                                       50                                                                                     50

                                       40                                                                                     40

                                       30                                                                                     30

                                       20                                                                                     20

                                       10                            1991-1999                                                10                            1991-1999
                                                                     2004-2012                                                                              2004-2012
                                        0                                                                                      0
                                            50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74                                                 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74
                                                             Age                                                                                    Age

                                                      c. Quartile 3                                                                d. Highest education quartile
                                                                                                                       60
                                60
                                                                                          Percentage in poor health



                                                                                                                       50
   Percentage in poor health




                                50
                                                                                                                       40
                                40
                                                                                                                       30
                                30
                                                                                                                       20
                                20
                                                                                                                       10                                  1991-1999
                                10                                  1991-1999                                                                              2004-2012
                                                                                                                              0
                                                                    2004-2012
                                       0                                                                                          50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74
                                           50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74                                                                  Age
                                                            Age

Notes: “Poor” health includes anyone reporting fair, bad or very bad self-assessed general health.
Source: Health Survey for England, 1991–2012.




                                                                                     17
Figure 6. Self-assessed health, by age and education level

                                        60


                                        50
   Percentage in poor health




                                        40


                                        30


                                        20
                                                                                                                Lowest
                                                                                                                Quartile 2
                                        10
                                                                                                                Quartile 3
                                                                                                                Highest
                                        0
                                             50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
                                                                                  Age


Notes: “Poor” health includes anyone reporting fair, bad or very bad self-assessed general health.
Source: Health Survey for England, 1991–2012.




Figure 7. Men’s employment rates, 1975–2014

                                        100%
                                                                       55 to 59          60 to 64              65 to 69
                                        90%
                                                                       70 to 74          All 55 to 69          All 55 to 74
   % in employment or self-employment




                                        80%

                                        70%

                                        60%

                                        50%

                                        40%

                                        30%

                                        20%

                                        10%

                                            0%
                                              1975     1980     1985       1990   1995     2000         2005    2010          2015

Source: Labour Force Survey.




                                                                                  18
Figure 8. Women’s employment rates, 1975–2014

                                        80%
                                                             55 to 59                      60 to 64                 65 to 69
                                        70%
   % in employment or self-employment




                                                             70 to 74                      All 55 to 69             All 55 to 74
                                        60%

                                        50%

                                        40%

                                        30%

                                        20%

                                        10%

                                         0%
                                           1975             1980            1985          1990             1995   2000      2005    2010     2015

Source: Labour Force Survey.




Figure 9. Male employment vs. mortality, 2013 vs 1995 vs. 1977

                                        100
                                                  43
                                                                                                                                           1977
                                         90       50
                                                                                                                                           1995
                                         80                                         60
                                                                                                                                           2013
                                         70            60
   % in employment




                                         60                                                    64
                                                                      60
                                         50
                                         40                 64
                                                                                64
                                         30                                                      65
                                                                 65
                                         20                                          65                             70
                                                                           69                         69
                                         10
                                                                                           74                              74               74
                                         0
                                              0               1                 2          3                 4      5           6     7           8
                                                                                     % chance of dying in next 12 months


Sources: Labour Force Survey and Office for National Statistics.




                                                                                                       19
Figure 10. Female employment vs. mortality, 2013 vs 1995 vs. 1977

                                 90
                                                         50                                                                          1977
                                 80
                                                                                                                                     1995
                                 70
                                                                                                                                     2013
                                                     43
                                 60
   % in employment




                                                               55
                                 50

                                 40

                                 30                                  60

                                 20

                                 10                                        65

                                             0                                                           74
                                                     0         1            2            3           4          5      6       7            8
                                                                                 % chance of dying in next 12 months




Sources: Labour Force Survey and Office for National Statistics.

Figure 11. Estimated additional employment capacity by year of comparison, by sex, 55 to 74 year
olds (Milligan-Wise approach)

                                             14
                                                               Men
                                             12
         Years of additional work capacity




                                                               Women
                                             10
                                                               Women (male employment rates)
                                                 8

                                                 6

                                                 4

                                                 2

                                                 0

                                             -2
                                               2015           2010        2005    2000        1995       1990   1985   1980   1975     1970
                                                                                             Comparison year


Source: Authors’ calculations using the Labour Force Survey and mortality data from the Office for National Statistics.




                                                                                                 20
Figure 12. Estimated additional employment capacity by year of comparison, by sex, 55 to 69 year
olds (Milligan-Wise approach)

                                                 14
                                                            Men
                                                 12
             Years of additional work capacity




                                                            Women
                                                 10
                                                            Women (male employment rates)
                                                  8

                                                  6

                                                  4

                                                  2

                                                  0

                                                 -2
                                                   2015    2010     2005      2000      1995      1990     1985       1980   1975     1970
                                                                                       Comparison year


Source: Authors’ calculations using the Labour Force Survey and mortality data from the Office for National Statistics.




Figure 13. Share of men working and additional work capacity comparing men in 2013 to men in
1977, by age (Milligan-Wise approach)

                                     100
                                                 90
                                                          16.9
                                                 80
   Percentage of population




                                                 70                        37.4
                                                                                                                               42.5
                                                 60
                                                                                               64.1
                                                 50
                                                 40                                                            55.5
                                                 30
                                                 20
                                                 10
                                                 0
                                                          55-59            60-64               65-69           70-74         All, 55-74

                                                                    Working        Estimated additional work capacity


Source: Authors’ calculations using the Labour Force Survey and mortality data from the Office for National Statistics.




                                                                                            21
Figure 14. Share of women working and additional work capacity comparing women in 2013 to
women in 1977, by age (Milligan-Wise approach)

                              100


                               80
   Percentage of population




                               60

                                                  24.1
                               40                                                                       12.5

                                                                     21.0
                               20
                                                                                       6.9
                               0    -3.8

                              -20
                                    55-59         60-64             65-69             70-74          All, 55-74

                                            Working       Estimated additional work capacity


Source: Authors’ calculations using the Labour Force Survey and mortality data from the Office for National Statistics.




Figure 15. Share of women working and additional work capacity comparing women in 2013 to
men in 1977, by age (Milligan-Wise approach)

                              100
                               90
                               80   27.2
   Percentage of population




                               70
                                                  59.3                                                  59.5
                               60
                               50                                    77.0
                                                                                      80.1
                               40
                               30
                               20
                               10
                               0
                                    55-59         60-64             65-69             70-74          All, 55-74

                                            Working       Estimated additional work capacity


Source: Authors’ calculations using the Labour Force Survey and mortality data from the Office for National Statistics.




                                                                   22
Figure 16. Share of men working and additional work capacity, by age (Cutler-Meara-Richards-
Shubik approach)

                              100
                               90
                               80    5.7
   Percentage of population




                               70                 24.7
                               60                                                                      35.0

                               50                                    56.5
                                                                                      65.3
                               40
                               30
                               20
                               10
                               0
                                    55-59         60-64             65-69             70-74          All, 55-74

                                            Working       Estimated additional work capacity


Source: Authors’ calculations using the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (2002–03 to 2012–13).




Figure 17. Share of women working and additional work capacity, by age – using female regression
coefficients (Cutler-Meara-Richards-Shubik approach)

                              100
                               90
                               80
   Percentage of population




                               70    8.4

                               60
                                                  38.0                                                 38.8
                               50
                               40                                    57.3
                                                                                      63.8
                               30
                               20
                               10
                               0
                                    55-59         60-64             65-69             70-74          All, 55-74

                                            Working       Estimated additional work capacity


Source: Authors’ calculations using the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (2002–03 to 2012–13).




                                                                   23
Figure 18. Share of women working and additional work capacity, by age – using male regression
coefficients (Cutler-Meara-Richards-Shubik approach)

                              100
                               90
                               80
   Percentage of population




                               70                             11.3

                               60
                                                                                                                 40.2                                                                                                                                          40.4
                               50
                                                                                                                                                               58.6
                               40
                                                                                                                                                                                                            63.4
                               30
                               20
                               10
                                0
                                                              55-59                                              60-64                                         65-69                                        70-74                                         All, 55-74

                                                                                          Working                              Estimated additional work capacity


Source: Authors’ calculations using the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (2002–03 to 2012–13).




Figure 19. Share of men working and additional work capacity, by age and education (Cutler-
Meara-Richards-Shubik approach)

 100
  90
                                                                            5.8
  80                                             6.7           4.1
  70                           6.3                                                                                                          24.7
                                                                                                         26.1
  60                                                                                           22.9 25.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            56.4
  50                                                                                                                                                                     56.5                                                                                               66.2
                                                                                                                                                               55.2 57.7
  40                                                                                                                                                                                                                            63.3 65.8 65.7
  30
  20
  10
   0
                               Lowest educated




                                                                                               Lowest educated




                                                                                                                                                                Lowest educated




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lowest educated
                                                                            Highest educated




                                                                                                                                            Highest educated




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highest educated




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Highest educated
                                                 Quartile 2

                                                               Quartile 3




                                                                                                                  Quartile 2

                                                                                                                               Quartile 3




                                                                                                                                                                                  Quartile 2

                                                                                                                                                                                               Quartile 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Quartile 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Quartile 3




                                                      55-59                                                            60-64                                                           65-69                                                           70-74

                                                                                          Working                              Estimated additional work capacity


Source: Authors’ calculations using the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (2002–03 to 2012–13).



                                                                                                                                                           24
Figure 20. Share of women working and additional work capacity, by age and education – using
female regression coefficients (Cutler-Meara-Richards-Shubik approach)

 100
  90
  80                                                 10.8
  70                       6.6          8.9
         7.1
  60                                                                                                                40.8
                                                                                                       38.8
  50                                                                    32.8 39.0
                                                                                                                                                                       57.2 60.8
  40                                                                                                                                   52.6 58.1                                                                 66.2 67.5
  30                                                                                                                                                                                                   57.6 63.1
  20
  10
   0
         Lowest educated




                                                                        Lowest educated




                                                                                                                                        Lowest educated




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lowest educated
                                                     Highest educated




                                                                                                                    Highest educated




                                                                                                                                                                                    Highest educated




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Highest educated
                           Quartile 2

                                        Quartile 3




                                                                                          Quartile 2

                                                                                                       Quartile 3




                                                                                                                                                          Quartile 2

                                                                                                                                                                       Quartile 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Quartile 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Quartile 3
                                55-59                                                          60-64                                                           65-69                                                          70-74

                                                                   Working                             Estimated additional work capacity


Source: Authors’ calculations using the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (2002–03 to 2012–13).




                                                                                                                                   25
Table 1a. Summary statistics, men

                                                    50-54        55-59     60-64      65-69          70-74   All, 50-74
% (unless otherwise stated)

In paid work                                         84.9        76.2       55.6       22.0          10.7      50.1
                                                     65.9        60.1       56.3       53.5          49.2      56.8
PVW index (mean percentile)

Self-reported health
     Excellent                                       22.8        17.6       16.3       13.6          11.5      16.1
     Very good                                       35.3        34.3       32.7       30.5          30.0      32.6
     Good                                            26.3        27.7       29.4       32.3          31.9      29.6
     Fair                                            10.7        13.9       15.4       17.0          18.6      15.2
     Poor                                             4.9         6.5       6.2         6.6          8.0       6.5
Limitations in activity and function
     1 physical limitation                           13.6        14.7       14.9       16.3          18.0      15.5
     >1 physical limitation                          17.9        24.4       29.0       32.8          40.0      29.0
     Any ADL limitation                              11.7        14.7       17.4       18.6          24.4      17.4
     Any IADL limitation                              4.8         5.8       6.3         6.0          7.6       6.1
Depressed (CES-D>3)                                  10.1         9.8       8.1         7.7          8.4       8.8
Diagnoses
     Heart disease                                    9.9        14.6       18.0       24.7          30.5      19.6
     Stroke                                           1.1         1.9       3.0         4.4          6.5       3.4
     Psychiatric disorder                            10.1        11.0       10.6        8.1          6.1       9.3
     Lung disease                                     2.3         4.2       5.7         8.0          9.3       5.9
     Cancer                                           2.4         3.0       5.2         8.4          11.2      6.0
     Hypertension                                    29.0        36.6       41.8       45.9          49.8      40.9
     Arthritis                                       16.0        23.0       29.3       32.2          36.1      27.6
     Diabetes                                         6.5         8.5       10.2       12.6          15.7      10.7
Back pain                                            14.6        16.5       17.1       17.3          17.6      16.7
Risk factors
     BMI missing                                      4.6         3.6       3.0         3.2          2.8       3.4
     Underweight                                      1.3         1.2       1.2         1.6          2.1       1.5
     Normal weight                                   22.4        21.0       20.3       19.8          18.9      20.4
     Overweight                                      43.9        45.7       46.7       48.8          51.0      47.2
     Obese                                           27.8        28.4       28.8       26.6          25.1      27.5
     Current smoker                                  22.4        19.2       16.3       14.0          11.8      16.6
     Former regular smoker                           28.6        36.3       43.7       46.8          51.5      41.7
     Former occasional smoker                         4.2         4.8       5.1         5.0          4.6       4.8
     Former smoker, DK frequency                      6.3         5.5       5.8         6.0          5.5       5.8
     Non-smoker                                      38.4        34.1       28.9       28.2          26.3      30.9
     Smoking status missing                           0.1         0.1       0.1         0.0          0.2       0.1
Education
   Lowest quartile                                  23.6         23.5      23.5        23.8          24.1      23.7
   Quartile 2                                       25.3         24.1      23.7        23.6          24.0      24.0
   Quartile 3                                       25.6         25.3      25.6        26.1          25.7      25.6
   Highest quartile                                 25.5         27.2      27.2        26.6          26.3      26.7
Ethnicity - white                                   95.6         95.8      97.1        97.0          97.3      96.6
Married                                             73.0         74.6      78.7        76.7          75.6      75.9
Sample size                                         2,948        5,118     4,889       4,235         3,632    20,822
Source: Authors’ calculations using the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (2002–03 to 2012–13).


                                                            26
Table 1b. Summary statistics, women

% (unless otherwise stated)                         50-54        55-59     60-64      65-69          70-74   All, 50-74
In paid work                                         77.9         67.0      35.5       14.2           5.4       41.6
PVW index (mean percentile)                          60.8         54.8      50.4       46.1           41.4      61.0

Self-reported health
     Excellent                                       21.5        17.2       16.5       14.0          11.5      16.2
     Very good                                       34.6        34.6       33.6       31.5          29.6      33.0
     Good                                            27.4        28.6       29.8       31.7          32.4      29.9
     Fair                                            12.3        14.1       15.5       17.2          19.2      15.5
     Poor                                             4.2         5.6       4.5         5.6          7.3       5.4
Limitations in activity and function
     1 physical limitation                           15.3        15.7       17.7       17.0          15.2      16.3
     >1 physical limitation                          29.6        35.9       40.3       48.3          57.0      41.6
     Any ADL limitation                              12.4        16.6       17.1       21.4          27.6      18.8
     Any IADL limitation                              6.6         8.0       8.3         9.2          12.0      8.7
Depressed (CES-D>3)                                  14.5        14.1       11.7       12.6          13.6      13.3
Diagnoses
     Heart disease                                    8.8        11.3       14.7       18.4          23.7      15.1
     Stroke                                           0.9         1.2       2.2         3.9          5.4       2.6
     Psychiatric disorder                            13.6        16.8       16.2       13.4          9.6       14.3
     Lung disease                                     2.6         4.3       5.4         7.3          7.8       5.4
     Cancer                                           4.2         7.2       8.9        11.1          10.2      8.3
     Hypertension                                    24.3        30.6       38.9       43.8          51.6      37.4
     Arthritis                                       22.8        33.0       41.4       48.2          52.2      39.2
     Diabetes                                         3.8         4.9       7.1         8.3          10.3      6.7
Back pain                                            18.1        20.9       22.3       23.9          26.8      22.3
Risk factors
     BMI missing                                      5.5         3.1       2.1         1.9          2.6       3.0
     Underweight                                      3.2         3.1       2.5         2.8          3.4       3.0
     Normal weight                                   32.4        29.1       27.6       25.5          23.9      27.8
     Overweight                                      30.8        33.3       35.4       37.8          37.5      34.9
     Obese                                           28.0        31.3       32.3       32.0          32.5      31.3
     Current smoker                                  22.1        19.9       16.3       12.6          11.7      16.7
     Former regular smoker                           21.1        28.2       31.9       32.9          31.3      29.2
     Former occasional smoker                         5.2         5.6       6.3         6.8          7.8       6.3
     Former smoker, DK frequency                      5.1         3.7       3.7         3.1          3.6       3.8
     Non-smoker                                      46.5        42.6       41.7       44.4          45.4      43.9
     Smoking status missing                           0.1         0.0       0.1         0.2          0.2       0.1
Education
   Lowest quartile                                  24.7         24.3      23.7        23.8          23.8      24.0
   Quartile 2                                       25.2         24.2      23.6        24.3          24.1      24.2
   Quartile 3                                       25.6         25.6      25.7        25.3          25.0      25.5
   Highest quartile                                 24.6         26.0      27.1        26.6          27.1      26.3
Ethnicity - white                                   94.9         96.5      97.5        97.8          97.8      96.9
Married                                             73.2         70.2      69.1        64.6          54.3      66.7
Sample size                                         4,316        6,205     5,596       4,751         4,182    25,050
Source: Authors’ calculations using the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (2002–03 to 2012–13).




                                                            27
Table 2. Employment regressions

                                                                  Men, 50-54                     Women, 50-54
PVW index                                                          0.006***                          0.005***
                                                                    (0.000)                           (0.000)
Education level (rel. to lowest quartile):
Second quartile                                                      0.016                            0.028
                                                                    (0.021)                          (0.022)
Third quartile                                                      –0.015                           0.046**
                                                                    (0.021)                          (0.021)
Most educated                                                        0.014                          0.074***
                                                                    (0.020)                          (0.021)
Married                                                            0.131***                           0.002
                                                                    (0.018)                          (0.016)
Non-white                                                           –0.043                          –0.162***
                                                                    (0.037)                          (0.041)
Constant                                                           0.381***                         0.458***
                                                                    (0.031)                          (0.025)
Sample size                                                          2,948                            4,316
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
Notes: Estimated using OLS. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered at the individual level. Using data
from waves 1-6 of ELSA.




                                                            28
