NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND EXPORTS:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINA’S WTO ACCESSION
Ling Feng
Zhiyuan Li
Deborah L. Swenson
Working Paper 21985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21985
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

We thank Robert Staiger, Robert Feenstra, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Thibault Fally, Ben Faber, Jiandong
Ju, Peter Morrow, Linke Zhu, two anonymous referee, seminar participants at University of California,
Berkeley, University of California, Davis, Tsinghua University, University of Nottingham Ningbo
China and conference participants at 11th FREIT-LETC for helpful comments. Ling Feng and Zhiyuan
Li thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support through Grant No.
71403159 and No. 71203128, respectively. Zhiyuan Li thanks the Economics Department at the University
of California, Berkeley, where he was a Visiting Scholar during the writing of this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ling Feng, Zhiyuan Li, and Deborah L. Swenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Policy Uncertainty and Exports: Evidence from China’s WTO Accession
Ling Feng, Zhiyuan Li, and Deborah L. Swenson
NBER Working Paper No. 21985
February 2016
JEL No. F13,F14,F23
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how reduction in trade policy uncertainty affects firm export decisions. Using a
firm-product level dataset on Chinese exports to the United States and the European Union in the years
surrounding China’s WTO accession, we provide strong evidence that reduction in trade policy uncertainty
simultaneously induced firm entries to and firm exits from export activity within fine product-level
markets. In addition, we uncover accompanying changes in export product prices and quality that coincided
with this reallocation: firms that provided higher quality products at lower prices entered the export
market, while firms that had higher prices and provided lower quality products prior to the changes,
exited. To explain the simultaneous export entries and exits, as well as the change in product export
prices and quality induced by trade policy uncertainty changes, we provide a model of heterogeneous
firms which incorporates trade policy uncertainty, tracing the effects of the changes in policy uncertainty
on firm-level payoffs and the resulting selection effects which apply to new entrants and incumbents.
Ling Feng
School of Finance
Shanghai University of Finance
and Economics
777 Guoding Road
Shanghai, China, 200433
feng.ling@mail.shufe.edu.cn
Zhiyuan Li
School of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance
& Economics
777 Guoding Road
Shanghai, P.R. China. 200433
zhyli97@gmail.com

Deborah L. Swenson
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
deswenson@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
This paper studies how trade policy uncertainty affects firm export decisions. In
particular, we study the micro firm-level response margins which shaped firm export
changes following changes in trade policy uncertainty. To answer these questions, we
take advantage of the trade activities of Chinese firms that exported to the United States
at the time of China’s 2001 WTO entry. 1
Three factors make this setting especially suitable for addressing our question. First,
Chinese exports to the United States during this period were characterized by strong
dynamics. As Figure 1 shows, the exceptional acceleration of China’s export growth
coincided almost exactly with China's WTO entry. More important, as we show in detail
in section 2, there was remarkable reallocation of export activities across firms. Firms
who exited the export market between 2000 and 2006 were responsible for 76 percent of
China’s total export value just prior to China’s WTO accession. Indeed, while some of the
reallocation led to market share expansion by established exporters, new exporters who
started to export following China’s WTO entry were responsible for 67 percent of China’s
export activity in 2006.
Second, China's WTO entry provided exporters with a substantial reduction in trade
policy uncertainty in the U.S. market. Such uncertainty reduction stems from the small
bound duties in the U.S. that are negotiated under Most Favored Nation (MFN) treatment.
As MFN binds the applied duties by these bound rates, the MFN bound rates provide a
significant reduction in the gap between the applied rate and the bound rate. China’s
WTO accession thus removed the threat that the U.S. might at some future time revoke its
Most Favored Nation treatment of China's exports, reverting instead to the much higher
general tariff rates levied by the U.S. on non-MFN countries.
Third, the United States is one of the most important markets for Chinese exporters.
For firms that ever exported to the US during the 2000 to 2006 interval, 25% of their
export value was shipped to the United States, followed by 18% to the European Union
and 12% to Japan.

1

Prior to China's WTO entry each of its trade partners was free to decide whether to provide
China access to their MFN treatment. MFN status for China, which was suspended in 1951 by the
United States, was restored in 1980, though its continuation was subject to annual extensions.
Following 1989, the annual renewal of China’s MFN status became a source of considerable
debate in the U.S. Congress (Dumbaugh, 2001).
1

Analysis of China's exports to the U.S. reveals a number of robust links between
trade policy uncertainty reduction and firm exports. First, we find that trade volume
growth associated with new export entry was positively related to product-level
uncertainty reduction following from China's WTO accession. These product level
responses to uncertainty reduction were apparent by 2002 and grew in magnitude over
the longer horizon. More importantly, we also find a positive relationship between the
degree of trade policy uncertainty reduction and exits by some of the incumbent firms
that were engaged in U.S. export prior to the policy changes.
To understand why trade policy uncertainty reduction induced export entry by one
group of firms while it caused another group of firms to exit, we compare the export
characteristics of new exporters with the characteristics of exiters. 2 We find strong
evidence that new exporters charged lower prices while they exported higher quality
goods than did exiting firms.3 Moreover, we find that the advantages of new exporters
relative to exiting exporters were larger for products that experienced larger reductions in
trade policy uncertainty.
Our discovery of simultaneous export entry and export exit at the product-level are
not initially intuitive. In particular, it is commonly assumed that lower tariff uncertainty,
which facilitates entry by new exporters, will also benefit, or at worst be harmless to
incumbents in the export market. Consequently heterogeneous firm models, such as
Melitz (2003) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), do not predict an increase in the exit
from export by some exporting incumbents following favorable trade policy
developments. In other words, while trade liberalization expands export opportunities and
induces export entry, these models do not predict that trade liberalization will also cause
some incumbents to exit the export market.
Nonetheless, recent work on the effects of trade liberalization, demonstrates the
value of modelling and evaluating effects stemming from the reallocation of activities
across firms and products. For example, Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014) consider
how changes in export competition lead to changes in product export composition, with
consequences for firm-level productivity, while Melitz and Redding (2013) demonstrate
how endogenous firm selection has the potential to influence aggregate productivity.

2

The term “new exporter” refers to a firm that was not involved in export in 2000, but exported in one of
the years following China’s WTO accession. The export “exiters” are defined as firms that exported to the
US in 2000 but ceased their US export following China’s WTO accession. Further details about the
definitions are provided in Section 2.
3
Product quality is measured following Khandelwal, Schott and Wei (2013).

2

To explain the simultaneous entries by new exporters and exits by incumbent firms,
we provide a parsimonious extension of Melitz (2003) which incorporates trade policy
uncertainty in a setting where congestion effects influence the cost of export. In
particular, our model demonstrates how trade policy uncertainty reduction, which lowers
firm expectations about the level of tariff payments, encourages export entry due to the
expectation of increased export profits. In turn, as an increasing mass of firms seek to
serve the export market, congestion externalities raise the per-period fixed costs of export
which are tied to export support such as logistics, finance, and ongoing advertising (see
Bergin and Lin (2012)). Ultimately, as congestion externalities raise the fixed costs of
export, and therefore the cutoff productivity for export, lower productivity incumbent
firms whose productivity falls short of the new export productivity thresholds cease to
export. Nonetheless, while the lowest productivity exporters may be driven out of the
market due to rising cutoff levels, the total number of exporting firms may increase
through the fresh export entry by firms lured to export by the improved trade policy
environment.
By demonstrating a connection between reductions in trade policy uncertainty and
firm export activities, our work adds to the recent literature on trade policy uncertainty
and international trade, pioneered by Handley (2014) and Handley and Limao (2014a,
2014b). 4 Our paper is closest to Handley and Limao (2014b) which also studies the
effects of trade policy uncertainty reductions on China’s U.S.-destined exports and the
welfare implication for US consumers. However, while Handley and Limao (2014b)
focuse on export growth changes at the product-level, our study provides insights on the
diverse changes within products which are tied to firm-level decisions within industries.
Notably, our work is the first to document and explain the simultaneous entry and exit
responses which stem from trade policy uncertainty reduction. 5

4

Another type of uncertainty, market-specific demand uncertainty, has been studied in the literature. For
example, in a partial equilibrium representative firm setting, Conconi, Sapir and Zanardi (2013) studies
how demand uncertainty in a foreign market leads firms to experiment with exports before engaging in
FDI. In a heterogeneous though still partial equilibrium setting, Nguyen (2012) shows how demand
uncertainty may cause firms to delay exporting in order to gather information about foreign demand and to
use previous demand realizations to forecast unknown levels of demand in as yet untested destinations. In
contrast, our analysis of trade policy uncertainty focuses on the simultaneous entry and exit of firms in the
same market which crucially hinges on general equilibrium conditions.
5
Khandelwal, Schott and Wei (2013) also show that following the removal of quotas on Chinese textile and
clothing exports in 2005, high-productivity new entrants entered the export market with relatively low
prices as they replaced low-productivity firms who exported high-priced exports. However, their
explanation, the removal of inefficient institutional arrangements, favored a subset of firms who were
active in quota-limited industries, while our results extend to a period several years before the final removal
of quota system and extends to other industries that did not experience similar changes in quota treatment.

3

Our main finding – that Chinese firm export responses involve reallocation through
simultaneous entries and exits – also supports recent work in international trade that
shows the effects of trade policy changes are often observed on the extensive margin. 6
Indeed, by tracking the margins of China's export changes associated with China’s WTO
accession, including shifts in export activity from low-quality high-price exiters to highquality low-price new exporters, our paper also contributes to the understanding of
resource reallocations induced by trade liberalization. While the current literature, (e.g.,
Melitz (2003) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008)) sheds light on the resource reallocation
between domestic firms and exporting firms, our study identifies an additional margin as
it shows how decreases in trade policy uncertainty can lead to reallocation towards more
productive newcomers and away from less productive exiting exporters.7 The reallocation
effects we observe are also similar to the reallocation effects uncovered in Alfaro and
Chen’s (2015) work on FDI spillovers, due to the role for selection effects. 8 The
characteristics of new exporters and exiters we document in our work are also consistent
with the observations of Chinese export prices in Mandel (2013) which studies how
competition from Chinese exporters affected the mark-ups and marginal costs of other
exporters who shipped their products to the U.S.
Finally, our paper also contributes to the literature that seeks to understand how
changes in trade policy have influenced U.S. economic outcomes. The relevance of this
issue is made apparent by the work of Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013), and Autor, Dorn,
Hanson and Song (2014), both of which show how increased imports from China affected
U.S. labor markets. In addition, Pierce and Schott (2013) find that the uncertainty
reduction associated with China's WTO accession can help explain changes in U.S.
manufacturing employment and wages. Indeed, our results suggest that the unusually
strong downturn in the U.S. manufacturing labor market noted by Pierce and Schott
(2013) may have been driven not only by the growth in overall exports that followed the
trade policy uncertainty reduction, but also by the intensification of product market
competition in the U.S. stemming from the exits of less capable Chinese exporters and
the entry of higher-quality and higher-capability exporting firms.

6

For example, Debaere and Mostashari (2010) provide evidence that extensive margin responses to U.S.
tariff policy changes had an effect on U.S. country-product imports.
7
A growing strand of macroeconomics literature, including Ghironi and Melitz (2005), Alessandria and
Choi (2007) and Ruhl and Willis (2014), study firms’ entry and export decisions in business cycles through
the lens of dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models.
8
Alfaro and Chen (2015) discover that increases in aggregate productivity following FDI are due to
between-firm selection effects which lead to the exit of the least productive firms in addition to the
beneficial within firm productivity spillovers which enhance the productivity of ongoing firms.

4

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the salient features
of Chinese export dynamics between 2000 and 2006, and introduces the key policy
developments tied to China's WTO accession. Section 3 provides a model which helps to
explain the developments of this period, explaining the mechanism through which trade
policy uncertainty reductions may induce simultaneous entries and exits. Section 4
introduces the data and presents our empirical results regarding the impacts of uncertainty
reductions on firms’ entry and exit decisions. Section 5 further examines the impact of
uncertainty reduction as manifested by the intensification of market competition. Section
6 concludes.
2. Background: Aggregate Reallocation and Trade Policy Uncertainty
In this section, we document two stylized facts that are potentially linked. The first
notable feature was a dramatic reallocation of export activities across firms following
China’s WTO accession, largely due to shifts in export value tied to extensive margin of
export entries and exits. The second observation is that China’s WTO entry provided
exporters with a substantial reduction in trade policy uncertainty. In succeeding sections,
we will examine whether the aggregate reallocations can be explained by the reductions
in trade policy uncertainty.
2.1 Aggregate Reallocation
To provide information on the export dynamics in China’s 2000 to 2006 U.S. exports, we
decompose changes according to the margins of adjustment. Throughout the paper, we
define four margins of adjustment: “exiters”, “incumbents”, “new exporters” and
“adders”. The “new exporters” and “adders” are summed together to form the aggregate
we term, “new entrants”. For each year t after WTO accession (t = 2002 through 2006),
the margins of “exiters”, “incumbents”, and “new entrants” are defined respectively as
the firm*product combinations that were exported to the US in 2000 but not in year t, that
were exported both in 2000 and in year t, and that were exported in year t but not in year
2000. Within the “new entrants” group, the “new exporters” margin refers to year t firms
that were not involved in exports in 2000, while the “adders” margin encompasses the
export of new goods in year t by firms which exported other goods in 2000.
After we classified our firms based on their export activities, we calculated the
market share changes associated with each margin between 2000 and 2006, to provide
information for overall exports as well as firm groups classified by ownership. We start
by calculating the market share tied to each margin m (including the incumbents, exiters,
new exporters, and adders) for each HS 6-digit product h in each year t,
5

/ ∑

. Next we take the difference in the market share between 2000 and
2006 for each product h, and calculate the average difference for each margin across
products.9
Panel A of Table 1 reports the changes in export market shares disaggregated by
response margin and ownership. 10 Column 1 provides the decomposition for China's
overall exports, while columns 2 through 4 provide the decomposition for each type of
ownership: state-owned enterprises (SOE), foreign-invested enterprises (FIE) and
domestic private firms (DOM). It should be noted that for each margin, the sum of market
share changes made by the different ownership groups sums to the market share change
for overall exports at the same margin. In other words, for each row, the last three
columns sum to the first column.
The dramatic aggregate reallocation of China’s U.S. exports between new entrants
and exiters is reflected by the market share data reported in Panel A of Table 1. Overall
export growth was disproportionately driven by the changes along the extensive margin,
with the largest reallocation occurring between exiting exporters (who experienced a 76
percentage point market share reduction) and the activities conducted by new exporter
entrants (an increase in share of 67 percentage points). Among new entrants, the market
share growth generated by the adders (a 19 percentage point increase) was considerably
smaller than contributions associated with new exporters.
In Panel A, the shares of new entrants and exiters are calculated based on the total
export values in 2006 and 2000 respectively. Since the total export value grew during this
interval, it is also informative to trace the changes in the number of active firms by firm
type. Thus to provide information on this margin, we follow Eaton, Eslava, Kugler and
Tybout (2007) in tracing the change in the number of exporting firms to the contributions
tied to new entrants and exiters. In particular, we measure the contribution of each margin
m to the growth in the number of exporting firms for each product h as

9

dEXNum
/

,

The market share for each margin m for each HS 6-digit product h in each year t,
, the
, and the average
difference in the market share between 2000 and 2006 for each product h, _
, are defined respectively as:
difference for each margin across products,
_ _
/ ∑
, _
, and
∑ _
/ , where H is the total number of distinct HS 6-digit products.
_ _
Note products, which are not exported in any of the two years, are dropped from the calculation.
10
Differences in the table are marked with stars if they are statistically significant. Triple stars, *** ,
represent a significance level of 1%. We obtain the statistics by running regressions of the changes in
market shares on a constant. For comparison, we also examined the decomposition based on changes in
market shares between 2000 and 2002. Since the results are very similar, they are reported in Appendix
Table 1.

6

where N is the total number of firms exporting product h in year t and dEXNum is
the change in the number of exporting firms related to margin m for product h.11 Next,
we calculate the average contribution, based on the individual product-level measures.
These measures are reported in the Panel B of Table A, column 1. The contribution of
each margin can be further decomposed based on firm ownership types and are reported
in columns 2 to 4.
Compared to Panel A of Table 1, the contribution of the new exporter margin is
magnified in Panel B. The total number of new exporters is about twice as large as the
number of exiters. Within the new exporters, the number of domestic private firms
exceeds the total number of exiting firms. Although the two panels of Table 1 provide
different perspectives, they each convey the same key message: Chinese trade
experienced a remarkable aggregate reallocation between new exporters and exiters,
which largely entailed the replacement of SOE exiters by domestic private new firms.
Since these are intriguing developments, our paper seeks to evaluate whether the
reallocation was related to the reductions in trade policy uncertainty following China’s
WTO accession.
2.2 Trade Policy Uncertainty Reduction
As an outsider to the multiple rounds of tariff negotiations conducted through the GATT
and successor WTO framework, China missed out on the formalized tariff reductions,
which were conferred by the GATT/WTO process. Although the U.S. allowed China to
benefit from the same tariff concessions that were offered to GATT/WTO members who
received MFN treatment, China’s MFN treatment was extended on a provisional basis
that was subject to annual renewal.
Dumbaugh (2001) and Pregelj (2005) describe the politically controversial annual
renewals of China’s MFN tariff treatment prior to China's WTO accession. Since
continued access to MFN treatment was not assured, any exporters had to consider the
possibility of sharp tariff increases on their exports to the United States. Indeed, the
possibility of trade action has not disappeared entirely following China's WTO accession,
as there has been political pressure for U.S. trade action against China, to pressure China
to increase the value its currency “in accordance with accepted market-based trading
policies”.12

11

Note that the change of the number of exporting firms for the incumbent margin is zero.
In contrast with the implied tariff penalty associated with loss of MFN, which would differ product by
product, the proposed penalty for currency manipulation is often a single tariff (e.g., 25%) which would be

12

7

Nonetheless, China's WTO accession lowered the possibility for tariff adjustment
via the loss of MFN treatment, and thereby, mitigated the worst-case tariffs, and the risk
of change, that Chinese exporters needed to consider. The worst-case tariff before China's
WTO accession, if China lost its MFN tariff treatment, was the United States' special rate
of duty assigned to trade restricted countries.13 After China's WTO accession the worstcase tariff became the much lower schedule of WTO bound tariffs.14 As Figure 2 shows,
the reductions in the worst-case tariff were substantial. The mean non-MFN tariff was
roughly 32 percent while the mean bound tariff was only 3.6 percent. Moreover, the nonMFN tariff varied widely across product lines.
In contrast to the large reductions in trade policy uncertainty, the U.S. applied tariffs
on imports changed almost imperceptibly in the early 2000’s. As Table 2 shows, U.S.
applied tariffs on imports averaged over the years 2000 and 2002 were roughly 3.65%.
Further, U.S. applied MFN tariffs declined by a mere 0.16 percentage points between
2000 to 2002.15
Figure 3 provides more detail on the distribution of non-MFN tariffs by sector. Two
patterns stand out. First, all U.S. sectors had worst-case tariffs that applied to non-MFN
countries, and the worst-case tariff rates were very high. If the U.S. decided to revoke its
MFN treatment of China’s exports, no sector was immune from the threat of sizeable
tariff increases. Second, within each sector, the non-MFN tariff varied dramatically
across products. Since non-MFN tariffs were not uniform even within sectors, we can
exploit the product-level tariff variation to identify exporters' responses to changes in
trade policy uncertainty.
The worst-case tariffs were arguably exogenous. Pierce and Schott (2012) argue
that, non-MFN tariffs were set decades ago and remained stable over recent decades.
Similarly, since U.S. bound tariffs were also set well in advance of China’s WTO entry,
and were applied to all GATT/WTO members, they too should have been exogenous
from Chinese considerations.

applied uniformly to all China’s exports to the U.S., and which would be set to offset the degree to which
China’s currency were deemed to be underpriced.
13
These tariffs are also interchangeably referred to as non-most favored nation treatment tariffs (nonMFN), non-normal trade relation tariffs (non-NTR) or Column 2 tariffs (Feenstra, Romalis & Schott,
2002). They were originally set in the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930.
14
The United States permitted permanent MFN treatment to China in October 2000, but it is effective only
once China joins the World Trade Organization. Negotiations on China's terms of membership in the WTO
concluded in September 2001. Permanent MFN tariff treatment for China by the U.S. became effective on
Jan 1, 2002. See http://www.wto.org/english/news\_e/pres01\_e/pr243\_e.htm.
15
There were no further large adjustments to applied tariffs through the period of 2002 to 2006.

8

3. Theory and Predictions
In this section we develop a heterogeneous firm model to study the impact of trade policy
uncertainty reduction on firms’ export decisions. We find that uncertainty reductions
induce new export entry, and more important, may also drive out incumbent firms when
new entry increases competition in export markets.
3.1 Basic Setting
There are two countries, home and foreign. In addition, while there are two or more
industries in the economy we set ideas by focusing on a single industry in which firms
produce a continuum of differentiated goods. This industry is characterized by
monopolistic competition, as in the Melitz (2003) framework.
Without loss of generality, we assume that the total expenditure on goods in this
industry is a constant share of the economy’s total income, as is the case when consumers
have Cobb-Douglas preferences over industries. In our representative industry, we focus
on the home firms’ decisions regarding export to the foreign market.16 Thus all demand
side variables in our model involve foreign country variables while all supply side
variables in our model involve the home country.
Following Melitz (2003), there are an infinite number of time periods and the
discount rate is  . In each period, the foreign country’s preference for home products is


 1

 1
given by CES preferences, or U    q( )  d  , where   1 is the elasticity of
  


substitution between varieties. Consequently demand for each variety follows

q( )  Q  p( ) / P 



and the revenue each firm collects (tariff inclusive) is
1

r( )  R  p( ) / P 
1

where P   
p( )1 d 1 , R 
 





(1) ,

r( )d and Q  U  R / P .

16

Since our empirical work focuses on firms’ export outcomes, we only present our model’s implications
for firm exports. However, a simple extension of our model would enable us to study firm sales in the
home market as well. For simplicity, we also ignore foreign firms producing in this industry. Implicitly,
this assumes that Chinese firms have comparative advantage in their export goods, or that importers devote
a fixed share of their expenditures to imports in each industry.

9

3.2 Trade Policy and Uncertainty
We follow Feenstra and Romalis (2014), Caliendo, Feenstra, Romalis and Taylor (2015)
and Handley and Limao (2014b) in assuming that exporting firms face an ad valorem
tariff  charged by the foreign country such that   1   1 . That is, for a given Free
on Board price p* received by the firm, it must charge consumers in the destination
foreign market a price p   p* . Alternatively, given tariff inclusive revenue r  pq , the
earnings received by the firm are r /  , and the tariff collected by the foreign government
is r(( 1) /  ) .
We follow Handley and Limao (2014a) in assuming that policy uncertainty concerns
the applied tariff rate. Absent the protection of WTO membership, the foreign country
may at any time decide to change its tariffs. We model this uncertainty as an arrival rate,
 , which characterizes the risk that the foreign country will choose to replace its current
tariff schedule with an alternative tariff schedule in each period. If the foreign country
decides to adjust its tariffs, the new tariff will be drawn from a distribution H ( ) with
support [1,  ] , where    is the highest possible tariff levied by the foreign country. In
our setting, this is equivalent to the U.S. removing China’s MFN treatment, and applying
the higher non-MFN tariffs to Chinese imports instead.
3.3 Firm Decision
On the supply side, prior to production each firm must pay a one-time sunk entry cost, ,
to learn its productivity, , which is drawn from a common distribution with c.d.f.
and p.d.f. g φ . When firms make their entry decisions, they are aware of the current
applied tariff rate and the degree of all future trade policy uncertainty.
Upon learning their productivities, firms decide next whether to produce (and
export). If the firm decides to export to the foreign market, it pays a per-period fixed
export cost,
, where is the total mass of exporting firms, and
0 represents the
degree of congestion externalities involved in entering export markets. In our setting the
fixed export cost rises with the number of exporters due to increased competition from
other exporting firms for the resources that are used in the provision of the export fixed
costs. In the literature, this specification of fixed costs represents an imperfectly elastic
supply of a specific factor which is required for entry. 17 We note that the increase in
export fixed costs in the face of intensified export activity is also consistent with our later
17

See Bergin and Lin (2012), Berentsen and Waller (2010) and Rocheteau and Wright (2005) for examples
motivated by search and advertising costs.

10

empirical finding (see section 5) that new exporters charged lower prices while producing
higher quality export goods as compared with exiting firms.
Given the timeline for firm decisions, the firm problem can be solved backward.
First, conditional on given aggregate variables, the firm calculates its profits at varying
tariff levels. Second, based on information on tariff levels and trade policy uncertainty,
the firm calculates its present value of expected profits. Third, the firm compares export
profits with the per-period fixed costs of export as it determines whether to export or not.
Finally, potential entrants decide whether to pay the entry cost and to learn their
productivity.
3.3.1 Firm Production in Each Period
Without loss of generality, we assume that foreign expenditure in each period, R , is
given exogenously. We assume further that the home wage is fixed and normalized to
unity.
Given tariffs charged by the foreign government, the variable profit the firm will earn is

p 1
v( )  (  )q . Profit maximization given CES preferences over varieties leads to the





firm’s pricing rule,

p( ) 
Consequently,

v( )  (

the

firm’s

 
 1 

(2) .

variable

profit

is

given

by


  q 1 r( )
q
1) 

.
 1
  1   

Substituting the pricing rule, Eq. (2), into the firm’s revenue function, Eq. (1), and
the variable profit equation, we get, respectively,
 1

 1 P 
r( )  R 
   

(3)

and

v( ) 

R  1
(
P ) 1 





11

(4) .

Since all firms with the same productivity will charge the same price, the aggregate
1


price index can be rewritten as P    p( )1 M  ( )d 1 , where  ( ) is the p.d.f. of
0



the productivity distribution for surviving firms. Substituting the pricing rule, Eq. (2),
into

the

aggregate

price,

it

becomes

,

where

is the average productivity of surviving firms.
When we substitute the aggregate price into Equations (3) and (4), each firm’s
revenue and variable profit become
5
and
.

Similar to Melitz (2003), it is easy to derive the following conditions,
,
where

, and

is the total variable profit obtained by all participating firms.

3.3.2 Export Participation
A firm’s export participation decision is based on its present value of variable profit and
the fixed cost of export. The present value of variable profits for a firm with productivity,
 , is

v p ( t ,  )  v( t ,  )   1   v p ( t ,  )   E v p ( t1,  ) (7)
where the expectation term is taken based on the distribution of possible tariffs. Taking
expectations on both sides, we have E v p ( ,  ) 
into Eq. (7), the present value of profits becomes,
12

1
E v( ,  ) . Substituting this back
1 

v p ( t ,  ) 

where a 

1
a v( t ,  )  E E v( ,  ) (8)
1 


1 
and a  E 1.
, E 
1  1  
1  1  

We note that terms in the right-hand brackets of Eq. (8) represent a weighted average
of current variable profit based on the current tariff,  t , and the unconditional expected
variable profit which accounts for the uncertainty regarding future tariff changes. If trade
policy uncertainty rises, which is represented by an increase in the expected arrival rate,
 , the firm will increase the weight on the term for the expected variable profit, while
decreasing the weight it places on its current profit that is based on currently applied
tariffs.
Substituting the variable profit function, Eq. (6) into Eq. (8), we further simplify the
present value of variable profit as

v p ( t ,  )  BRTt  1 (9)
where

 

and Tt  a t1  E E  1 .

To gain further intuition about the compound tariff term, T , note that this term
depends on the current applied tariff, as well as an expected term related to the tariff
distribution and weights. In addition, to gain intuition about the decisions facing Chinese
firms at the beginning of the 2000’s, prior to China’s WTO entry, recall that the applied
tariff is relatively low, close to the lower bound of the distribution H ( ) , so that  t1 is
relatively high and  t1  E ( 1 ) .
The uncertainty facing exporting firms can now be summarized by two terms. The
first term is the expectation term, E ( 1 ) . If the unconditional tariff distribution is
further away from the applied tariff,  t , then this expectation term is smaller. For
example, if the tariff distribution follows a uniform distribution, then the larger is the
upper bound of the tariff distribution, the smaller is this expectation term. In practice, as
discussed in section 2, considering that the worst case scenario tariffs faced by Chinese
firms in the US are the non-normal trade relation tariffs (non-NTR tariff) before WTO
accession and a much lower WTO bound tariff after WTO accession, there is then a shift
13

for the tariff distribution toward the applied low tariffs and thus the expectation term
increases. In our empirical application, since the reductions in the worst-case tariffs differ
across products, the variation in the expectation term is our main source of identification.
The second factor which influences the level of trade policy uncertainty are the
weights, a and E , which in turn depend on the arrival rate,  , for trade policy shocks.
Since we assume  t1  E ( 1 ) , a larger arrival rate indicates a larger probability that
tariffs will rise compared with the currently low applied rate. Thus, the compound tariff,
T , is increasing in the arrival rate. In practice, China’s WTO accession reduced the
arrival rate characterizing the possibility of tariff increases since WTO membership
guarantees MFN treatment. Thus WTO accession implies a decrease in the level of T .
However, since the reduction in the arrival rate tied to MFN treatment is identical for all
products, we cannot use this term to estimate the effects of uncertainty reduction on firm
export decisions.
, is the present value of expected revenue
It is important to note that the term,
18
received by exporting firms. Thus, changes in the compound tariff term translate
directly into changes in the revenue received by firms.
A firm starts to produce and export if the expected profit of exporting net of entry
cost is greater than zero. I.e. for firms with expected profit of exporting,
,
/ 1
,

∗

, the productivity cutoff,
∗

0

∗

, can be determined as

/ 1

10 . 19

3.3.3 Entry Decision and Equilibrium
Given the cutoff productivity, the productivity distribution for surviving firms is given by,
∗

∗
∗

0

.

Accordingly, the average productivity is given by
1
1

∗

∗

18

To see this, note that / is the revenue received by firms in each period (exclusive of tariffs).
In our model, firms exit the market only when their profit is less than zero. Thus, firms’ exit decisions are
endogenous. This is different from Melitz (2003) where firms may also exit due to exogenous death shock.

19

14

Let

,

denote the average export profit for surviving firms. Free entry

requires the expected value of export activity based on potential productivity draws to
equal to the entry cost,
∗

0∗

∗

∗ 1

The free entry condition (FE) can then be rewritten as

∗

1
Note that

,

/ 1

.

11
,

and

, ∗

∗

, a second relation

between the average profit and cutoff productivity level, the zero cutoff profit condition
(ZCP), can be derived as
∗

where

/ 1

,

12

1.

The free entry condition (FE) and the zero cutoff profit condition (ZCP) here are
almost identical to the ones derived in Melitz (2003), except that the mass of exporting
firms positively affects fixed export costs. Thus, given the mass of firms, , there exists
a unique solution for the average profit and the cutoff productivity. Since the solutions are
functions of the mass of firms,
, Appendix A1 shows that these
and ∗
functions are increasing in the mass of firms,

.

To solve the equilibrium mass of firms, we recall the present value of variable profit,
Eq. (9). It implies that the variable profit for the average productivity firm is
,

.

1

13

Consequently, the average profit is given by the following condition, which we name as
the “market clearing condition” (or MC),
,

1
1

1

15

14

Eq. (14) defines another relation between the average profit

and the mass of firms,

.

In this equation, the average profit is a decreasing function in the mass of firms.
Thus there exists a unique pair of firm mass,

, and average profit,

Eq. (11), (12) and Eq. (14). The cutoff productivity,
the mass of firms, , is determined.

∗

which solves

, is also jointly determined when

3.3.4 Entry and Exit Dynamics
To understand the entry and exit dynamics for the economy, it is helpful to review the
equilibrium conditions for firm decisions. As there is no limit on firm entry, the
equilibrium will be achieved in each and every period, starting from a hypothetical “first”
period, in which the equilibrium is established. In the initial period, a pool of identical
entrants, denoted by , pay the entry cost and learn their productivities. Among these
entrants, a mass,
, learn that their productivity exceeds the equilibrium cutoff
∗
productivity, , and become surviving firms. The remaining firms exit.
In subsequent periods, assume that the current applied tariff rate and the degree of
future trade policy uncertainty do not change. If new entrants were to pay the entry cost
and draw their productivities, some of them would draw high productivities and the mass
of surviving firms, , would increase. However, this would reduce the average profit as
in Eq. (14) and consequently reduce the expected payoff of entry in Eq. (11). Thus, in the
absence to changes to the economic conditions which shape profit opportunities, entry in
subsequent periods is not predicted. As a result, all entries occur in the first period and
there is no further entry and exit in subsequent periods unless conditions change.
Changes in applied tariff rates or the trade policy uncertainty introduce the type of
change which will influence the mass of active firms. For instance, when there are
reductions in trade policy uncertainty, or more specifically, when the worst-case tariff, ̅,
rises and the compound tariff term, , rises. 20 As
declines, the expectation term
an increase in implies higher expected payoffs to entry, as in Eq. (14), it will induce
more entries to the market. Further entries increase the mass of firms and congestion
externality consequently results in an increase in the cutoff productivity, ∗ . Since
surviving firms from earlier period, are required to pay the per period fixed cost if they
continue to export, they need to decide whether to produce or not based on Eq. (10).
Incumbent firms with productivities above the new cutoff productivity level will find it
20

When the current applied tariff rate is low compared with the worst case tariff, decreases in the arrival
rate, , or a reduction in the applied tariff have similar effects, since either change increases T .

16

profitable to remain in the market and thus will continue their participation in export. In
contrast, as congestion costs raise the fixed costs of continued export, some lower
productivity incumbent firms will exit the market if they find that their productivities is
below the new cutoff level.
In sum, our model thus predicts that reduced trade policy uncertainty will lead to an
increase in the mass of firms exporting to the foreign market.21 Moreover, as the mass of
exporting firms increases the fixed cost of exporting faced by each exporter, some of the
lower-productivity incumbent exporting firms can no longer survive and have to exit the
export market. Therefore when trade policy uncertainty declines, our model predicts that
we will observe export entry by more productive firms (new entrants with productivity
level above the increased new cutoff productivity) at the same time that some less
productive incumbent firms exit from export (incumbent firms with productivity between
the old and the new cutoff productivities). This market reallocation outcome is the key
prediction we test when we turn to our data.
4. Data and Empirical Results
Our theory predicts that trade policy uncertainty reductions will lead to a larger mass of
exporting firms. In turn, due to general equilibrium effects, the cutoff productivity for
continued export will increase, driving some of the lower-productivity incumbent
exporting firms out of the export market. Thus, in this section we empirically test whether
trade policy uncertainty reductions due to China’s WTO accession led to firm entries and
exits that support the predictions of our model.
4.1 Data
Our empirical analysis uses China's transaction-level customs data, which track the
universe of exports by Chinese firms between the years 2000 and 2006. The dataset
provides detailed information including firm identifiers, product codes (8-digit codes
which we aggregate to the internationally comparable 6-digit HS codes), destination
country (we only make use of the exports to the United States and countries of the
European Union), trade regime (ordinary trade or processing trade), transaction value and
quantity.22

21

Without uncertainty, Caliendo, Feenstra, Romalis and Taylor (2015) also shows how changes of ad
valorem tariffs may lead to firm entry in a Melitz type model.
22
We restrict our attention to China-US trade because the worst-case tariff before China's WTO accession
is only readily available for the U.S. However, in the robustness section, we also use China’s export to the
EU countries to serve as a control group.

17

We obtain the MFN applied tariff and bound tariff from the WTO Tariff Download
Facility.23 The dataset reports the import tariffs of WTO members, disaggregated to the 6digit HS codes.24 The non-MFN tariffs of the U.S. are from Feenstra, Romalis and Schott
(2002). Similar to the customs data, the tariff data sets have different versions of HS
codes for different years due to the 2002 HS revision. We concord all observations with
HS 2002 codes into HS 1996 codes based on the concordance provided by United
Nation.25
We measure the trade policy environment using three variables. These variables are
average applied import tariffs ( , or avt), the change in applied import tariffs (
, or
). Tariffs are measured at the HS 6-digit
dat), and the change in tariff uncertainty (
product level.
The first tariff variable, , measures the average U.S. tariff rate which was applied
, is constructed by
to imports of product h between 2000 and 2002. The variable,
subtracting the applied tariff rate in 2002 (after China’s WTO accession) from the tariff
rate applied tariff in 2000 (prior to China’s WTO accession). Positive values of this
measure imply that Chinese exporters benefitted from a reduction in applied tariffs.
Finally, if we define
as the difference between the worst-case tariff and the applied
tariff in a given year, the reduction in uncertainty,
, is then defined as
,
,
.
Positive
26
values of dgaph indicate that trade policy uncertainty was reduced. Summary statistics
in Table 2 provide information on tariff levels, tariff changes and the degree of
uncertainty reduction that followed China’s WTO entry.
Before we turn to estimation, we check raw data correlations to check whether the
changes in China's U.S.-destined exports were consistent with an explanation based on
uncertainty reduction. To this end, we assign each product to one of the four uncertainty
groups based on the degree of uncertainty reduction. Products that had no change in
uncertainty were assigned to the group one (Duncert1). This group accounts for about
23

See http://tariffdata.wto.org/ReportersAndProducts.aspx
In the dataset, much information related to the MFN applied tariff is provided. For example, within each
6-digit HS code, number of subheadings, number of tariff lines, number of national tariff lines with ad
valorem duty, average of all ad valorem duties, minimum and maximum of ad valorem duty, percentage of
applied duty free national tariff lines, and number of national tariff lines with non-ad valorem duty are
reported. Similar information is provided for the MFN bound tariffs. We take the average of all ad valorem
applied duties within a 6-digit HS code as its applied tariff while the average of all ad valorem bound duties
as its bound tariff.
25
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/trade/conversions/HS%20Correlation%20and%20Conversion%20tables.htm
26
If we construct our tariff measures replacing 2002 with later years in the 2002-2006 interval the tariff
measure changes only slightly, since U.S. tariffs were stable during this period.
24

18

15% of all HS 6-digit products. Remaining products, which experienced non-zero
changes in trade policy uncertainty, were assigned to three groups, Duncert2 to Duncert4.
Of the products in this group the 1/3rd of the goods that had the smallest reductions in
uncertainty were assigned to the group Duncert2. Similarly, 1/3rd of the goods with
medium reductions in tariff uncertainty were assigned to group Duncert3, and the last
1/3rd with the largest reductions in tariff uncertainty were assigned to the group
Duncert4.27
If uncertainty reduction influenced export decisions, we should observe that China’s
export growth was most pronounced for products which benefitted from the largest
reductions in trade policy uncertainty. Consistent with this prediction, Figure 4 shows that
the largest growth in trade value and in the number of exporting firms was in the group of
firms (Duncert4), which benefited the strongest reductions in tariff uncertainty.
As we formed our dataset, we constructed two measures of fixed export costs. The
first is constructed based on the China's manufacturing survey data, and is given as the
fixed assets of exporting firms.28 In particular, it is the weighted average of total fixed
assets per 1000 RMB sales across firms exporting the good, where each firms' share in
the exports of the good are used as weights. While this measure does not directly measure
fixed export costs, Castro, Li, Maskus and Xie's (2013) work on the fixed cost of
exporting indicates that fixed costs of export are correlated with such firm characteristics.
For a second measure of fixed export costs, we construct the intermediary share of
exports as a proxy. 29 The intermediary share of exports, imshare, is calculated as the
intermediary export value as a share of the total export value for each product in 2006.
Our use of imshare is motivated by the work of Ahn, Khandelwal and Wei (2011) and
Bernard, Grazzi and Tomasi (2012), which show that the intermediary share of trade is
higher for markets that are more costly to enter. To avoid endogeneity while ensuring that
the market conditions are similar to those of the U.S., we use China's exports to non-US
G7 countries to construct our product-level measures of the intermediary share.

27

Specifically, group one includes all products whose dgap was zero. The values for
for products
in Group 2 ranged from 2.2 to 29.5 percentage points, while the value for products in Group 3 spanned
from 29.5 to 40.1 percentage points. The value exceeded 40.1 percentage points for products in Group 4.
28
For details about this dataset, see Feng, Li and Swenson (2015).
29
We define a firm as an intermediary firm if the firm data had at least one of the two following indicators:
1) if its Chinese name includes characters such as international trade, import, export, shopping mall,
supermarket, commercial, etc, as in Ahn, Kandwall and Wei (2011), and/or 2) if the firm was observed in
China's 2008 enterprise census and the census categorized the firm as a wholesaler or retailer.

19

4.2 Baseline Results: Impacts and Reallocation
Our baseline regression estimates
dlnEXNum

α

β dgap

β dτ

β τ

β f

α

ε

15

The dependent variable is the change in the log number of exporting firms in margin m
for product h. As our focus is the extensive margin adjustment, we primarily study the
new entrant and exiter margins.
The exact definition of the dependent variable varies across margins. Since the new
entrant margin is zero by definition in year 2000, the variable dlnEXNum is the log
number of new entrants for product h in year t after WTO accession. In later regressions,
our new entrant margin is further divided into new exporter and adder margins. The
dependent variables for these margins are defined similarly. In contrast, the dependent
variable for the exiter margin is the log number of firms, which are categorized as exiters
by year t following China’s WTO accession, for product h in year 2000.
Trade policy variables were constructed following the definitions introduced earlier
in this section. Our main variable of interest is
, which measures the trade policy
uncertainty reduction for product h. Since our model predicts that reductions in trade
0. In other words,
policy uncertainty will lead to exports by new entrants, we expect
since positive values of
indicate that firms faced reduced uncertainty following
China's WTO accession, we expect the improved environment to increase export activity.
Our next policy variable,
, captures the magnitude of changes in applied tariffs. Since
reductions in applied tariff reductions have the same effect as decreases in trade policy
0. Finally, we include the average tariff level, , to
uncertainty, our model predicts
control for the possibility that tariff levels may have affected the cutoff productivity and
therefore had an effect on the number of new firms entering the market.
Our estimation equations include at least one of the two measures of fixed export
costs: the average fixed asset to sales ratio for exporting firms, and/or the product-level
intermediary share of exports. The reason for including fixed costs is that, as shown in
Eq. (10), fixed export costs are related to the cutoff productivity level. In particular,
industries with higher fixed costs have a higher cutoff productivity. If the lower end of
the productivity distribution is more densely populated with smaller firms, then the
number of new firms entering the market may be larger in low fixed cost industries than
in high fixed cost industries when trade policy uncertainty declines. We expect a negative

20

coefficient on this variable, i.e., β
0. Finally, to control for industry-level economic
factors that affect the level of new exports, we include HS 2-digit fixed effects.
Table 3 provides the first set of results. Beginning with column 1 we regress the log
number of new entrants in 2006 on our trade policy variables: uncertainty reduction
(dgap), the applied tariff reduction (dat) and the average tariff (avt). All standard errors
are clustered at HS 2-digit level in Table 3 and in all subsequent regressions. We find that
uncertainty reduction had a positive and significant effect on the growth of the number of
new entrants, while the average tariff and the applied tariff reductions did not have
significant effects.
In column 2, we add our measure of export fixed costs, average fixed assets to sales
ratio for exporters, to the regression. As expected, we find that the coefficient on the fixed
cost measure is negative and highly significant. However, the inclusion of fixed cost
measure does not affect the sign or the significance of the coefficient on our uncertainty
reduction measure, although the magnitude is slightly smaller. In column 3, we add the
second fixed cost measure, the intermediary share of exports. Now both measures of
export costs have the expected negative coefficients, while our estimated effect of
uncertainty reductions continues to indicate that declines in trade policy uncertainty
contributed to the growth of the number of new entrants.
In columns 4-6 of Table 3 we move to the full estimation equation that adds HS 2digit fixed effects to the specification. The inclusion of these fixed effects is warranted
first, if there is any concern that the fixed asset and intermediary share variables are
imperfect measures of the fixed costs of exporting. The inclusion of HS 2-digit fixed
effects is also desirable if there are sector-specific unobserved factors or trends that
affected the extent of new entries by sector. In addition, to check whether our estimated
coefficient magnitudes are sensitive to our choice of time frame, we examine three time
periods: 2000 to 2002, to 2004 and to 2006, respectively. As we move across time
horizons, our dependent variable (though not our independent variables) is updated
accordingly.30
Comparison of columns 3 and 6, both of which reflect the 2000 to 2006 time
horizon, shows that the inclusion of HS 2-digit fixed effects causes the estimated
coefficient on uncertainty reductions to decline in magnitude. However, both estimates
remain highly significant. In addition, if we compare the coefficient magnitudes across
30

Updating independent variables would not affect the results since the applied tariffs and the worst case
tariffs did not change meaningfully in the period following China's WTO accession.

21

different time horizons (through comparison of the coefficients in columns 4 through 6),
we note that the estimated coefficient on uncertainty reduction grows as we move from
the two-year window to the four or six year interval. Thus, it appears that the full
response to trade policy uncertainty reduction took a number of years to complete.
Similar to columns 4-6 in Table 3, Table 4 reports results when the new entrant
margin is further divided into new exporter (columns 1-3) and adder margins (columns 46). Applying our basic estimation equation to these two margins separately, the estimates
uniformly show that the intensity of new entrant activity, whether due to the activities of
new exporters or adders, was greatest for products that experienced larger reductions in
trade uncertainty.
There is one noticeable difference between the new exporter margin and the adder
margin, however. In particular, in later years (2004 and 2006), uncertainty reduction had
a larger impact on the new exporter margin than it did on the adder margin. The growing
response of new exporters is intuitive, as we expect the time involved in adding new
export products by existing exporters might be shorter than the time involved in making a
fresh entry to export.
In columns 7-9 of Table 4, we turn to the exiter margin. Similar to findings on the
new entrant margin, our results also show that larger magnitude reductions in tariff
uncertainty were positively correlated with the strength of export destruction through the
disappearance of Chinese exporters who had formerly been active in the U.S. market in
2000. Moreover, the magnitude of export destruction grew, as we move from the twoyear estimation window to longer intervals.
One concern regarding our results is that they might be driven by some special fastexpanding industries. For example, Amiti and Freund (2010) notes that between 2000 and
2006 Chinese exports shifted substantially away from low-tech products towards hightech products. Alternatively, Khandelwal, Schott and Wei (2013) shows how removal of
quotas on Chinese textile and clothing exports and related institutional changes in China
caused China’s textile and apparel exports to grow at a high pace. To check whether our
results are mainly driven by these special industries, we run regressions for a subset of
sectors excluding the high-tech machinery and instrument sector and previously quotarestricted textile and apparel sector. We find similar results to those in Table 4 for this
subsample (see Appendix Table 3), and thus conclude that our results are not restricted to
unusual features of these particular sectors.

22

In sum, in support of our model predictions, we provide evidence that reductions in
tariff policy uncertainty let to simultaneous export entry and export exit in the affected
products, with the strongest changes observed in those product sectors which experienced
the greatest reductions in tariff policy uncertainty.
4.3 Robustness
As we evaluate our baseline regression it is important to ask whether there were omitted
factors that were correlated with uncertainty reduction, which might have also affected
export entry and exit by firms. In our initial regressions, we include variables such as
applied tariff level, changes in applied tariff, measures of fixed costs and even HS 2-digit
fixed effects to control for other confounding factors. However, to address the relevance
of omitted variable bias, we employ the technique of using a control group which was not
subject to comparable uncertainty reduction during our sample period. Thus, we study
and compare the outcomes of U.S.-bound exports with exports that were destined for the
European Union. In contrast to the United States, the European Union granted permanent
MFN status to China long before 2000 (in 1985). 31 China's accession to the WTO,
therefore, had little effect on either the applied tariff or the policy uncertainty facing
Chinese exports to the EU.
We thus take Chinese exports to the EU countries and the US to form a sample
which we estimate via the following specification:32
EXNum

1

1

1

1

1

1

16

The definition of the dependent variable for each margin m is similar to our previous
regressions, though it is now separately derived for each destination country c. The triple
, the indicator for the US,
interaction term between the uncertainty reduction,
1
, and year dummies, 1
, is our coefficient of interest. This coefficient
indicates whether differences in the U.S. realizations of the dependent variables
compared with those for the EU countries in year t were correlated with our measures of
U.S. tariff uncertainty reduction.

31

http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/external_relations/relations_with_third_countries/asia/r14206
_en.htm
32
The derivation of this estimation equation can be found in Appendix A2.

23

To see the value of this estimation approach, suppose there is a variable that is
correlated with uncertainty reduction and also affects the dependent variable. Through
our use of a control group, we are now able to account for effects that might be driven by
factors such as Chinese industrial policies, technological advances, or any other variables
originating from China which affected trade outcomes, and might also be correlated with
trade policy uncertainty reduction. As long as these omitted factors had a common effect
on trade, regardless of destination, our strategy will provide unbiased estimates of
.
Nonetheless, to provide further certainty, we include further triple interaction term,
1
1
, which explicitly controls for some observable factors. In this term,
X is an array of product specific characteristics. In our reported results, we include the
applied tariff level, the change of the applied tariff and the measures of fixed costs in the
vector X.
Finally, as we now have introduced cross-country variation, we can include much
stronger fixed effects in the estimation equation. In contrast with Eq. (15), which
included controls for HS 2-digit fixed effects, now we include HS 6-digit product*year
fixed effects. HS 6-digit product*country fixed effects are also implicitly included, as
shown in Appendix A2.
Before we turn to the estimation results, two important points should be noted. First,
although there was no policy uncertainty reduction in the EU market, our identification is
based on the assumption that the uncertainty reductions in the US market have no impact
on the EU outcomes. This assumption might be violated if there were spillover across
markets. I.e., multi-market firms’ views of the benefits of serving the EU market might be
influenced by developments in the U.S. market (for example due to capacity constraints).
Although this is a valid concern, if present, it will lead to a downward bias to our
estimated coefficients. Thus, this additional factor, if present, will not invalidate our
results. However, to alleviate concerns about cross-market spillovers, in our EU sample
of firms, we drop all firms that also exported to the US market.
Second, we need to take care in selecting our control group countries, so any omitted
variables would have the same impacts on the US as on the control group countries. First,
we limit our definition of EU countries to countries that were EU members by the year
2000. 33 Next, to provide a more stringent control group, we create a second country
group with includes the EU members with import structures that were the most similar to
33

These countries are: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and United Kingdom.

24

those of the US. Based on the import structure similarity index introduced in Appendix
A3, the stringent EU control group includes the United Kingdom, France and Germany.
Table 5 shows the results when we use the full EU sample. Columns 1-4 report
results for the new entrant margin while 5-8 report the results for the exiter margin. For
parsimony, we only report the coefficients for the triple interaction term between
uncertainty reduction,
, the indicator for the US, 1
, and the year dummies,
1
.
As shown in column 1, the coefficients are positive and highly significant for all
years. These coefficients indicate that, for products which experienced larger uncertainty
reduction in the US, the strength of firm export entry to the U.S. exceeded the strength of
entry to the EU market. In other words, changes in U.S. trade policy uncertainty
differentially affected China’s exports to the U.S., compared with China’s exports to the
EU. Moreover, the coefficient grows over time, consistent with results reported in Table
3, which imply that the export effects stimulated by developments in trade policy
uncertainty take time to be fully realized. These patterns are preserved when we include
more control variables in the vector X, as shown in columns 2 to 4. Similarly, when we
turn to the exiter margin, columns 5-8, the positive and highly significant coefficients on
the triple interaction terms further support the findings presented in Table 4.
Due to our concerns about the use of the full EU sample as a control group for the
US, we also ran our robustness check on the more stringently selected control countries
which encompass the United Kingdom, Germany and France. We now observe that the
coefficients on the triple interaction terms are slightly smaller than those in Table 5.
Nonetheless, our Table 6 coefficients, whether for the new entrant margin or for the exiter
margin, remain positive and highly significant. Thus, we have further confidence that our
primary coefficient results are not driven by omitted variable bias.
5. Uncertainty Reductions and a more Competitive Market
Our theory predicts that tariff policy uncertainty reductions will drive some exporting
firms out of the market due to the effects of market congestion on the costs of export.
Moreover, the theory is clear that the firms which are induced to leave the export market,
will have lower productivity when compared with the new export market entrants. While
section 4 has confirmed the presence of strong reallocation effects tied to product-level
tariff uncertainty reduction, we now turn to this second prediction. In particular, we now
seek to confirm whether the new export entrants were more productive than the exiting
exporters and whether tariff uncertainty reduction intensified market competition.
25

To address these questions, we now compare the price and the quality of HS 6-digit
products sold by new exporters and exiting exporters in the US market. 34 Further, we
analyze whether there were any differences between the characteristics of goods sold by
the two groups of firms, and whether the differences were related to uncertainty
reduction.
Finally, although our comparison of the price and quality of exported goods shipped
by new exporters and export exiters provides indirect evidence on the relative efficiency
of these two types of firms, price and quality are not direct measures of firm productivity.
Thus to provide direct evidence on this topic, we also compare the productivities of new
exporters and export exiters in Appendix A5. 35 There, consistent with the price and
quality results presented in this section, we further document that new exporters were
generally more productive than were exiting exporters.
5.1 Product Prices
We begin by testing whether the degree of uncertainty reduction had an influence on
aggregate product prices. If the reallocations due to uncertainty reduction intensified
competition, we expect smaller aggregate price increases in products that experienced
larger declines in trade policy uncertainty.
In this exercise we first calculate the weighted average price for each HS 6-digit
product h in each year t across all firms exporting the product, using each firm’s export
∑ θ p . In this expression firm export
quantity share, θ , as weights, or P
quantity shares are given by θ
q / ∑ q , where the quantity of product h
exported by firm f in year t is q . We then compute the percentage change in average
product price for each product h between year t and year 2000, using the formula
Δ
/
. Following our variable construction we regress the
34

We also provide a comparison on the transaction characteristics of exporting adder firms and export
exiters in Appendix A4, which highlights similar reallocation effects on prices and qualities.
35
Due to a number of practical considerations, TFP comparison involves a subset of the firms from our full
sample of trade transactions. First, estimating TFP requires data that are collected through China’s
manufacturing census and thus we are only able to provide TFP measures for manufacturing firms. Second,
before we estimate TFP for manufacturing firms, through firm-level information contained in the Chinese
manufacturing census dataset, we must first match the firms with the custom’s data, which use a different
set of numerical identifiers. (For details of the manufacturing census dataset, TFP estimation and matching
of datasets see Feenstra, Li and Yu (2014) and Feng, Li and Swenson (2012)). The third and most important
problem with using TFP estimates for this project is that the TFP measures are firm-specific as is standard
in the literature, rather than market or product specific. Since firms may export multiple products and a
single firm may have different productivities for the products it produces, the use of a single productivity
estimate, TFP, for all products produced by the same firm, masks important information of firm
productivity at product level. Since we are unable to compare firm efficiency at product level using TFP, as
we do using prices and qualities, we relegate our TFP results to the appendix.

26

product price change measures on the product-level measures of uncertainty and applied
tariff reductions.36
Table 7 displays the results for the regressions of product level price changes
between 2000 to year t (t=2002, 2004 and 2006) on the magnitude of trade policy
uncertainty reductions. For reference, column 1 of Table 7 regresses our measures of
product price changes on a constant only, to uncover the average change in unit export
prices for all products. We find that average product prices increased by roughly 29%
between 2000 and 2002. When we add the trade policy measures to the regression, our
results in column 2 reveal a negative and significant coefficient on uncertainty reductions,
which indicates that products that experienced larger tariff uncertainty reduction were
characterized by smaller price increases. If we apply this regression framework to the
longer time spans running to 2004 or 2006, the data reveal the same dampening effect of
uncertainty reductions on export product prices.
The Table 7 observation that products that experienced larger tariff uncertainty
reductions were characterized by smaller unit export price increases, could arise if market
reallocation induced entry by more productive new exporters, who were capable of
exporting products at lower prices than were the firms that decided to exit from export.
To search for evidence of this mechanism, we compare the product-level prices charged
by new exporters with the prices charged by exiting exporters.
Since new exporters and exiters are not simultaneously observed, the comparison
involves a comparison of new exporter prices in a post-entry year t (t=2002, 2004 and
2006) with the prices of exiters in year 2000, prior to their exit from export.37 We thus
pool new exporters and exiters in a single sample and then run the following regression:
1

1

1

17

where

is the log price of product h, sold by firm f of ownership type o. As stated

above, the dependent variable is the log price in year t for new exporters, but the log price
in 2000 for exiting firms. The dummy variable, 1
, is an indicator which
denotes whether a firm is a new exporter. While this variable is likely to capture
36

We drop products whose prices change measures were either below the first or above the ninety-ninth
percentile.
37
We do not observe contemporaneous activity since the new exporter is becoming active in the same year
that the exiter is leaving, while the new exporter was absent in the earlier year when the now exiter was
active.

27

differences related to firms by age cohort, it also captures differences that arise due to the
fact that our observation of firm prices for export exiters are necessarily observed at a
point in time prior to our observed prices for new entrants. The interaction terms interact
the new exporter indicator variables with the product-level policy variables capturing
reductions in tariff uncertainty and the applied tariff. To account for inherent productspecific variation in prices we include HS 6-digit product fixed effects. In addition, to
capture any systematic price variation that is due to the form of firm ownership, we also
include fixed effects for the different forms of ownership.
Our new regressions, which are reported in Table 8, test whether new exporters'
products had lower prices than the products previously exported by exiting exporters, and
whether any differences were related to product-level reductions in uncertainty. The first
set of results, included in columns 1 and 2, are based on comparison of new exporters
who did not export in 2000 but appeared by 2002, with exiters who exported in 2000 but
ceased export by 2002. The coefficient on the new exporter indicator variable in column
1 is negative and highly significant, which demonstrates that controlling for product fixed
effects, new exporters' prices in 2002 were lower than the exiters' export prices in 2000.
This result is strong and surprising since we would generally expect to see some
price inflation over the two-year interval. Indeed, as shown by column 1 of Table 7,
average export prices rose between 2000 and 2002. Thus, the negative coefficient in
column 1 of Table 8 suggests that, on average new exporter charged lower prices in 2002
than did the average exiters in 2000. Taken together, the relatively low prices offered by
new exporters reflect an even larger price gap if one accounts for the inflation that took
place over the two-year interval.
Column 2 of Table 8 augments the regression with policy interaction terms. Further,
since firms of different ownership may charge different prices, we also add firm
ownership fixed effects to the regression. The coefficient on the regressor that interacts
the new exporter dummy with tariff uncertainty reduction is negative and highly
significant. This suggests that new exporters charged lower prices than exiters, and that
the price difference was particularly pronounced for products that experienced larger
tariff uncertainty reduction.
To check the robustness of our results, we perform a second set of comparisons,
which define new entry and exit using changes between 2000, and the later years 2004
and 2006. Since the comparisons extend across a larger number of years, it is not
surprising that columns 3 and 5 now suggest that new exporter unit values, controlling for
28

HS6 product effects, were higher on average than the export prices charged in 2000 by
firms that exited from export. Since these prices were observed four to six years after
2000, they would have been affected by any underlying inflation in China’s production
costs. Nonetheless, the relative price premium for new exporters relative to exiters' 2000
prices (4.2% in 2004 and 18% in 2006) is small relative to the export price inflation that
was revealed in Table 7 (48% in 2004 and 72% in 2006). More important, if we add
interactions between the tariff policy uncertainty reduction and the new exporter dummy,
our result show that products which experienced larger policy uncertainty reductions had
lower relative prices charged by new entrants when compared with exiter prices than
products that experienced smaller changes in policy uncertainty. Thus, our results suggest
that, due to the role of policy uncertainty reduction in encouraging entry by new
exporters who charged relatively lower prices, uncertainty reductions increased market
competition.
5.2 Quality
Although we conjecture that the lower price of new entrants relative to exiters were
driven by higher productivity, an alternative explanation could be that the lower price for
new exporters arose since new exporters chose to produce and sell lower quality
products. To investigate whether this alternative is consistent with the data, we adopt the
approach used by Khandelwal, Schott and Wei (2013) to gain evidence regarding the
relative quality of exports that were sold by new exporters compared with the quality
provided by firms that exited from export.
Following Khandelwal, Schott and Wei (2013), we incorporate the quality levels in
the utility function and use data on sales to estimate quality levels. For this exercise, we
, where represents
assume utility is given by the CES function:
the quality of the variety. The demand function for each variety is then
, where is the variety's price, is the aggregate price level and is
the aggregate expenditure on the good. Taking logs of the demand equation, we obtain
ln
1
. This provides us with the following
regression specification,
μ
which applies to individual firm f exports of HS 6-digit products, h. In this regression
capture the effects connected to aggregate price
equation product-year fixed effects,

29

( ), and aggregate expenditure ( ) as well as other year-specific unobservable factors
that affect product-level export costs or demand.
Following estimation of the demand equation, we could potentially back out the
⁄

quality levels using the estimated residual

. However, since we plan to

compare quality differences across firms within the same HS 6-digit product and the
estimation for quality is performed for each HS 6-digit product, we could simply use the
estimated residual term as the measure of quality. That is, for a pooled sample of new
exporters and exporting exiters, we regress the estimated residual term, which we call
“quality”, on the new exporter dummy and its interactions with our measure of tariff
uncertainty reduction and/or the applied tariff reduction. The specification for this
regression is identical to Eq. (17), but with the dependent variable replaced by our firmproduct quality measures derived from estimation of the demand equation.
Table 9 displays the quality regression results. Columns 1, 3 and 5 show that the
quality of products exported by new exporters exceeded the quality of exports shipped by
exiters, regardless of the time horizon we use for comparison. In columns 2, 4 and 6 we
do not find that the magnitude of the quality premium provided by new exporters was
related to the magnitude of the trade policy uncertainty reduction. Nonetheless, since our
evidence suggests that new exporters provided higher, not lower, quality exports, we do
not believe the lower prices associated with new firm exports were attributable to a
choice to provide new exports of inferior quality. Instead, our results suggest that new
exporters were more productive, produced higher quality goods and charged lower prices
than exiting exporters. In turn, this trend may explain Mandel's (2013) observation that
U.S. exports from other countries responded to Chinese competition by reducing markups by a magnitude of 30%, and increasing marginal costs by 50% (presumably in a
move to provide distinctly higher quality products compared with China).
Combining the results in Table 8 and Table 9 with the fact that market share
reallocations associated with the activities of new exporters and exiting exporters were
the most important driver of changes in extensive margin market share reallocation,
shown in Table 1, we find that trade policy reductions induced the reallocation of export
market share from high-price low-quality exiting exporters to low-price high-quality new
exporters. Moreover, products which experienced larger policy uncertainty reductions
had lower relative prices charged by new entrants when compared with exiting exporter
prices, than was the case for the relative price differences for products that experienced
smaller changes in tariff policy uncertainty. Taken together, these features of China’s

30

export market reallocation suggest that reductions in tariff policy uncertainty intensified
product market competition.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we document two important features of Chinese exports to the United
States in the early 2000’s. First, at the fine product-level there was a dramatic
reallocation of export activities across firms following China’s WTO accession. In
particular, within product-level export lines, substantial export market share expansions
by new exporters coincided with similar magnitude export market share losses by exiting
exporters. The second important development at this time was the sizeable reduction in
U.S. trade policy uncertainty which was provided by China’s WTO entry in 2001.
We argue that this aggregate reallocations can be explained by the reduction in trade
policy uncertainty. To analyze the connection, we develop a model of heterogeneous
firms which incorporates trade policy uncertainty. Due to general equilibrium effects that
operate through changes in the mass of exporting firms, our model generates
simultaneous export entries and exits by firms within sectors when trade policy
uncertainty is reduced – a reallocation effect on which current literature is typically silent.
Empirically, we exploit the rich firm-level Chinese Customs dataset to test how the
uncertainty reductions associated with China’s WTO entry contribute to exporter
dynamics. We find very strong export entry and exit responses by firms, in response to
reductions in trade policy uncertainty. More importantly, when we compare the price and
quality of exported products for new exporters versus exiting exporters, we find strong
evidence that the new exporters charged lower prices even though they exported higher
quality goods than did exiting exporters. Further, the degree to which new exporter
prices were lower than those of exiters was larger for products that experienced larger
uncertainty reductions.
When considered as a whole, our results suggest that tariff policy uncertainty
reductions contributed to the aggregate reallocation of Chinese exports. In particular,
tariff uncertainty reduction led to churning at the fine product level, and encouraged the
entry of high-productivity low-price new exporters at the expense of low-productivity
high-price exiting exporters. Overall, since trade policy uncertainty reduction for Chinese
exporters may have intensified the competitiveness of China’s U.S. exports, through
increased quality and reduced prices, this change in policy may help explain the potency
of the effects of China’s increased exports to the U.S. on the US manufacturing sector and
labor market.
31

References
Ahn, JaeBin, Amit K. Khandelwal and Shang-Jin Wei. (2011) “The Role of
Intermediaries in Facilitating Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 84: 73-85.
Alfaro, Laura and Maggie X. Chen (2015) “Selection and Market Reallocation:
Productivity Gains from Multinational Production,”
Harvard Business School
Manuscript.
Alessandria, George, and Horag Choi. (2007). “Do Sunk Costs Of Exporting Matter for
Net Export Dynamics?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 289-336
Amiti, Mary and Freund, Caroline. (2010) “The Anatomy of China’s Trade Growth.” in
Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei, eds. “China’s Growing Role in World Trade,”
NBER Books.
Autor, David H., David Dorn and Gordon H. Hanson. (2013) “The China Syndrome:
Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American
Economic Review, 103(6): 2121- 68
Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson and Jae Song. (2014) “Trade
Adjustment: Worker Level Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Berentsen, Aleksander and Christopher Waller. (2010) “Optimal Stabilization policy with
endogenous firm entry.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis working paper 2009-032.
Bergin, Paul. and Ching-Yi Lin. (2012). “The Dynamics Effects of Currency Union on
Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 87(2): 191-204.
Bernard, Andrew, Marco Grazzi and Chiara Tomasi. (2012) “Intermediaries in
International Trade: Direct versus Indirect Modes of Export.” NBER Working Paper,
17711.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Robert Feenstra, John Romalis and Allan Taylor. (2015) “Tariff
Reductions, Entry and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for the Last Two Decades.” NBER
working paper, #21768.
Castro, Luis, Ben Li, Keith E. Maskus and Yiqing Xie. (2013) “Fixed Export Costs and
Firm-Level Export Behavior.” University of Colorado, Manuscript.
Conconi, P., A. Sapir and M. Zanardi. (2013) “The Internationalization Process of Firms:
From Exports to FDI.”, Discussion Paper 9332 (London: CEPR).
Debaere, Peter and Shalah Mostashari. (2010) “Do Tariffs Matter for the Extensive
Margin of International Trade? An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of International
Economics, 81(2) 163-169.

32

Dumbaugh, Kerry. (2001) “Voting on NTR for China Again in 2001, and Past
Congressional Decisions.” CRS Report for Congress, Order Code RS20691
(Congressional Research Service: The Library of Congress)
Eaton, Jonathan, Marcela Eslava, Maurice Kugler and James Tybout. (2007) “Export
Dynamics in Colombia: Firm-Level Evidence.” NBER Working Paper, #13531.
Feenstra, Robert C., Zhiyuan Li and Miaojie Yu. (2014) “Exports and Credit Constraints
under Incomplete Information: Theory and Evidence from China.” Review of Economics
and Statisitcs, 96(4): 729–744
Feenstra, Robert C. and John Romalis. (2014) “International prices and endogenous
quality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2):477–527.
Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis and Peter K. Schott. (2002) “U.S. Imports, Exports
and Tariff Data, 1989-2001.” NBER Working Paper 9387.
Feng, Ling, Zhiyuan Li and Deborah L. Swenson. (2012) “The Connection between
Imported Intermediate Inputs and Exports: Evidence from Chinese Firms.” NBER
Working Papers 18260.
Finger, J. Michael, and M. E. Kreinin, (1979) “A measure of ‘export similarity’ and its
possible uses.” Economic Journal, 89: 905-912.
Handley, Kyle. (2014) “Exporting under Trade Policy Uncertainty: Theory and
Evidence.” Journal of International Economics, 94: 50-66
Handley, Kyle and Limao, Nuno (2014a) “Trade and Investment under Policy
Uncertainty: Theory and Firm Evidence.” American Economic Journal: Policy,
forthcoming.
Handley, Kyle and Limao, Nuno. (2014b) “Policy Uncertainty, Trade and Welfare:
Theory and Evidence for China and the U.S.” NBER Working Paper 19376.
Khandelwal, Amit K., Peter Schott and Shang-Jin Wei. (2013) “Trade Liberalization and
Embedding Institutional Reform.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Lewis, Vivien. (2009) “Business cycle evidence on firm entry.” Macroeconomic
Dynamics 13(5): 605-624.
Mandel, Benjamin R. (2013) “Chinese Exports and U.S. Import Prices.” Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 591.
Mayer, Thierry, Melitz, Marc J, and Giancarlo Ottaviano. (2014) “Market Size,
Competition, and the Product Mix of Exporters,” American Economic Review, 104(2):
495-536.

33

Melitz, Marc J. (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and
Aggregate Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, vol. 71(6):1695-1725,
Melitz, Marc J., and Fabio Ghironi. (2005) “International Trade and Macroeconomic
Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3), 865–
915.
Melitz, Marc J. and Giancarlo Ottaviano. (2008) “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity.”
Review of Economic Studies, 75, 295–316.
Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen J. Redding. (2013) “New Trade Models, New Welfare
Implications,” NBER Working Paper, 18,919.
Melitz, Marc J. and Saso Polanec. (2012) “Dynamic Olley-Pakes Productivity
Decomposition with Entry and exit,” NBER Working Paper, No. 18,182.
Nguyen, D. X.. (2012) “Demand uncertainty: Exporting delays and exporting failures.”
Journal of International Economics, 86(2), 336-344.
Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. (2012) “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S.
Manufacturing Employment.” NBER Working Paper 18655.
Pregelj, Vladimir. (2005) “Normal-Trade-Relations (Most-Favored-Nation) Policy of the
United States.” CRS Report For Congress RL31558.
Rocheteau, Guillaume and Wright, Randall. (2005) “Money in Search Equilibrium, in
Competitive Equilibrium, and in Competitive Search Equilibrium.” Econometrica 73(1):
175-202.
Ruhl, K., Willis, J., (2014) “New exporter dynamics.” mimeo.

34

Figure 1: China’s Exports to the United States, 1992-2008

Data source: Chinese customs data obtained from UC Davis CID.

0

.05

Density
.1
.15

.2

.25

Figure 2: Distribution of Worst-case Tariffs across Tariff (Lines before and after
China’s WTO Accession)

0

20
40
60
80
Non-normal Trade Relation Tariff or Bound Tariff
Non-normal Trade Relation Tariff

100

WTO Bound Tariff

Note: This figure displays the kernel density of non-normal trade,
or non-MFN tariffs (the worst-case tariff for China prior to its
WTO accession) and the bound tariffs (the worst-case tariff
following China’s WTO accession) imposed by the United States
across HS 6-digit tariff lines.

35

Figure 3: Distribution of Worst-case U.S. Tariffs before China’s WTO Accession, by
Sector
Chemical

Food

Footwear

Instruments

Iron

Jewelry

Leather

Machinery

Mineral

Paper

Plastic

Textile

Toys

Vehicle

Wood

0 .02.04.06.08
0 .02.04.06.08
0 .02.04.06.08

Density in Sector

0 .02.04.06.08

Ceramics

0

50

100

0

50

100

0

50

100

0

50

100

Non-normal Trade Relation (Column 2) Tariff
Graphs by hs2group

Note: Figures show the kernel density of non-normal trade relation tariffs across HS 6 digit product lines by
sector. Sectors are defined according to HS classification (See Appendix Table 2). Some sectors, such as art
products and ammunition, are dropped due to small export values.

Figure 4: Tariff Uncertainty Reduction and Export Growth: Export Firm Numbers
and Export Value

Notes: Each figure is based on China’s ordinary exports to the U.S.. Products were assigned to the four
groups, based on the degree of trade policy uncertainty reduction for China’s U.S. exports following
China’s WTO accession. At the one end of the spectrum, products in Duncert1 experienced zero uncertainty
reduction. In contrast, products in the group Duncert4 benefited from the largest reduction in U.S. trade
policy uncertainty. The vertical axis of the left figure is the number of exporting firms averaged across HS
6-digit products within each group and the vertical axis for the right figure is the total export value for
products in each group. Results for processing exports are similar.

36

Table 1: Aggregate Reallocation of Export Activities
Panel A: Market Share Changes 2000-2006, Overall and by Firm Ownership
Margin
(1) Incumbents
Net entry
(2) Exiters
(3) New Exporters
(4) Adders

All
(1)
-10.484***

SOE
(2)
-5.484***

FIE
(3)
-4.663***

Dom
(4)
-0.336***

-75.995***
67.144***
19.335***

-52.107***
9.906***
11.468***

-19.761***
26.836***
5.989***

-4.127***
30.402***
1.879***

(5) Total Net Entry
10.484***
-30.734***
13.064***
28.154***
(6) Total
0
-36.218***
8.401***
27.817***
Note: This table reports the average market share changes for different margins for the period 2000 to 2006.
The data are averaged across HS 6-digit products, according to the margins of adjustment and the form of
firm ownership. In each column, the contributions due to exiters, new exporters, and adders (displayed in
rows 2 to 4) sum up to the values reported in row 5 (total net entry). Similarly, the market share changes
due to incumbents (row 1) can be summed with the market share changes caused by total net entry (row 5)
to compute the value displayed in row 6. Since the data are also disaggregated to show changes by
ownership (SOE, FIE and Domestic), the values in the associated rows for columns 2 to 4, can be summed
to arrive at the overall change by margin, displayed in column 1. Results are generated by regressing the
changes in market shares for HS 6-digit products on a constant. Triple-stared values represent statistical
significance at 1% level.
Panel B: The Growth of Firm Numbers 2000-2006, Decomposition by Margin and by Firm Ownership
Margin
(1) Incumbents
(2) Exiters
(3) New Exporters
(4) Adders

All
(1)
0
-54.387***
105.094***
29.891***

SOE
(2)
0
-40.009***
16.024***
20.611***

FIE
(3)
0
-11.515***
26.340***
6.471***

Dom
(4)
0
-2.863***
62.730***
2.809***

(5) Net Growth Rate
80.597***
-3.374***
21.295***
62.676***
Note: This table reports the contributions to the exporting firm number growth for different margins and
different firm ownerships for the period 2000 to 2006. The data are averaged across HS 6-digit products,
according to the margins of adjustment and the form of firm ownership. In each column, the contributions
due to exiters, new exporters, and adders (displayed in rows 2 to 4) sum up to the values reported in row 5
(net growth rate). Since the data are also disaggregated to show contributions by ownership (SOE, FIE and
Domestic), the values in the associated rows for columns 2 to 4, can be summed to arrive at the overall
contribution by margin, displayed in column 1. By definition the contributions due to incumbents (row 1)
are zero. Results are generated by regressing the contributions to exporting firm number growth rate for HS
6-digit products on a constant. Triple-stared values represent statistical significance at 1% level.

37

TABLE 2: Tariff Measure Summary Statistics
Variable
Tariff Policy Uncertainty Reduction
dgap (percentage points)
Change in Average Tariff Rate
dat (percentage points)
Average Tariff Rate
avt (percentage points)

Obs. #

Mean Std. Dev.

Min

Max

4721

29.99

20.37

-56.56

145.5

4721

0.16

7.10

-262.5

35

4721

3.65

7.39

0

218.75

Notes: Tariffs are measured at the HS 6-digit product level. The variable “avt” measures U.S. tariff rates
averaged over the years 2000 and 2002. The definition for the variable measuring changes in applied tariffs,
or “dat”, is dat = the year 2000 (before WTO accession) applied tariff - the year 2002 (after WTO
accession) applied tariff. Positive values reflect the reductions in applied tariffs. We define “gap” as the
difference between the worst-case tariff and the applied tariff. The reduction in uncertainty “dgap” is then
defined as dgap=(gap_2000, before WTO accession)-(gap_2002, after WTO accession). Positive values of
the variable dgap imply that tariff uncertainty fell after China’s WTO accession.

38

Table 3: Trade Policy and Number of New Entrants by Product: Main Specification
Dependent

Constant

1.327***
(0.152)

Log number of new entrants in year t (new exporters and adders in year t)
T=2006
T=2002
T=2004
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.034***
0.030***
0.016***
0.019***
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
-0.024
-0.021
0.012
0.014
(0.034)
(0.034)
(0.017)
(0.015)
-0.001
0.004
0.004
0.002
(0.026)
(0.025)
(0.011)
(0.011)
-1.542***
-1.523***
-0.815***
-0.952***
(0.213)
(0.206)
(0.153)
(0.167)
-0.810***
-0.273**
-0.405***
(0.160)
(0.120)
(0.141)
2.358***
2.958***
2.205***
2.610***
(0.196)
(0.214)
(0.131)
(0.140)

HS 2d FE
N
R2
adj. R2
Log lik.
F

No
4685
0.156
0.155
-9677.971
36.822

No
3807
0.152
0.151
-7665.135
40.836

dgap
dat
avt

(1)
0.041***
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.022)
-0.006
(0.027)

fixed_ass
imshare

No
3572
0.145
0.144
-7071.975
36.130

Yes
3572
0.349
0.330
-6105.080
13.709

Yes
3572
0.358
0.340
-6367.491
15.210

T=2006
(6)
0.018***
(0.003)
0.029**
(0.014)
0.022*
(0.011)
-0.906***
(0.173)
-0.504***
(0.156)
2.961***
(0.160)
Yes
3572
0.362
0.344
-6548.150
15.052

Notes: Standard errors in () are clustered at HS 2digit level. The change in tariff uncertainty is labelled with (
), while the average applied import tariff is
given by (avt), and the change in the applied tariffs is given by (dat). Industry fixed_assets relative to sales is measured by (fixed_ass), while the intermediary
share of trade at the 6-digit level is given by (imshare). Statistical significance denoted by: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

39

TABLE 4: Trade Policy and Number of Firms: New Exporters, Adders and Exiters
Dependent

dgap
dat
avt
fixed_ass
imshare
Constant

HS 2d FE
N
R2
adj. R2
Log lik.
F

Log firm number (year t)
new exporters
t=2002
t=2004
t=2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.018***
0.018***
0.014***
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.005
0.010
0.026*
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.015)
-0.000
-0.001
0.017
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.011)
-0.818***
-0.872***
-0.944***
(0.155)
(0.160)
(0.170)
-0.190
-0.181
-0.391**
(0.128)
(0.161)
(0.152)
***
***
1.535
2.137
2.679***
(0.134)
(0.136)
(0.152)

Log firm number (year t)
adders
t=2002
t=2004
t=2006
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.014***
0.015***
0.014***
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.013
0.014
0.026**
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.012)
0.001
0.003
0.016*
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
-0.811***
-0.771***
-0.800***
(0.143)
(0.128)
(0.154)
-0.113
-0.064
-0.160
(0.115)
(0.143)
(0.110)
1.796***
1.635***
1.549***
(0.127)
(0.124)
(0.128)

Log firm number at year 2000
exiters (exit by year t)
t=2002
t=2004
t=2006
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.013***
0.014***
0.015***
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.009
0.008
0.008
(0.017)
(0.019)
(0.018)
0.005
0.007
0.006
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.012)
-0.755***
-0.658***
-0.810***
(0.148)
(0.148)
(0.156)
-0.026
0.095
0.018
(0.137)
(0.155)
(0.126)
1.868***
1.809***
1.849***
(0.125)
(0.128)
(0.127)

Yes
3254
0.301
0.279
-5383.72
12.716

Yes
3254
0.327
0.306
-5349.44
14.061

Yes
3254
0.309
0.287
-5423.14
9.986

Yes
3350
0.322
0.302
-5941.62
13.781

Yes
3474
0.342
0.323
-6381.91
15.261

Yes
3350
0.336
0.316
-5516.71
13.071

Yes
3474
0.354
0.335
-5641.60
16.026

Yes
3350
0.308
0.287
-5703.70
8.425

Yes
3474
0.321
0.301
-5966.79
11.046

Notes: Standard errors in () are clustered at HS 2digit level. The change in tariff uncertainty is labelled with (
), while the average applied import tariff is
given by (avt), and the change in the applied tariffs is given by (dat). Industry fixed_assets relative to sales is measured by (fixed_ass), while the intermediary
share of trade at the 6-digit level is given by (imshare). Statistical significance denoted by: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

40

TABLE 5: Trade Policy Uncertainty and the Number of Firms, Difference in Differences Estimates: US comparison with the
EU as the Control Group
Dependent

US*dgap*2001
US*dgap*2002
US*dgap*2003
US*dgap*2004
US*dgap*2005
US*dgap*2006
Constant

HS6*Year FE
US*Year FE
X in US*Year*X
dat
avt
fixed_ass
imshare

(1)
0.012***
(0.001)
0.015***
(0.001)
0.016***
(0.001)
0.017***
(0.001)
0.021***
(0.001)
0.020***
(0.001)
0.244***
(0.001)

Log firm number (year t)
new entrants (new exporter and adders)
(2)
(3)
0.014***
0.013***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.017***
0.015***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.018***
0.016***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.021***
0.019***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.022***
0.020***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.022***
0.019***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.244***
0.259***
(0.001)
(0.001)

(4)
0.012***
(0.001)
0.015***
(0.001)
0.016***
(0.001)
0.018***
(0.001)
0.019***
(0.001)
0.018***
(0.001)
0.264***
(0.001)

Log firm number at year 2000 exited by year t
exiters
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.012***
0.014***
0.012***
0.012***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.012***
0.014***
0.012***
0.012***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.011***
0.013***
0.012***
0.011***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.012***
0.014***
0.012***
0.012***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.012***
0.014***
0.012***
0.012***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.012***
0.014***
0.013***
0.012***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.169***
0.169***
0.180***
0.183***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

N
278446
278446
259476
254968
278446
278446
259476
254968
0.738
0.738
0.747
0.749
0.724
0.725
0.734
0.736
R2
0.738
0.738
0.747
0.749
0.724
0.725
0.734
0.736
adj. R2
F
6138.980
4646.850
4083.272
3520.625
4309.669
3249.056
2689.484
2264.383
Notes: Standard errors in () are clustered at HS 6digit level. The change in tariff uncertainty is labelled with (
). Coefficients for the triple interaction with
(
) by year (2001-2006) are reported, while other variables are suppressed. The average applied import tariff is given by (avt), and the change in the applied
tariffs is given by (dat). Industry fixed_assets relative to sales is measured by (fixed_ass), while the intermediary share of trade at the 6-digit level is given by
(imshare). Statistical significance denoted by: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

41

TABLE 6: Trade Policy Uncertainty and the Number of Firms, Difference in Differences Estimates: US comparison with the
UK, Germany, France as Control Group
Dependent

US*dgap*2001
US*dgap*2002
US*dgap*2003
US*dgap*2004
US*dgap*2005
US*dgap*2006
Constant

HS6*Year FE
US*Year FE
X in US*Year*X
dat
avt
fixed_ass
imshare

(1)
0.009***
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.001)
0.013***
(0.001)
0.016***
(0.001)
0.015***
(0.001)
0.455***
(0.002)

Log firm number in year t
new entrants (new exporter and adders)
(2)
(3)
0.012***
0.010***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.014***
0.013***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.015***
0.013***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.017***
0.015***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.018***
0.016***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.016***
0.014***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.455***
0.485***
(0.002)
(0.002)

(4)
0.010***
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.001)
0.013***
(0.001)
0.014***
(0.001)
0.015***
(0.001)
0.013***
(0.001)
0.493***
(0.002)

Log firm number at year 2000 exited by year t
Exiters
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.010***
0.012***
0.011***
0.010***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.010***
0.011***
0.010***
0.010***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.009***
0.011***
0.010***
0.009***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.010***
0.012***
0.010***
0.010***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.009***
0.011***
0.010***
0.010***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.010***
0.012***
0.011***
0.010***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.319***
0.319***
0.339***
0.345***
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

N
79556
79556
74136
72848
79556
79556
74136
72848
0.864
0.865
0.874
0.876
0.830
0.831
0.839
0.841
R2
0.864
0.865
0.874
0.876
0.830
0.831
0.839
0.841
adj. R2
F
6601.847
5032.622
4378.683
3774.275
4567.925
3456.139
2840.160
2393.718
Notes: Standard errors in () are clustered at HS 6digit level. The change in tariff uncertainty is labelled with (
). Coefficients for the triple interaction with
(
) by year (2001-2006) are reported, while other variables are suppressed. The average applied import tariff is given by (avt), and the change in the applied
tariffs is given by (dat). Industry fixed_assets relative to sales is measured by (fixed_ass), while the intermediary share of trade at the 6-digit level is given by
(imshare).
Statistical
significance
denoted
by:
*
p
<
0.10,
**
p
<
0.05,
***
p
<
0.01.

42

Table 7: Aggregate Price Changes at the 6-digit Product Level
Dependent

Constant
dgap
dat

N
adj. R2

Percentage change of aggregate unit price (from year 2000 to year t) for HS 6-digit
products
T=2002
T=2002
T=2004
T=2004
T=2006
T=2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.291***
0.422***
0.485***
0.712***
0.720***
0.967***
(0.049)
(0.078)
(0.0603)
(0.080)
(0.098)
(0.130)
-0.004***
-0.007***
-0.007***
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.002
-0.003
-0.009
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.011)
3244
0.000

3244
0.002

3255
0.000

3255
0.005

3290
0.000

3290
0.004

Notes: The change in tariff uncertainty is labelled with (
), while the change in the applied tariffs is
given by (dat). Statistical significance denoted by: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 8: Price Difference between New Exporters and Exiters
Dependent

NewExp

NewExp*dgap
NewExp*dat
Constant

HS 6-digit FE
Ownership FE
N
adj. R2

Ln (Unit price) in year t (for new exporters) or in year 2000 (for exiters)
T=2002
T=2004
T=2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.114***
0.042***
0.346***
0.180***
0.584***
0.107***
(0.006)
(0.016)
(0.005)
(0.013)
(0.004)
(0.012)
-0.002***
-0.003***
-0.005***
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.004
-0.004
-0.017***
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.946***
0.911***
0.972***
0.943***
1.012***
0.994***
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Yes
No
149561
0.561

Yes
Yes
149561
0.573

Yes
No
274347
0.559

Yes
Yes
274347
0.570

Yes
No
448174
0.547

Yes
Yes
448174
0.559

Notes: The change in tariff uncertainty is labeled with (
), while the change in the applied tariffs is
given by (dat). New export transactions are denoted by an indicator variable (NewExp). Statistical
significance denoted by: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

43

Table 9: Quality Difference between New Exporters and Exiters
Dependent

NewExp
NewExp*dgap
NewExp*dat
Constant

HS 6digit FE
Ownership FE
N
R2
adj. R2
Log lik.
F

Quality in year t (for new exporters) or in year 2000 (for exiters)
T=2002
T=2004
T=2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.261***
0.369***
0.161***
0.383***
0.087***
0.432***
(0.012)
(0.030)
(0.009)
(0.024)
(0.008)
(0.022)
-0.000
-0.000
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
-0.001
-0.008
-0.014**
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.007)
-0.569*** -0.640*** -0.348*** -0.437*** -0.232*** -0.315***
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.008)
Yes
No
147640
0.024
0.005
-3.22e+05
496.831

Yes
Yes
147640
0.033
0.015
-3.22e+05
240.543

Yes
No
271508
0.009
-0.002
-6.08e+05
290.948

Yes
Yes
271508
0.027
0.017
-6.05e+05
589.570

Yes
No
443497
0.004
-0.003
-9.99e+05
108.331

Yes
Yes
443497
0.028
0.022
-9.94e+05
1234.143

Notes: The change in tariff uncertainty is labeled with (
), while the change in the applied tariffs is
given by (dat). New export transactions are denoted by an indicator variable (NewExp). Statistical
significance denoted by:
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

44

Appendix

A1 Proof of existence and uniqueness of equilibrium solution
We can rewrite the ZCP and FE conditions as

∗

≡

, where

1 1
. As shown by Melitz (2003),
goes from ∞ to 0 when goes from 0 to ∞.
for any given value of .
This proves the existence and uniqueness of the solution ∗ and
This property of
also necessarily implies that the solutions of ∗ and
are increasing
∗
goes to infinity. When goes to
functions of . Specifically, when goes to infinity,
∗
zero,
goes to zero. The same applies to
.

A2 Derivation of estimating equation (16)
The full empirical specification is as follows:
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

Note we have included very comprehensive fixed effects: product*year fixed effects and
country*product fixed effects.

∑

1

∑

terms ∑

,

Further note that the product*year fixed effects,
1

.

Similarly,

the

, 1
are absorbed by the country*product fixed effects,
simplify the estimation equation as:
1
1

1

1

45

1
1

1
terms

,
1

. Thus, we can

Taking differences across periods, the equation can then be written as
1

1

1

1

1

1

which is estimation equation (16).

A3 Import structure similarity
We construct the import similarity index based on the approach of Finger and Kreinin (1979). We
first calculate the import share of product h in a country c’s total imports from China in year t,
⁄ ∑
. We then construct the similarity index by comparing these shares to
100 ∑ min
,
. This
the shares in the reference country, which is US in our case,
index is bounded by zero and one hundred, with higher values indicate higher similarity.
Appendix Table 4 shows the similarity index for the EU countries.

A4 Adders vs Exiters
In this section, we compare prices and qualities of adders against those of exiting exporters. The
estimation equation and approach are similar to those in text when we compare new exporters and
exiters.
Appendix Table 5 reports the results comparing adders’ price with exiters’ price. As shown
by columns 1, unlike new exporters in year 2002, adders on average charged higher prices in
2002 than did exiters in 2000. For years 2004 and 2006, we also find adders charged higher prices
in these years than the exiters’ price in 2000. For year 2002 and 2004 (columns 2 and 4), we do
not find that the price difference between adders and exiters was significantly correlated with
uncertainty reduction, though we do find negative significant correlation in year 2006.
Appendix Table 6 reports the quality results comparing adders against exiters. As shown by
columns 1, 3 and 5, we find that adders on average have higher quality than exiters in all years.
Moreover, for years 2004 and 2006 (columns 4 and 6), we find that the quality difference between
adders and exiters are significantly larger if the product experienced higher uncertainty reduction.
Overall, although we do not find strong evidence that adders charged lower prices than
exiters, we do find that they export goods with higher qualities than the exiters. Moreover, we
find some evidence that the price and quality premium of adders relative to exporting exiters were
related to the products’ uncertainty reduction.

46

A5 Productivity Comparison of New Exporters and Exiters
We estimate manufacturing firms’ TFP based on the Chinese Manufacturing census, following
Feenstra, Li and Yu (2014). We then matched the firms in the Chinese Manufacturing census with
the firms in the Customs dataset. Details of the matching procedure can be found in Feng, Li and
Swenson (2012). Since we only have one productivity measure for each firm, we assign this
productivity to each product exported by the firm. We thus have firm*product level information
of firm productivity for new exporters in the years (2002, 2004 and 2006) and for exiters in the
year (2000). Note, since all nominal values are deflated when we estimate firm TFP, productivity
measures in different years are comparable. Note also that we maintain the dataset at
firm*product level in order to compare productivities of firms that were exporting the same HS 6digit products.
For the pooled sample of new exporters and exporting exiters, we regress the productivity
measure, our TFP estimate, on the new exporter dummy and its interactions with our measure of
uncertainty reductions and/or with the applied tariff reductions. The specification for this
regression is identical to Eq. (17), but with the dependent variable replaced by the productivity
measure.
Appendix Table 7 displays the productivity regression results. Columns 1, 3 and 5 show that,
for exporters which exported the same HS 6-digit products, the productivity of new exporters
exceeded the productivity of exiters in 2004 and 2006, but not immediately after WTO accession
in 2002. In columns 2, 4 and 6 we do not find that the magnitude of the productivity premium of
new exporters was related to the magnitude of the trade policy uncertainty reductions.

47

APPENDIX TABLES

Appendix Table 1: Market Share Changes 2000-2002, Overall and by Firm Ownership
Margin
(1) Incumbents
Net entry
(2) Exiters
(3) New Exporters
(4) Adders

All
(1)
-6.479***

SOE
(2)
-3.808***

FIE
(3)
-2.677***

Dom
(4)
0.006

-53.489***
25.845***
34.123***

-38.069***
8.826***
24.756***

-12.418***
10.196***
6.812***

-3.002***
6.824***
2.555***

(5) Total Net Entry
(6) Total

6.479***
0

-4.487***
-8.295***

4.589***
1.912***

6.377***
6.383***

Note: This table reports the average market share changes for different margins for the period from 2000 to 2002.

Appendix Table 2: Sectors in HS Classification
Sector Name
Food
Minerals
Chemicals
Plastics
Leather
Wood

HS 2 digit
1-24
25-27
28-38
39-40
41-43
44-46

Sector Name
Paper
Textiles
Footwear
Ceramics
Jewelry
Iron

HS 2 digit
47-49
50-63
64-67
68-70
71
72-83

48

Sector Name
Machinery
Vehicles
Instruments
Arms
Toys
Arts

HS 2 digit
84-85
86-89
90-92
93
94-96
97

Appendix Table 3: Trade Policy and Number of Firms: New Exporters, Adders and Exiters, Sample excluding the Textile, Machinery and
Instrument Industries
Dependent

dgap
dat
avt
fixed_ass
imshare
Constant

HS 2d FE
N
adj. R2
F

Log firm number (year t)
new exporters
T=2002
T=2004
T=2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.016***
0.019***
0.020***
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
-0.000
0.007
0.015
(0.022)
(0.023)
(0.021)
-0.002
0.000
0.007
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.017)
-0.632***
-0.806***
-0.807***
(0.132)
(0.166)
(0.175)
-0.067
-0.278*
-0.391**
(0.128)
(0.158)
(0.166)
1.496***
2.203***
2.659***
(0.146)
(0.159)
(0.175)

Log firm number (year t)
adders
T=2002
T=2004
T=2006
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.017***
0.016***
0.015***
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
0.007
0.016
0.018
(0.022)
(0.019)
(0.016)
-0.003
0.005
0.005
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.014)
-0.649***
-0.710***
-0.643***
(0.152)
(0.135)
(0.151)
-0.105
-0.131
-0.151
(0.135)
(0.125)
(0.120)
1.698***
1.664***
1.597***
(0.135)
(0.135)
(0.137)

Log firm number (year 2000)
exiters (exit by year t)
T=2002
T=2004
T=2006
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.017***
0.018***
0.017***
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
-0.002
-0.002
-0.001
(0.022)
(0.023)
(0.023)
-0.004
-0.003
-0.002
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.018)
-0.651***
-0.659***
-0.671***
(0.159)
(0.161)
(0.166)
-0.057
-0.083
-0.055
(0.144)
(0.156)
(0.154)
1.807***
1.927***
1.966***
(0.136)
(0.146)
(0.145)

Yes
2124
0.343
8.830

Yes
2124
0.363
9.155

Yes
2124
0.357
7.574

Yes
2124
0.357
10.996

Yes
2124
0.354
11.656

Yes
2124
0.366
12.383

Yes
2124
0.371
10.689

Yes
2124
0.350
7.895

Yes
2124
0.351
7.605

Note: This table reports regression results based on the exclusion of the textile, apparel, machinery and instrument sectors from our full sample. Standard errors in () are clustered
at HS 2digit level. The change in tariff uncertainty is labelled with (
), while the average applied import tariff is given by (avt), and the change in the applied tariffs is given by
(dat). Industry fixed_assets relative to sales is measured by (fixed_ass), while the intermediary share of trade at the 6-digit level is given by (imshare). Statistical significance
denoted by: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

49

Appendix Table 4: Import Similarity Index for EU Countries with the U.S.
Country
Similarity
Country
Similarity
United Kingdom
.71
Sweden
.52
Germany
.64
Austria
.52
France
.64
Belgium
.50
Spain
.56
Italy
.50
Netherlands
.55
Portugal
.49
Note: method for computing import similarity indices described in A3.

Country
Finland
Denmark
Greece
Ireland
Luxembourg

Similarity
.48
.46
.46
.33
.17

Appendix Table 5: Price Difference between Adders and Exiters
Dependent

Adder
Adder*dgap
Adder*dat
Constant

HS 6d FE
Ownership
FE
N
adj. R2

Ln (Unit price) in year t (for adders) or in year 2000 (for exiters)
T=2002
T=2004
T=2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.055***
0.053***
0.191***
0.212***
0.385***
0.488***
(0.006)
(0.016)
(0.006)
(0.015)
(0.006)
(0.015)
0.000
-0.000
-0.002***
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
-0.001
-0.011**
-0.038***
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.006)
0.983***
0.946***
1.002***
0.964***
1.027***
0.988***
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

158373
0.545

158373
0.548

177996
0.557

177996
0.559

186350
0.566

186350
0.569

Notes: The indicator variable, Adder, is set to one for all new product exports that were added by existing exporters of other
products. Notes: The change in tariff uncertainty is labeled with (
), while the change in the applied tariffs is given by (dat).
Statistical significance denoted by: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

50

Appendix Table 6: Quality Difference between Adders and Exiters
Dependent
Variable

Adder
Adder*dgap
Adder*dat
Constant

HS 6d FE
Ownership
FE
N
Log lik.
adj. R2

Quality in year t (for adders) or in year 2000 (for exiters)
T=2002
(1)
(2)
0.052***
0.048*
(0.011)
(0.028)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.007
(0.008)
-0.543***
-0.572***
(0.008)
(0.009)

T=2004
(3)
(4)
0.112***
0.063**
(0.012)
(0.029)
0.001*
(0.001)
-0.012
(0.009)
-0.333***
-0.386***
(0.007)
(0.008)

T=2006
(5)
(6)
0.298***
0.238***
(0.012)
(0.030)
0.001**
(0.001)
-0.015
(0.012)
-0.232***
-0.291***
(0.007)
(0.008)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

156070
-3.41e+05
0.006

156070
-3.41e+05
0.007

175676
-3.91e+05
-0.001

175676
-3.91e+05
0.001

183805
-4.11e+05
0.000

183805
-4.11e+05
0.002

Notes: The indicator variable, Adder, is set to one for all new product exports that were added by existing exporters of
other products. Notes: The change in tariff uncertainty is labeled with (
), while the change in the applied tariffs is
given by (dat). Statistical significance denoted by: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Appendix Table 7: Productivity Difference between New Exporters and Exiters
Dependent

NewExp
NewExp*dgap
NewExp*dat
Constant

HS 6digit FE
Ownership FE
N
adj. R2

Productivity (TFP) in year t (for new exporters) or in year 2000 (for exiters)
T=2002
T=2004
T=2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.006
0.025
0.034***
0.080***
0.034***
0.074***
(0.011)
(0.027)
(0.008)
(0.019)
(0.006)
(0.015)
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.000)
-0.001
-0.010
-0.004
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.006)
3.689***
3.766***
3.685***
3.726***
3.704***
3.735***
0.006
0.025
0.034***
0.080***
0.034***
0.074***
Yes
No
12963
0.268

Yes
Yes
12963
0.273

Yes
No
27682
0.294

Yes
Yes
27682
0.296

Yes
No
61282
0.268

Yes
Yes
61282
0.271

Notes: The change in tariff uncertainty is labeled with (
), while the change in the applied tariffs is given by (dat).
New export transactions are denoted by an indicator variable (NewExp). Statistical significance denoted by: * p <
0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

51

