                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE COMPLEXITY OF IMMIGRANT GENERATIONS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR ASSESSING THE SOCIOECONOMIC INTEGRATION OF HISPANICS AND ASIANS

                                                  Brian Duncan
                                                 Stephen J. Trejo

                                              Working Paper 21982
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w21982


                            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           February 2016




     This research was supported by NICHD grants R03HD050574 and R03HD066104 to Stephen Trejo
     and R24HD042849 to the Population Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin. The content
     is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
     NICHD or the NIH. For helpful comments, the authors are grateful to Richard Alba, Catalina Amuedo-Dorantes,
     Heather Antecol, Silvia Barcellos, David Bjerk, Sandra Black, Marika Cabral, Jose Fernandez, Michael
     Geruso, Daniel Hamermesh, Charles Hirschman, John Iceland, Gerald Oettinger, Arthur Sakamoto,
     Aliya Saperstein, Jon Sonstelie, Todd Sorensen, and Mary Waters. The views expressed herein are
     those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

     NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
     reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
     NBER publications.

     © 2016 by Brian Duncan and Stephen J. Trejo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
     two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
     is given to the source.
The Complexity of Immigrant Generations: Implications for Assessing the Socioeconomic
Integration of Hispanics and Asians
Brian Duncan and Stephen J. Trejo
NBER Working Paper No. 21982
February 2016
JEL No. J15,J61,J62

                                                 ABSTRACT

Because of data limitations, virtually all studies of the later-generation descendants of immigrants
rely on subjective measures of ethnic self-identification rather than arguably more objective measures
based on the countries of birth of the respondent and his ancestors. In this context, biases can arise
from “ethnic attrition” (e.g., U.S.-born individuals who do not self-identify as Hispanic despite having
ancestors who were immigrants from a Spanish-speaking country). Analyzing 2003-2013 data from
the Current Population Survey (CPS), this study shows that such ethnic attrition is sizeable and selective
for the second- and third-generation populations of key Hispanic and Asian national origin groups.
In addition, the results indicate that ethnic attrition generates measurement biases that vary across
groups in direction as well as magnitude, and that correcting for these biases is likely to raise the socioeconomic
standing of the U.S.-born descendants of most Hispanic immigrants relative to their Asian counterparts.


Brian Duncan
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Campus Box 181
Denver, CO 80217-3364
brian.duncan@ucdenver.edu

Stephen J. Trejo
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway Stop C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
trejo@austin.utexas.edu
       Recent research emphasizes how immigrant ancestry and interethnic marriage shape

racial/ethnic attachment and identification, and how “ethnic attrition” can generate potentially

serious problems for tracking the socioeconomic progress of later-generation descendants of U.S.

immigrant groups (Perlmann and Waters 2007; Alba and Islam 2009; Lee and Bean 2010). Our

own previous work demonstrates the salience of these issues for the specific case of Mexican

Americans (Duncan and Trejo 2007, 2009, 2011). Analyzing microdata from the Current

Population Survey (CPS) for children living with both parents, in Duncan and Trejo (2011) we

compare an objective indicator of Mexican descent (based on the countries of birth of the child,

his parents, and his grandparents) with the standard subjective measure of Mexican identification

(based on the response to the Hispanic origin question). We find that about 30 percent of third-

generation Mexican children are not identified as Mexican by the Hispanic origin question in the

CPS, and this ethnic attrition is highly selective. In particular, the high school dropout rate of

third-generation Mexican youth (ages 16 and 17) is 25 percent higher when the sample is limited

to those youth subjectively identified as Mexican. Therefore, our previous research suggests that

ethnic attrition is substantial among third-generation Mexicans and could produce significant

downward bias in standard measures of attainment which rely on subjective ethnic identification

rather than objective indicators of Mexican descent.

       Does such evidence mitigate concerns that Mexican Americans do not seem to be

experiencing the same kind of socioeconomic integration enjoyed by the U.S.-born descendants

of other immigrant groups, particularly Asians? Not necessarily. Given that intermarriage is a

primary source of ethnic attrition, and that intermarriage rates for most groups are at least as high

as those of Mexicans (Lieberson and Waters 1988; Lichter and Qian 2005), the resulting biases

could be even larger for the descendants of non-Mexican immigrants. If the measurement biases
                                                  2

from ethnic attrition run in the same direction for all national origin groups, then correcting for

these biases could ultimately produce little improvement or even a worsening in the relative

standing of Mexican Americans.

       Some theories of intermarriage (e.g., Furtado 2006, 2012; Kalmijn 2012), however, imply

that the biases from ethnic attrition could differ across groups not only in magnitude but also in

direction. For reasons explained below, such theories predict that members of low-education

groups (such as some Hispanic groups) who intermarry should be positively selected in terms of

education, whereas the corresponding selectivity should be less positive and perhaps even

negative for intermarried members of high-education groups (such as most Asian groups).

Because ethnic attrition predominately occurs among those with mixed origins (i.e., the products

of interethnic marriages), differences across groups in intermarriage selectivity can generate

corresponding differences in the selectivity of ethnic attrition. Therefore, it is of both theoretical

and empirical interest to analyze the extent and selectivity of ethnic attrition for a variety of

immigrant groups, as we do here for the first time.

       Historically, much of the socioeconomic mobility achieved by U.S. immigrant families

has taken place across rather than within generations (Neidert and Farley 1985; Borjas 1994;

Perlmann 2005). When evaluating the long-term integration of immigrants, it is therefore

important to analyze differences not just between the foreign-born and U.S-born, but also across

generations of the U.S.-born (Farley and Alba 2002; Card 2005; Smith 2006). The ideal data set

for such an analysis would include information about the family tree of each individual, enabling

us to identify which individuals have ancestors who immigrated to the United States from a

particular country and how many generations have elapsed since that immigration took place.

Information of this sort would also allow us to characterize the complexity of each individual’s
                                                 3

immigrant roots in some detail, accounting for factors such as the specific national origins of an

individual’s immigrant ancestors, whether the same national origins show up on both the paternal

and maternal sides of the family tree, and how far removed from the current generation are the

immigrant ancestors.

       Unfortunately, the large, nationally-representative data sources typically employed to

study U.S. immigrants and their descendants provide only very limited information pertaining to

immigrant generations. Microdata sources such as the decennial U.S. Census, the American

Community Survey (ACS), and the CPS report each respondent’s country of birth, thereby

distinguishing foreign-born individuals (i.e., the first generation) from the U.S.-born population.

Only the CPS, however, currently collects information about the countries of birth of each

respondent’s parents, which allows the second generation (i.e., U.S.-born individuals who have

at least one foreign-born parent) to be differentiated from higher generations of U.S.-born

individuals. Moreover, none of these surveys provide information about the countries of birth of

an adult respondent’s grandparents, so studies of immigrant descendants beyond the second

generation are forced to identify the population of interest using subjective measures of ethnic

identification (e.g., third- and higher-generation Mexicans are U.S.-born individuals who have

U.S.-born parents and who self-identify as Mexican in response to the Hispanic origin question).

       In this context, measurement biases arising from selective ethnic identification could

distort assessments of the socioeconomic attainment and integration of later-generation

descendants of immigrants. The current paper explores this issue for a wide range of national

origin groups from important Hispanic (Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, El Salvador, and the

Dominican Republic) and Asian (China, India, Japan, Korea, and the Philippines) source

countries. Using microdata from recent years of the CPS, we delineate the strong links between
                                                                4

generational complexity and ethnic identification. In addition, we analyze the extent and

educational selectivity of ethnic attrition among first-, second-, and third-generation members of

these immigrant groups, and we provide some evidence on the consequent biases in standard

measures of attainment that almost always rely on subjective ethnic identification for immigrant

descendants in the third generation and beyond. We also show that the theoretical mechanism

described above potentially accounts for a substantial portion of the variation across national

origin groups in the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition. Finally, the appendix documents

that changes to the CPS Hispanic origin and race questions adopted in 2003 had a substantial

impact on ethnic attrition among Hispanics and Asians.



                                                              Data

          We use microdata from the CPS for all months from January 2003 through December

2013. 1 The CPS is a monthly survey of 50,000-60,000 households that the U.S. government

administers to estimate unemployment rates and other indicators of labor market activity. In

addition to the detailed demographic and labor force data reported for all respondents, the CPS

collects earnings information each month from one-quarter of the sample, the so-called

“outgoing rotation groups.” The data we analyze come from these outgoing rotation group

samples. The CPS sampling scheme is such that selected residences are surveyed for four

consecutive months (e.g., January through April), then leave the sample for eight months (e.g.,


          1
              As described more fully in the appendix, major changes to the CPS questions regarding Hispanic origin and race were
introduced in the January 2003 survey (Bowler et al. 2003). By asking directly about Hispanic ethnicity and by allowing
multiple race responses, the CPS now elicits higher rates of subjective ethnic identification among the descendants of Hispanic
and Asian immigrants. The evidence we present below, however, suggests that ethnic attrition remains a significant problem in
the post-2002 CPS data collected using the improved questionnaire. Moreover, the Hispanic origin and race questions introduced
in the 2003 CPS are similar to the analogous questions employed in the Census and ACS from 2000 forward, and so the issues
pertaining to subjective identification and selective ethnic attrition that we explore here with CPS data will also be relevant for
Census and ACS data. For these reasons, we focus on CPS data from January 2003 forward, but the appendix shows that ethnic
attrition is even more prevalent in earlier CPS data.
                                                              5

May through December), and return for a final four months (e.g., January through April of the

following year) before exiting the sample for good. The outgoing rotation groups in a given

month include those residences that will rotate out of the sample in the following month, either

temporarily (i.e., those residences completing their fourth month in the CPS sample) or

permanently (i.e., those residences being surveyed for the eighth and final time). To avoid

samples with repeated observations for a given household, we use only data from the first time a

residence appears in an outgoing rotation group (i.e., we use only data from the fourth month that

a residence appears in the CPS sample). By pooling together these 11 years of monthly CPS

data, we substantially increase sample sizes and improve the precision of our estimates. A key

feature of CPS data is their inclusion (beginning in 1994) of the information about parental

countries of birth that is currently missing from the Census and ACS. As a result, the CPS is

now the best large-scale, nationally-representative U.S. data set for investigating how outcomes

vary by immigrant generation.

         Throughout this paper, we define immigrant generations using information on the

countries of birth of the respondent, his parents, and (when possible, as described below) his

grandparents. The first generation consists of foreign-born individuals (excluding those born

abroad of an American parent). The second generation includes U.S.-born individuals who have

at least one foreign-born parent. The third generation denotes U.S.-born individuals with two

U.S.-born parents but at least one foreign-born grandparent. These immigrant generations are

defined with respect to the specific Hispanic and Asian source countries that we analyze here.

The Hispanic source countries are Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, El Salvador, and the Dominican

Republic, and the Asian source countries are China, India, Japan, Korea, and the Philippines. 2


         2
           These particular countries were chosen because they are important sources of U.S. immigration and they yield CPS
samples of reasonable size for all three generations. Based on 2000 Census data, these five Hispanic national origin groups
                                                                6

So, for example, a first-generation Cuban is someone who was born in Cuba and immigrated to

the United States, and a second-generation Japanese is a U.S.-born individual whose father

and/or mother were born in Japan.

          The approach described above assigns national origins using the specific countries of

birth of the respondent and his ancestors. In contrast, data limitations commonly force

researchers to adopt an alternative approach whereby self-reported race/ethnicity is used to

approximate the national origins of immigrant groups, especially for individuals beyond the first

generation (e.g., in Census or ACS data, second- and higher-generation Asians are U.S.-born

individuals who subjectively identify as Asian in response to the race question). A central aim of

the current paper is to investigate the accuracy of these approximations. For this purpose, we

examine the subjective racial/ethnic identification of individuals whose immigrant generation

and national origins can be determined from the information available in the CPS regarding the

countries of birth of themselves and their ancestors. For individuals linked to Hispanic source

countries, we examine whether they subjectively identify as Hispanic in response to the Hispanic

origin question in the CPS. 3 For individuals linked to Asian source countries, we examine




account for over three-quarters of the U.S. Hispanic population (Guzman 2001), and the analogous statement also holds for the
five Asian national origin groups that we study (Barnes and Bennett 2002). Persons born in Puerto Rico are U.S. citizens and
enjoy unfettered mobility between the island and the U.S. mainland, and therefore Puerto Ricans are not, strictly speaking, a U.S.
“immigrant” group. Nonetheless, island-born Puerto-Ricans who move to the United States and their U.S.-born descendants
encounter many of the same adjustment issues as conventional immigrant groups. Accordingly, the socioeconomic mobility of
Puerto Ricans is often analyzed using models and methods developed to study U.S. immigrant groups (e.g., Feliciano 2001;
Hirschman 2001).
           3
             Since January 2003, the CPS has collected information about Hispanic origin as follows. Respondents are asked
whether they are “Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino,” and those who answer affirmatively are then asked to designate a specific
Hispanic national origin group (Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central/South American, or Other Spanish). The Hispanic origin
question in the 2000 Census is similar (Grieco and Cassidy 2001). In this paper, we employ the broad indicator of “Hispanic”
ethnic identification that potentially applies to all of the Hispanic national origin groups. In previous work that focused on
Mexicans (Duncan and Trejo 2007, 2009, 2011), we employed the specific indicator for “Mexican” ethnic identification. In CPS
data, the “Hispanic” indicator captures all those who designate a specific national origin (such as Mexican, Puerto Rican, or
Cuban) as well those who identify as Hispanic but fail to indicate a specific national origin. Therefore, the results reported here
may understate the amount of ethnic attrition that would be relevant when a particular Hispanic national origin group is the focus
of analysis.
                                                                7

whether they subjectively identify as Asian in response to the race question in the CPS.4

          To improve the reliability of our measures of subjective racial/ethnic identification, we

exclude individuals with imputed information regarding Hispanic origin (for analyses of

Hispanic source countries) or race (for analyses of Asian source countries). By doing so, we

avoid confounding true ethnic attrition with errors generated by the CPS imputation process. To

more accurately assign immigrant generations, we exclude individuals with missing or imputed

information regarding the country of birth of themselves or any relevant ancestors. In particular,

we exclude all individuals with missing or imputed information regarding their own country of

birth. When constructing samples for the second and third generations, we also exclude

individuals with missing or imputed information regarding the country of birth of either parent,

and when defining the third generation, we further exclude individuals with missing or imputed

information regarding the country of birth of any grandparent.

          Our samples of first- and second-generation adults ages 25-59 are constructed using the

information collected in the CPS regarding the countries of birth of each respondent and of each

respondent’s father and mother. By matching second-generation individuals in the CPS with

their spouses and children, we can push this analysis one step further and learn something about

ethnic attrition in the third generation. For children living with both parents, the survey data

collected from the parents reveal the countries of birth of each child’s grandparents. With this

information, we can now formulate a more precise definition of the third generation, as opposed

to the standard definition that relies on subjective racial/ethnic identification and does not
          4
            Unlike the Census and ACS, the CPS race question does not identify specific Asian national origin groups (e.g.,
Chinese, Japanese, Korean, etc.). Prior to 2003, the relevant race category in the CPS was “Asian or Pacific Islander.” Starting
in January 2003, “Asian” and “Hawaiian/Pacific Islander” become separate categories, and respondents can identify with more
than one race category (Bowler et al. 2003). For the sake of comparability with earlier data, from 2003 on we consider
individuals to identify as Asian if they respond to the CPS race question with “Asian” or “Hawaiian/Pacific Islander” (or both),
even if they also give other (i.e., non-Asian) race responses. Treating multiple race responses in this way will produce
conservative estimates of ethnic attrition. In the appendix, we discuss how the 2003 changes in the CPS questionnaire affected
Hispanic and Asian identification.
                                                                8

distinguish the true third generation from higher generations. Our third-generation samples

include U.S.-born children ages 17 and below who live in intact families and have two U.S.-born

parents (ages 18 and above) but at least one grandparent born in a relevant source country. 5 We

limit the third-generation samples to children in married, intact families because complete

information regarding grandparents’ countries of birth is available only for children living in the

same household as both of their parents.

          At the outset, let us acknowledge some important limitations of our analysis of third-

generation children. First, because we must restrict attention to children in married, intact

families, these samples are not representative of all third-generation children. Available

evidence suggests that endogamy is more prevalent in marriage than in cohabitation or out-of-

wedlock childbearing, so restricting our samples to married, intact families is likely to understate

the extent of ethnic attrition. 6

          Second, the analyses we report do not distinguish children with step or adoptive parents

from those with biological parents. Not until 2007 does the CPS collect the information

necessary to make such distinctions. Using only the data from 2007 forward, we find that around

10 percent of the third-generation children in our samples have at least one non-biological

parent. When we limit our analyses to children with two biological parents, rates of Hispanic

and Asian identification rise, but only modestly (i.e., by a couple of percentage points, at most),

and the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition does not change.

          Third, we base our measures of subjective ethnic identification for third-generation


          5
           Our samples of third-generation children include siblings from the same set of parents. When we avoid repeated
observations within families by retaining only the youngest child from each family, sample sizes fall by roughly half, but the
results remain very similar to those reported below using the full samples.
          6
           After reviewing the relevant literature, Perlmann and Waters (2004, p. 275) conclude that “formal marriage and the
children born in wedlock provide us with a conservative view of the degree of intermixing—both in terms of interethnic couples
and in terms of the production of mixed-ancestry children.”
                                                                9

children on their responses to the CPS Hispanic origin and race questions, but these responses

primarily represent a parent or other adult member of the household answering for the child. A

critical issue is whether these children will give similar responses when they become adults and

answer for themselves. 7 Fourth, because the CPS does not provide informative measures of

attainment for children, we analyze the selectivity of ethnic attrition among third-generation

children somewhat indirectly, by examining the education levels of their parents. Finally, for

some of the national origin groups, the samples of third-generation children are small (see the

appendix). Note that none of these limitations apply to our analysis of ethnic attrition among

second-generation adults. Individuals with a foreign-born parent retain relatively strong ethnic

attachments, however, so if we restrict our analysis to the second generation we would miss the

more extensive ethnic attrition that occurs in later generations. Therefore, despite its limitations,

we believe our analysis of ethnic attrition in the third generation provides a useful empirical

glimpse into a potentially significant topic about which little is currently known.



                                                      Basic Patterns

         As a simple way of summarizing our findings and highlighting some of the potential

implications, Tables 1 and 2 show the basic patterns that emerge when our source country

samples are pooled into pan-ethnic aggregates for Hispanics and for Asians. 8 For the individuals

we can objectively assign as first-, second-, or third-generation members of a relevant Hispanic
         7
            See Portes and Rumbaut (2001, chapter 7) for a discussion of parental and other influences on the evolving ethnic
identities of second-generation adolescents.
         8
            Our samples of second-generation adults and third-generation children include a small amount of overlap across
source countries, due to individuals with mixed origins (e.g., a third-generation child with one grandparent born in Puerto Rico
and another grandparent born in the Dominican Republic). The aggregated, pan-ethnic samples of Hispanics count each
individual only once, and so do the pan-ethnic samples of Asians, but there remains a tiny amount of overlap between the
Hispanic and Asian samples, because of a few individuals with both Hispanic and Asian ancestry. We do not employ the CPS
sampling weights in any of the calculations we report in this paper, because these weights are constructed using the information
on subjective racial/ethnic identification that we treat as endogenous (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2006). Nevertheless, weighted
calculations produce similar results.
                                                 10

or Asian national origin group, Table 1 reports the percentage who subjectively identify in the

expected way. Among Hispanics, these ethnic identification rates fall from 99 percent for first-

generation adults to 93 percent for second-generation adults to 82 percent for third-generation

children. Ethnic attrition is more prevalent and the generational gradient is steeper for Asians,

with ethnic identification rates of 96 percent for the first generation, 79 percent for the second

generation, and 58 percent for the third generation.

       Analyzing data from the 2000 Census, Rumbaut (2006, Table 2-3) reports a strong

correspondence between country of birth and subjective ethnic identification for Hispanic

immigrants. Our CPS samples confirm this finding and reveal a similar pattern for Asian

immigrants. We did not expect to find much ethnic attrition in the first generation, so we are not

surprised by the very high rates of Hispanic and Asian identification among foreign-born adults

from the relevant source countries. Ethnic identification rates for the first generation do provide

an important baseline, however, for measuring ethnic attrition in the second and third

generations. The fact that immigrants from these Hispanic and Asian countries consistently

choose the expected response suggests that they understand the CPS Hispanic origin and race

questions and do not have difficulty locating where they fit within the implied racial/ethnic

configuration. This finding for the first generation implies that the significant decline in

subjective identification observed for later generations represents true ethnic attrition rather than

confusion with the CPS questionnaire or unfamiliarity with the U.S. racial/ethnic structure.

       Table 1 demonstrates that, despite nearly perfect rates of ethnic identification for first-

generation adults, Hispanics and Asians exhibit substantial amounts of ethnic attrition in the

second and third generations. For ethnic attrition to distort standard measures of generational

progress for immigrant groups, however, it is not enough that such attrition be sizeable; the
                                                                11

attrition must also be selective on socioeconomic attainment. To provide some initial evidence

on the selectivity of ethnic attrition, Table 2 reports average completed years of schooling by

ethnic identification for second-generation adults and third-generation children. 9 For third-

generation children, the education measure represents the average of father’s and mother’s years

of schooling. We focus on educational attainment because it is a fundamental determinant of

economic success, social status, health, family stability, and life opportunities (Oreopoulos and

Salvanes 2011; Hout 2012), and schooling data are available for all adult respondents in the CPS.

          Table 2 succinctly illustrates a key finding of our paper: with regard to educational

attainment, ethnic attrition among the U.S.-born descendants of immigrants tends to be positively

selected for Hispanics and negatively selected for Asians. For example, second-generation

Hispanics who fail to identify as Hispanic average three-quarters of a year more education than

their counterparts who do so identify, whereas the analogous comparison among second-

generation Asians yields a deficit of three-fifths of a year for those who fail to identify as Asian.

The pattern is similar among third-generation children: those of Hispanic descent who are not

identified as Hispanic enjoy advantaged backgrounds (i.e., fathers and mothers with more

schooling, on average) compared to their peers who are identified as Hispanic, and this

selectivity runs in the opposite direction for children of Asian descent. In particular, average

parental education is more than four-fifths of a year higher for third-generation Hispanic children

not identified as Hispanic compared to those who are identified as Hispanic. In contrast, average

parental education is over two-thirds of a year lower for third-generation Asian children not

identified as Asian compared to those who are identified as Asian.


          9
            For comparison purposes, Table 2 also reports average completed years of schooling for first-generation adults.
Given the negligible amount of ethnic attrition observed in the first generation, however, we do not distinguish this generation by
ethnic identification. We follow Jaeger’s (1997) recommendations for how to construct a completed years of schooling variable
from the CPS information collected about postsecondary degrees obtained.
                                                   12

       Our previous research for Mexicans (Duncan and Trejo 2007, 2011) suggests that

selective ethnic attrition causes most analyses to understate the socioeconomic attainment of the

U.S.-born descendants of Mexican immigrants, because this population usually must be

identified by their subjective responses to questions about ethnic origins. Table 2 indicates that a

similar conclusion holds for Hispanics more broadly, at least in terms of education. On the other

hand, Table 2 reveals the reverse bias for Asians, which suggests that ethnic attrition inflates

observed schooling levels for the U.S.-born descendants of Asian immigrants. The analyses that

follow explore in greater detail the patterns of ethnic identification and education selectivity

highlighted in Tables 1 and 2 and assess a possible theoretical explanation for why the direction

of selectivity differs for Hispanics and Asians.



                                       Ethnic Identification

       In this section, we investigate the determinants of subjective ethnic identification among

second- and third-generation Hispanics and Asians. Table 3 reveals that there exists substantial

variation in the structure of ethnic origins and that Hispanic and Asian identification rises with

the strength of the relevant ethnic attachments. For our samples of second-generation adults, the

upper part of Table 3 indicates that only about three-fifths of Hispanics and half of Asians are

from families in which both parents were born in a relevant source country. The remaining

second-generation adults have weaker ethnic attachments in the sense that one of their parents is

either U.S.-born or originated in a country other than one of the five main Hispanic (or Asian)

source countries considered here. Ethnic identification rates are very high for second-generation

adults when both of their parents were born in a relevant source country (97 percent for

Hispanics and 95 percent for Asians). Identification rates decline significantly, however, for
                                                             13

those second-generation adults with only one parent born in a relevant source country (i.e.,

reductions of 10 percentage points for Hispanics and 30 percentage points for Asians).

Interestingly, among second-generation Hispanics with only one parent born in a relevant source

country, ethnic identification rates are similar regardless of whether that parent is the father or

the mother. Among Asians, however, ethnic identification rate are five percentage points higher

for those second-generation adults whose father rather than mother was born in a relevant

country.

         For our samples of third-generation children, the lower part of Table 3 reports similar

information pertaining to generational complexity and its relationship to subjective ethnic

identification. First, we show the percentage distribution of third-generation children by how

many of their grandparents were born in a relevant source country, and below that we indicate

how ethnic identification rates vary with this indicator of the strength of ethnic origins. Note that

the vast majority of third-generation children (75 percent of Hispanics and 90 percent of Asians)

have only one or two grandparents who were born in a relevant source country, rather than three

or four. This complexity of grandparents’ origins has two sources: interethnic marriage, and

marriage between different generations of the same ethnicity. 10 The only way that a third-

generation Hispanic child can have three or four of his grandparents born in Hispanic source

countries, for example, is if both parents are second-generation Hispanics (i.e., the mother and

father are both the U.S.-born children of Hispanic immigrants). By contrast, if a second-

generation Hispanic marries either a non-Hispanic or a later-generation Hispanic (i.e., an

Hispanic from the third generation or beyond), then the children resulting from such a marriage

can have at most two grandparents born in Hispanic source countries.

         10
           Lichter, Carmalt, and Qian (2011) discuss the prevalence and implications of cross-generational marriage among
Hispanics. Min and Kim (2009) do the same for Asians.
                                                 14

       Table 3 shows that this generational complexity is closely related to third-generation

children’s subjective ethnic identification. Children with three or four grandparents born in a

relevant source country are very likely to report the corresponding ethnic identification (at rates

of 97 percent for Hispanics and 90 percent for Asians), but identification rates are much lower

for the bulk of third-generation children who have only one or two immigrant grandparents and

therefore weaker ethnic ties. Indeed, for both Hispanics and Asians, the largest segment of the

third generation has just one grandparent born in a relevant source country (40 percent of

Hispanics and 59 percent of Asians), and ethnic identification rates for this segment fall to 69

percent for Hispanics and 42 percent for Asians.

       In the preceding discussion, heterogeneity among third-generation children is measured

by how many of their grandparents were born in a relevant source country. The bottom part of

Table 3 provides a somewhat different perspective on generational complexity by distinguishing

third-generation children according to whether their ethnicity derives from both the paternal and

maternal sides of their family rather than just from one side. For example, we define a third-

generation Hispanic child to have Hispanic ethnicity on his father’s side of the family if at least

one of the following two things is true: (1) the child has a paternal grandparent who was born in

an Hispanic source country, or (2) the child’s father self-identifies as Hispanic in response to the

Hispanic origin question. In an analogous fashion, the countries of birth of the maternal

grandparents and the mother’s subjective ethnic identification determine whether a third-

generation Hispanic child has Hispanic ethnicity on his mother’s side of the family. By

construction, all of the children in our third-generation samples have at least one grandparent

born in a relevant source country, so they all have Hispanic (or Asian) ethnicity on at least one

side of their family. The issue is whether the CPS data give any indication that a child also has
                                                                 15

this ethnicity on the other side of his family. In this way, we distinguish third-generation

children by whether they are the products of ethnic in-marriage (i.e., children with the relevant

ethnicity on both sides of their family) or ethnic intermarriage (i.e., children with the relevant

ethnicity on only one side of their family).

          Table 3 shows that mixed ethnic origins are widespread among third-generation Hispanic

and Asian children. For nearly half of Hispanic children, this ethnicity originates on only one

side of their family, and the corresponding share approaches three-quarters for Asian children.

Table 3 also indicates that ethnic intermarriage is a fundamental source of ethnic attrition in the

third generation. Among third-generation children with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of

their family, ethnic identification rates are 98 percent for Hispanics and 93 percent for Asians.

Identification rates are markedly lower, however, for children whose ethnicity originates from

just one side of their family: 65 percent for Hispanics and 45 percent for Asians. Clearly, the

sizeable amount of ethnic attrition observed in our third-generation samples is concentrated

among children who are the products of interethnic marriages. Among such children, for

Hispanics there is now some indication of greater ethnic identification when the source of this

ethnicity is paternal rather than maternal, whereas Asians display the reverse pattern.

          Next, we investigate whether the relationship between ethnic origins and ethnic

identification changes upon controlling for other variables, and we also show how this

relationship varies across national origin groups. Tables 4 (for Hispanics) and 5 (for Asians)

report estimates from least squares regressions for our samples of second-generation adults and

third-generation children in which the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the

respondent subjectively identifies as a member of the relevant ethnic group. 11 Specification (1)


          11
               Although the dependent variable in these regressions is dichotomous, we choose to report least squares estimates
(i.e., linear probability models) because the coefficients are easier to interpret. Probit estimates, however, imply similar marginal
                                                                 16

includes as independent variables only an intercept and a set of dummy variables distinguishing

whether the respondent’s ethnicity derives from both sides of their family (the reference group),

only their father’s side, or only their mother’s side. 12 These estimates simply reproduce, for

comparison purposes, the unadjusted differences in ethnic identification rates implicit in Table 3.

For example, the specification (1) estimates for third-generation Hispanics in Table 4 indicate

that the ethnic identification rate is 97.7 percent (the estimated intercept) for children with

Hispanic ethnicity on both sides of their family, whereas the rate is 30.5 percentage points lower

(or 67.2 percent) for those with Hispanic ethnicity on only their father’s side and is 35.1

percentage points lower (or 62.6 percent) for those with Hispanic ethnicity on only their

mother’s side.

          The specification (2) regressions add a number of control variables, including indicators

for gender, geographic location, survey month, and survey year. 13 For second-generation adults,

the control variables also include indicators for the respondent’s age and whether he was the

household member who completed the survey. For third-generation children, the additional

control variables include the ages of the child and of his father and mother, and indicators for

whom in the household completed the survey (a parent with the relevant ethnicity, a parent

without the relevant ethnicity, or another household member).

          By comparing the estimates in specifications (1) and (2), we see that adding the control


effects. In order to account for the heteroskedasticity that arises with linear probability models (or for other reasons), we report
robust standard errors (White 1980) in parentheses for all regressions.
          12
             To be precise, this is how the dummy variables are defined for third-generation children, and it is the same
categorization employed for third-generation children in the bottom part of Table 3. For second-generation adults, the dummy
variables instead distinguish between respondents with both parents born in a relevant source country (the reference group), those
with only their father born in a relevant source country, and those with only their mother born in a relevant source country. This
is the same breakdown of second-generation adults used in the top part of Table 3. Limitations of CPS data necessitate the
different classification schemes for second-generation adults and third-generation children. For second-generation adults,
country of birth is the only thing we know about the parents, whereas we have much more parental information for our samples
of third-generation children living with both parents, including race and Hispanic origin.
          13
               The controls for geographic location are dummy variables identifying the nine Census divisions.
                                                               17

variables does not change the conclusion that the source of ethnic origins (i.e., both sides of

family versus father’s side only versus mother’s side only) is a primary determinant of ethnic

identification. The relevant coefficients change very little for second-generation adults and

attenuate somewhat (by about 10 percent for Hispanics and 20 percent for Asians) for third-

generation children. Moreover, direct effects of the control variables on ethnic identification

(not reported in the tables) are generally quite modest. Gender differences in ethnic

identification are small and not statistically significant, but identification does tend to decline

with the respondent’s age and increase with calendar year, and there exists significant regional

variation. For second-generation adults, identification rates are not affected by whether the

survey questions were answered by the respondent himself rather than by another household

member. For third-generation children, it does not matter whether the parent who completed the

survey shares the child’s ethnicity, but identification rates are somewhat higher when the survey

was completed by some other (i.e., non-parent) household member.

         Finally, specification (3) adds source country main effects and interactions that allow

ethnic identification rates and the impacts of ethnic origins to vary by national origin. The

reference countries are Mexico for Hispanics and China for Asians. 14 For second-generation

Hispanics in Table 4, for example, the estimated main effect for Cuba indicates that, among

those with both parents born in an Hispanic country, ethnic identification rates are two

percentage points lower for Cubans than for Mexicans (the reference group). The corresponding

interaction terms imply that, compared to second-generation Cubans with both parents born in

Cuba, identification rates are 21.6 percentage points lower for those with only a Cuban-born


         14
            Strictly speaking, the source country dummy variables included in the specification (3) regressions are not mutually
exclusive, but they are close to being so. As noted earlier, respondents with mixed origins create a small amount of overlap
across these dummies (e.g., a third-generation child with one grandparent born in Puerto Rico and another grandparent born in
the Dominican Republic would be assigned a value of “1” for the dummy variables pertaining to both of these countries).
                                                               18

father and 25.9 percentage points lower for those with only a Cuban-born mother.

          For the most part, source country main effects in the specification (3) regressions are

small and not statistically significant, indicating that ethnic identification rates are similar across

national origin groups for respondents with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family. 15

Third-generation Asians in Table 5 are an exception to this pattern, with identification rates

among those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family that exceed the reference

group (Chinese) by 9 percentage points for Koreans, 10 percentage points for Japanese, and 15

percentage points for Filipinos. There seems to be greater variation across national origin

groups, however, in the impact of mixed origins on ethnic identification (i.e., the estimated

coefficients on the interaction terms between source country dummies and the variables

indicating whether the relevant ethnicity originates only on the father’s side or only on the

mother’s side). Among Hispanics, being from mixed origins produces the smallest reduction in

ethnic identification for Mexicans and the largest reduction in identification for Salvadorans.

Among Asians, being from mixed origins has a relatively small impact on identification for

Chinese and a relatively large impact for Indians. 16



                               Educational Selectivity of Ethnic Identification

          We now turn to a more detailed analysis of the educational selectivity of ethnic

identification that was previewed earlier in Table 2. Tables 6 (for Hispanics) and 7 (for Asians)

          15
             This statement compares national origin groups within Hispanics and within Asians. As shown in Table 3, however,
ethnic identification rates overall are a few percentage points higher for Hispanics than for Asians among second-generation
adults and third-generation children with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family.
          16
             For second-generation adults, CPS data provide the country of birth for each respondent’s father and mother, but it is
not known whether a foreign-born parent was born abroad of an American parent, as might be the case for children of U.S.
military personnel stationed abroad. Similarly, for third-generation children, we do not know whether a foreign-born grandparent
was born abroad of an American parent. Therefore, for source countries like Japan and Korea that host significant numbers of
U.S. military personnel and American workers on foreign assignments, ethnic attrition rates for the second and third generations
could be overstated because country of birth may not accurately signal ethnicity for ancestors born abroad of an American parent.
                                                                19

report estimates from least squares regressions in which the dependent variable is completed

years of education. 17 In specification (1), the only independent variables are an intercept and a

dummy variable indicating those respondents who do not subjectively identify with the relevant

ethnic group (Hispanic or Asian). Therefore, these results restate the unadjusted differences in

average education associated with ethnic attrition that were presented earlier in Table 2. For

example, the specification (1) estimates for second-generation Hispanics in Table 6 indicate that

average schooling is 12.88 years (the estimated intercept) for those who subjectively identify as

Hispanic, but average educational attainment is higher by .76 years for second-generation adults

who do not identify as Hispanic. As discussed earlier, for both second-generation adults and

third-generation children, these raw averages reveal that ethnic attrition attracts Hispanics with

about three-quarters of a year more education than their peers who continue to identify as

Hispanic, whereas analogous comparisons for Asians imply an educational deficit for ethnic

attriters of roughly two-thirds of a year. The specification (2) regressions demonstrate that the

pattern is similar when controls are added for age, gender, geographic location, survey month,

and survey year.

          In broad terms, this educational selectivity of ethnic attrition has two possible sources.

First, because ethnic attrition predominately occurs among those with mixed origins (i.e.,

second- and third-generation individuals who are the products of interethnic marriages), the

educational selectivity of intermarriage is a potential source of schooling differences between

respondents who do and do not provide the expected subjective identification. Second, within

the subsample of those with mixed origins, ethnic identification might be selective on education.

In order to shed light on the separate roles played by these two sources of selectivity, the

           17
              For second-generation adults, the dependent variable is the respondent’s educational attainment; for third-generation
children, it is the average of father’s and mother’s education.
                                                                20

specification (3) regressions add interaction terms that allow the effect of subjective ethnic

identification to vary with the source of ethnic origins (i.e., both sides of family versus father’s

side only versus mother’s side only). The first source of selectivity, intermarriage selectivity,

represents education differences between respondents with the relevant ethnicity on only one

side of their family and those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family. The

second source, selective ethnic identification among those with mixed origins, shows up in how

education varies with subjective ethnic identification for respondents with the relevant ethnicity

on just one side of their family.

          For second-generation Hispanics and Asians, the specification (3) estimates imply that

both potential sources of the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition are important. 18

Intermarriage selectivity arises because respondents with the relevant ethnicity on only one side

of their family have significantly different educational levels, on average, than those with the

relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family (the reference group). For Hispanics, respondents

with mixed origins tend to have higher educational attainment, whereas for Asians mixed origins

are associated with lower educational attainment. Selective ethnic identification is also evident,

however, because among those with mixed origins, the education patterns noted above are

stronger for those who do not subjectively identify with the relevant ethnicity. For example, the

schooling advantage (relative to the reference group) for second-generation Hispanics with a

mother (but not a father) born in an Hispanic source country is .65 years for those who identify

as Hispanic and 1.38 years for those who do not identify as Hispanic. Second-generation Asians

          18
             The reference group in specification (3) consists of those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family who
also subjectively identify with the expected ethnic group. To simplify our discussion of these estimates, we will take this
reference group as representing all of those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family, in effect ignoring the
estimated education differences for those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family who do not subjectively identify
with the expected ethnic group. We saw earlier in Table 3, however, that ethnic identification rates are very high (93 percent and
above) for those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family, so the group we ignore is quite small and their education
differences inconsequential.
                                                  21

display a similar but inverted pattern, with the relevant differentials now representing schooling

deficits rather than advantages.

        For third-generation children, in contrast, the primary source of the educational

selectivity of ethnic attrition differs for Hispanics and Asians. For Hispanics, the selectivity of

ethnic attrition arises principally from the first source of selectivity (intermarriage selectivity),

and the second source (selective ethnic identification among those with mixed origins) is

relatively unimportant. The relevant estimates in Table 6 indicate that average parental

education is substantially higher for third-generation children with Hispanic ethnicity on just one

side of their family than for the corresponding children with Hispanic ethnicity on both sides of

their family; moreover, average parental education does not vary much with the child’s ethnic

identification among those third-generation children with Hispanic ethnicity on just one side of

their family. For third-generation Asian children, however, it is selective ethnic identification

rather than intermarriage selectivity that drives the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition. The

relevant results in Table 7 imply that, within the subsamples of third-generation children with

Asian ethnicity on only one side of their family, average parental education is markedly lower

for children who fail to identify as Asian.

        In terms of educational attainment, why is ethnic attrition positively selected for

Hispanics and negatively selected for Asians? Some theories of interethnic marriage (e.g.,

Furtado 2006, 2012; Kalmijn 2012) predict that members of low-attainment groups (such as

Hispanics) who intermarry should be positively selected in terms of attainment, whereas the

corresponding selectivity should be less positive and perhaps even negative for intermarried

members of high-attainment groups (such as Asians). Our findings on the educational selectivity

of ethnic attrition are broadly consistent with this prediction, given that average schooling levels
                                                                 22

are much lower for Hispanics than for Asians (see Table 2) and that intermarriage induces ethnic

attrition (see Table 3).

          In particular, Furtado (2006, 2012) emphasizes how the supplies of potential spouses vary

with ethnic-specific schooling distributions in marriage markets where individuals hope to match

on both education and ethnicity. 19 A college-educated Mexican American, for example, may

choose to intermarry because of the relative scarcity of other Mexican ethnics with a college

degree. The same logic applies to other Hispanic national origin groups with relatively low

education levels, such as Puerto Ricans. Most Asian-American groups tend to be

overrepresented on college campuses, however, so for these groups it may instead be the less-

educated individuals who face a more difficult time finding co-ethnics to marry within their

education group. Consequently, this model predicts that members of low-education groups who

intermarry should be positively selected in terms of education, whereas the selectivity should be

weaker and possibly negative for intermarried members of high-education groups. 20 Because

intermarriage is a fundamental source of ethnic attrition, the differences across groups in

intermarriage selectivity predicted by Furtado’s model can generate corresponding differences in

the selectivity of ethnic attrition.21

          19
               Kalmijn (2012) makes a similar argument when he discusses the “structural perspective” on intermarriage.
          20
              For a number of reasons, increased education might make individuals more receptive toward interethnic marriage
and/or put them in settings where they meet a more diverse pool of potential spouses (Furtado 2012; Kalmijn 2012). Such forces
create a tendency for the educational selectivity of intermarriage to be positive for all groups, independent of the structural supply
forces that generate different types of selection for low-education and high-education groups. On net, therefore, the educational
selectivity of intermarriage could turn out to be positive or negative for high-education groups like the Chinese, but this
selectivity is predicted to be positive and stronger for low-education groups like Mexicans.
          21
             Furtado’s model focuses on the educational selectivity of interethnic marriage; in other words, how does an
individual’s education level influence their chances of entering into an interethnic marriage. Interethnic marriage might also
directly affect the educational attainment of any resulting children. Indeed, van Ours and Veenman (2010) provide evidence
from the Netherlands that marriages between Moluccan immigrant men and Dutch women generate a positive impact on their
children’s education (relative to endogamous Moluccan marriages or marriages between Dutch men and Moluccan women),
perhaps because native Dutch mothers have better language skills and greater knowledge of the relevant educational system than
do Moluccan immigrant mothers. Because the education measures we have available for our samples of third-generation children
are the schooling levels of their parents rather the schooling levels of the children themselves, these measures are not affected by
any direct effects of interethnic marriage on the children.
                                                                23

          To further assess this potential explanation for our findings, we begin by disaggregating

to the level of the ten specific source countries (five Hispanic countries and five Asian countries)

in our samples. For each of these national origin groups, Table 8 presents average education

levels and measures of educational selectivity separately for second-generation adults and third-

generation children. Our measures of the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition represent

estimated differences in education, by source country, between those who do not identify with

the relevant ethnicity and those who do so identify, after conditioning on the “other control

variables” included in specification (2) of Tables 6 and 7. 22 The measures of educational

selectivity of interethnic marriage represent analogous differences in education between those

with the relevant ethnicity on only one side of their family (i.e., father’s side or mother’s side)

and those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family. 23

          Furtado’s model predicts that the educational selectivity of interethnic marriage (and, by

extension, ethnic attrition) should be largest (i.e., most positive) for the groups with the lowest

average schooling levels and smallest (i.e., least positive or most negative) for the groups with

the highest average schooling levels. A casual inspection of Table 8 appears to support this

prediction, as our measures of educational selectivity tend to be most positive for the least-

educated groups (Mexicans and Puerto Ricans) and most negative for the highest-educated

groups (Indians and Chinese). The simple bivariate regressions reported in Table 9 confirm a

negative relationship across national origin groups between the measures of educational

          22
             In other words, we estimated regressions similar to specification (2) in Tables 6 and 7, but with the addition of main
effects for each source country and interaction terms between the source country dummies and the indicator for respondents who
do not subjectively identify with the relevant ethnic group (Hispanic or Asian). The estimated coefficients on these interaction
terms constitute our country-specific measures of the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition.
          23
             In other words, we estimated regressions similar to those described in the preceding footnote, but the indicator for
not identifying with the relevant ethnic group was replaced with an indicator for respondents who have the relevant ethnicity on
only one side of their family (i.e., father’s side or mother’s side) rather than on both sides of their family. The estimated
coefficients on the interaction terms between this indicator and the source country dummies constitute our country-specific
measures of the educational selectivity of interethnic marriage.
                                                                 24

selectivity and average schooling levels. In each regression, a measure of educational selectivity

is regressed on average completed years of education, and the ten observations consist of the ten

source countries. Separate regressions are run for second-generation adults and for third-

generation children. Regressions shown in the odd-numbered columns are unweighted, whereas

regressions in the even-numbered columns are weighted by the inverse of the standard errors of

the dependent variables. 24

        All of the regressions exhibit a statistically significant negative relationship between

educational selectivity and a group’s average schooling level, and in every case this relationship

accounts for a substantial portion of the variation across groups in educational selectivity, as

indicated by R-squared statistics ranging from .28 to .90. Our finding of such a relationship for

the educational selectivity of interethnic marriage echoes previous results reported by Furtado

and Theodoropoulos (2011), Furtado (2012) and Kalmijn (2012). Because Furtado’s theoretical

prediction pertains most directly to the selectivity of interethnic marriage, however, it is

somewhat surprising that the relationship seems to be even stronger for the selectivity of ethnic

attrition (i.e., higher R-squared statistics, as well as slope coefficients that are larger in absolute

value and more precisely estimated). Figure 1 presents graphs of the data points and estimated

regression lines from the unweighted specifications in Table 9, and these graphs visually confirm

the tighter fit and steeper slope of the relationship for ethnic attrition than for intermarriage.

Recall that the selectivity of ethnic attrition derives from both intermarriage selectivity and

selective ethnic identification. Evidently, a negative relationship between identification

selectivity and a group’s average schooling level reinforces the corresponding relationship for

intermarriage selectivity to produce an even stronger negative relationship between the


        24
             Table 8 shows all of the data used in these regressions.
                                                 25

educational selectivity of ethnic attrition and average schooling. These simple correlations

across ten national origin groups are meant only to be suggestive, but they do support a potential

mechanism for our finding that the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition tends to be positive

for Hispanics and negative for Asians.



                                            Conclusion

       Because of data limitations, research on the U.S.-born descendants of Hispanic and Asian

immigrants often must identify the populations of interest using subjective measures of

racial/ethnic identification (Sakamoto, Wu, and Tzeng 2000; Snipp and Hirschman 2004; Zeng

and Xie 2004; Saenz 2005; Duncan, Hotz, and Trejo 2006). In particular, this approach is

typically the only feasible option for studies that seek to examine long-term integration by

distinguishing immigrant descendants in the third and higher generations (Rong and Grant 1992;

Borjas 1994; Trejo 1997, 2003; Goyette and Xie 1999; Farley and Alba 2002; Grogger and Trejo

2002; Yang 2004; Smith 2006; Blau and Kahn 2007). A potential problem with this approach is

that assimilation and intermarriage can cause ethnic attachments to fade across generations (Alba

1990; Waters; 1990; Perlmann and Waters 2007), and therefore subjective measures of

racial/ethnic identification might miss a significant portion of the later-generation descendants of

immigrants. Furthermore, if such ethnic attrition is selective on socioeconomic attainment, then

it can distort assessments of integration and generational progress.

       Using 2003-2013 CPS data, we explore this issue for a wide range of national origin

groups from important Hispanic (Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, El Salvador, and the Dominican

Republic) and Asian (China, India, Japan, Korea, and the Philippines) source countries. We

measure ethnic attrition by analyzing the subjective racial/ethnic identification of individuals
                                                               26

whose immigrant generation and national origins can be determined from the information

available in the CPS regarding the countries of birth of themselves and their ancestors. For

individuals linked to Hispanic source countries, we examine whether they subjectively identify

as Hispanic in response to the Hispanic origin question, and for individuals linked to Asian

source countries, we examine whether they subjectively identify as Asian in response to the race

question. We conduct this analysis for three immigrant generations: first-generation adults (i.e.,

U.S. immigrants ages 25-59 who were born in a relevant source country), second-generation

adults (i.e., U.S.-born individuals ages 25-59 who have at least one parent born in a relevant

source country), and third-generation children (i.e., U.S.-born children ages 17 and below who

live in intact families and have two U.S.-born parents but at least one grandparent born in a

relevant source country). 25 So, for example, the ethnic attrition rate for second-generation

Cubans represents the percentage who do not subjectively identify as Hispanic within our sample

of U.S.-born adults with a parent born in Cuba.

          We find little ethnic attrition in the first generation, which indicates that immigrants from

these Hispanic and Asian countries generally understand the CPS Hispanic origin and race

questions and consistently provide the expected responses. By the second generation, however,

non-negligible rates of ethnic attrition emerge (7 percent for Hispanics and 21 percent for

Asians), with particularly high rates for Salvadorans (28 percent), Indians (24 percent), and

Japanese (32 percent). Attrition rates are much higher for third-generation children (18 for

Hispanics and 42 percent for Asians), with rates for specific national origin groups ranging from

12 percent for Mexicans, 19 percent for Dominicans, and 24 percent for Puerto Ricans to 35

percent or more for the remaining groups (including rates exceeding 50 percent for Salvadorans
          25
           In CPS data, complete information regarding grandparents’ countries of birth is available only for children living in
the same household as both of their parents, which is why our third-generation samples are limited to children in married, intact
families.
                                                               27

and Japanese and well over 60 percent for Indians). Consequently, standard analyses that must

rely on subjective racial/ethnic identification to detect the later-generation descendants of

immigrants may miss large segments of the target populations. We also find that mixed ethnic

origins are common among third-generation Hispanic and Asian children, and we demonstrate

that ethnic attrition predominately occurs in children with mixed parental origins. Among third-

generation children with the relevant ethnicity on both the paternal and maternal sides of their

family, ethnic attrition rates are low (2 percent for Hispanics and 7 percent for Asians), but these

rates are dramatically higher among children whose ethnicity originates from only one side of

their family (35 percent for Hispanics and 55 percent for Asians).

          In addition, we analyze the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition and uncover

important differences between Hispanics and Asians. 26 For both second-generation adults and

third-generation children, the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition is positive for Hispanics

and negative for Asians (i.e., average parental education is higher for third-generation children of

Hispanic descent who do not subjectively identify as Hispanic, whereas this pattern is reversed

for children of Asian descent). Moreover, the source of the selectivity differs across groups,

especially for the third generation. For third-generation Hispanics, the positive selectivity arises

primarily because Hispanics who marry non-Hispanics tend to have higher education levels than

Hispanics who marry endogamously. For Asians, in contrast, the principal source of the

negative selectivity is that, within intermarried families, average parental education is lower for

children who fail to identify as Asian. In other words, third-generation Asian children with

better-educated parents appear to retain stronger ethnic ties.

          The overall pattern that the educational selectivity of ethnic attrition tends to be positive

           26
              The CPS does not provide informative measures of attainment for children, so we analyze the selectivity of ethnic
attrition among third-generation children by examining the education levels of their parents.
                                                28

for low-education Hispanic groups and negative for high-education Asian groups is consistent

with Furtado’s (2006, 2011) model of interethnic marriage. By analyzing variation in

educational selectivity and average education levels across the ten specific source countries (five

Hispanic countries and five Asian countries) in our samples, we provide further evidence in

support of Furtado’s model and show that the mechanism proposed by this model potentially

accounts for a substantial portion of the variation across national origin groups in educational

selectivity. Regardless of the theoretical explanation, our empirical findings indicate that ethnic

attrition generates measurement biases that vary across national origin groups in direction as well

as magnitude, and that correcting for these biases is likely to raise the socioeconomic standing of

the U.S.-born descendants of Hispanic immigrants relative to their Asian counterparts. Our

results, however, shed more light on the direction rather than the ultimate magnitude of these

measurement biases, and so at this point we cannot say whether correcting for selective ethnic

attrition would produce a small or large improvement in the relative attainment of later-

generation Hispanics.

       The data analyzed in the main body of the paper come from after the major changes to

the CPS Hispanic origin and race questions that were adopted in 2003. In the appendix, we show

that these survey changes have substantially lowered rates of ethnic attrition for second- and

third-generation Hispanics and Asians. By asking directly about Hispanic ethnicity and by

allowing multiple race responses, the CPS now elicits higher rates of subjective ethnic

identification among the descendants of Hispanic and Asian immigrants. Ethnic attrition

remains a significant problem, however, even in CPS data collected using the improved

questionnaire. Because the Hispanic origin and race questions introduced in the 2003 CPS are

similar to the analogous questions employed in the Census and ACS from 2000 forward, the
                                                 29

issues pertaining to subjective identification and selective ethnic attrition that we have explored

here with CPS data are also relevant for Census and ACS data. Unfortunately, the lack of

information about parental countries of birth makes these issues difficult to study or address in

the Census and ACS.
                                               30


                                           Appendix

       In this appendix, we describe major changes to the CPS questions regarding Hispanic

origin and race that were introduced in the January 2003 survey (Bowler et al. 2003), and we

also compare data from before and after these changes in order to assess their potential impact on

ethnic identification by the descendants of U.S. immigrants from key Hispanic and Asian source

countries. These modifications of the survey questionnaire had large effects on subjective

measures of ethnic identification.

       Prior to 2003, the CPS collected information on Hispanic origin in a rather indirect

fashion. Respondents were asked to choose their “origin or descent” from a flash card listing

about 20 options. Just over half of these options represented European ancestries (such as

“German” or “Swedish”), another option was “Afro-American,” and there was a residual

category for “another group not listed.” The remaining options were meant to capture Hispanics.

Three separate options were available for those of Mexican descent (“Mexican-American,”

“Chicano,” and “Mexican”), and the options for non-Mexican Hispanics included “Puerto

Rican,” “Cuban,” “Central or South American (Hispanic Countries),” and “Other Hispanic.” For

our purposes, it is important to note that “Salvadoran” and “Dominican” were not listed

explicitly as options. Presumably, Salvadorans were expected to choose the “Central or South

American” option, and Dominicans were expected to choose “Other Hispanic.” Starting in 2003,

the CPS Hispanic origin question was changed to a format similar to that introduced in the 2000

U.S. Census and also adopted by the ACS. Respondents are now asked directly whether they are

“Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino,” and those who answer affirmatively are then given the

opportunity to designate a specific national origin group (Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban,

Central/South American, or Other Spanish).
                                                               31

          Beginning in January 2003, the CPS race question also was revised to be similar to the

2000 Census race question. The most significant change is that respondents can now choose

more than one race, whereas previously only a single race response was allowed. 27 In addition,

the ordering of the Hispanic origin and race items on the questionnaire was switched. Prior to

the 2003 CPS (or the 2000 Census), the race question preceded the Hispanic origin question.

Now, the Hispanic origin question precedes the race question. 28

          We anticipate that these changes to the CPS questionnaire will increase ethnic

identification (and thereby reduce ethnic attrition) for our samples of Hispanic and Asian

national origin groups. The revised Hispanic origin question now directly asks about “Spanish,

Hispanic, or Latino” ethnicity, which could improve identification for all Hispanic national

origin groups, because the pre-2003 version of this question was not clear about its intent to

identify Hispanics. We might expect to see the largest jumps in Hispanic identification for

groups such as Salvadorans and Dominicans that were not listed explicitly as options in the

previous version of the Hispanic origin question. The revised race question allows for multiple

responses, which could increase Asian identification among multiracial Asians who previously

may have given a non-Asian response when they were forced select a single race. Because

Asians have relatively high rates of multiracial identification (Jones and Symens Smith 2001),

their answers to the race question might be particularly sensitive to permitting multiple

responses. 29


          27
             In contrast, the Hispanic origin question continues to permit only a single response. For example, respondents are
not allowed to indicate that they are both “Mexican” and “Puerto Rican”.
         28
            To a large extent, the 2003 changes to both the race and Hispanic origin questions in the CPS echo the revisions that
had been made to the corresponding questions in the 2000 Census. See Grieco and Cassidy (2001) for a discussion of the race
and Hispanic origin questions in the 2000 Census.
          29
            Using the CPS data from 2003-2013, we can calculate the percentage of individuals who answer the race question
with multiple responses that include both Asian and non-Asian responses. This measure of the multiracial Asian population
provides an indication of the extent to which Asians in our samples might have been affected by the pre-2003 requirement to
                                                               32

          For three groups with large enough samples to produce reasonably precise estimates by

CPS survey year, Figure A.1 illustrates the noticeable impact of the 2003 questionnaire changes

on ethnic attrition. For each group, Figure A.1 plots ethnic attrition rates calculated separately

by survey year, with these annual rates displayed as dots. 30 The dashed vertical line

distinguishes rates from before and after the CPS questionnaire changes that were introduced at

the start of 2003, and the solid horizontal lines represent average ethnic attrition rates for the

relevant “pre” (1994-2002) and “post” (2003-2013) regimes.

          The top panel of Figure A.1 shows ethnic attrition rates for first-generation Dominican

adults. Under the pre-2003 version of the CPS Hispanic origin question, annual rates of ethnic

attrition for Dominican immigrants range from 12 to 30 percent, with an average of about 18

percent. After the 2003 changes to the Hispanic origin question, however, the corresponding

annual rates never exceed 4 percent, and the average ethnic attrition rate drops to 2 percent.

Evidently, the questionnaire changes have raised Hispanic identification and lowered ethnic

attrition among first-generation Dominicans, and by a substantial amount. Under the revised

Hispanic origin question, ethnic attrition becomes negligible for U.S. immigrants from the

Dominican Republic, notwithstanding factors (e.g., phenotype and home country conceptions of

race/ethnicity quite different from those in the United States) that might complicate ethnic

identification for Dominicans (Bailey 2001; Itzigsohn, Giorguli, and Vazquez 2005). 31 Among


select a single race. For second-generation adults from Asian source countries, the proportion identifying as multiracial Asians is
13 percent for the overall sample, with country-specific rates ranging from 5 percent for Indians and 7 percent for Chinese to just
over 20 percent for Japanese and Koreans. For third-generation children, the corresponding rates are substantially higher, with an
overall rate of 34 percent and country-specific rates ranging from 26 percent for Indians to 40 percent for Koreans.
          30
            The ethnic attrition rate represents the percentage of individuals who do not subjectively identify as Hispanic or
Asian (whichever would be expected for their national origin group). As such, the ethnic attrition rates displayed in Figure A.1
are complements of the corresponding ethnic identification rates reported earlier in Tables 1 and 3 and reported below in Tables
A.1, A.2, and A.3 (i.e., the ethnic attrition rate equals 100 minus the ethnic identification rate).
          31
            Our findings for Dominican immigrants corroborate the corresponding results in del Pinal and Schmidley (2005),
who matched respondents from the 2000 CPS (for the months of February through May) with the information that these same
individuals provided in the 2000 Census (conducted in April). With their matched sample, del Pinal and Schmidley can compare
                                                               33

first-generation adults, Dominicans are the only national origin group to exhibit such a dramatic

shift in ethnic identification before and after the 2003 changes in the CPS questionnaire. Only

two other first-generation groups show statistically significant movement in the average rate of

ethnic attrition before and after the questionnaire changes, and for these groups the declines in

ethnic attrition are more modest (for Salvadorans, the rate of ethnic attrition falls from 5 percent

before 2003 to 1 percent afterward, and the corresponding reduction for Indians is from 11 to 6

percent).

          The middle panel of Figure A.1 displays a similar graph for second-generation Puerto

Rican adults who have only one of their parents (rather than both) born in Puerto Rico. Because

the rate of ethnic attrition is only about 5 percent (see Table A.2 below) among second-

generation adults with both parents born in Puerto Rico, we choose to focus here on those with

mixed parental origins for whom ethnic attrition is more prevalent. Once again, we see a

discernible reduction in ethnic attrition after the CPS questionnaire changes are introduced in

2003. From 1994-2002, the annual rates of ethnic attrition for second-generation adults with just

one parent born in Puerto Rico vary between 28-39 percent, whereas from 2003-2013 the

comparable range is 11-26 percent. The average rate of ethnic attrition is cut in half, falling from

34 percent before 2003 to 17 percent from 2003 forward.

          The bottom panel of Figure A.1 tells a similar story for third-generation Mexican children

with Hispanic ethnicity on just one side of their family. 32 The average rate of ethnic attrition

plunges from 61 percent during 1994-2002 down to 28 percent in the 2003-2013 data, with


how these individuals answered the Hispanic origin and race questions in both the 2000 CPS (which employed the earlier version
of these questions) and the 2000 Census (which introduced the significant changes to these questions described above). Among
those born in the Dominican Republic, the rate of Hispanic identification was much higher when responding to the 2000 Census
(94 percent) than to the 2000 CPS (79 percent).
          32
             Third-generation Mexican children with Hispanic ethnicity on both sides of their family have an ethnic attrition rate
of only 2 percent (see Table A.3 below), and this rate is very similar before and after the 2003 changes in the CPS questionnaire.
                                                             34

annual rates that do not stray too far from the relevant average in each time period. Indeed, the

lowest annual rate of ethnic attrition observed in the pre-2003 period (55 percent in 1998) far

exceeds the highest annual rate observed afterward (35 percent in 2011). The middle and bottom

panels of Figure A.1 indicate that, even for groups such as Puerto Ricans and Mexicans that were

listed explicitly as options in the pre-2003 CPS Hispanic origin question, the more direct version

of this question adopted in 2003 dramatically reduced ethnic attrition among second- and third-

generation individuals with mixed parental origins.

       The other groups of second- and third-generation individuals with mixed parental origins

also experienced increases in ethnic identification (i.e., declines in ethnic attrition) following the

2003 questionnaire changes, but smaller sample sizes make the annual estimates rather noisy for

most of these groups. To provide an informative picture of the overall patterns, Tables A.1 (for

first-generation adults), A.2 (for second-generation adults), and A.3 (for third-generation

children) report rates of ethnic identification before (1994-2002) and after (2003-2013) the CPS

revision, separately by source country and for relevant subgroups (e.g., third-generation children

with the relevant ethnicity on only one side of their family). These tables make clear that the

2003 changes to the CPS Hispanic origin and race questions had pervasive impacts on Hispanic

and Asian identification. For U.S.-born individuals with mixed parental origins from almost

every one of our source country samples, the 2003 questionnaire changes increased ethnic

identification. 33 Among second-generation adults with only one parent born in a relevant source

country, these increases are particularly large for Salvadorans and Indians, the two groups with

the lowest pre-2003 rates of ethnic identification. Among third-generation children of mixed

origins, ethnic identification rises by a substantial amount for every source country, with the


       33
            The lone exception is second-generation Japanese whose father but not mother was born in Japan.
                                                 35

biggest increases occurring for Hispanic national origin groups.

        The preceding discussion has focused on individuals with mixed parental origins, because

ethnic attrition predominately occurs in this population. For most national origin groups, ethnic

identification rates are close to perfect (i.e., 100 percent) for second-generation adults with both

parents born in the relevant country (see Table A.2) and for third-generation children with the

relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family (see Table A.3), and so for these groups there is

not much scope for the CPS questionnaire changes to increase identification. For those groups,

however, with sizeable attrition even among individuals whose ethnicity originates from both

parents, the 2003 questionnaire changes did raise identification and reduce ethnic attrition. For

example, among second-generation adults with both parents born in the relevant country, ethnic

identification rates rose for Salvadorans (from 49 to 95 percent), Dominicans (from 79 to 96

percent), and Indians (from 80 to 89 percent). 34 Similarly, among third-generation children with

Hispanic ethnicity on both sides of their family, identification rates increased for Puerto Ricans

(from 89 to 96 percent), Salvadorans (from 58 to 100 percent), and Dominicans (from 83 to 99

percent). 35

        As mentioned previously, the most straightforward explanation for why the revised CPS

race question increases Asian identification is that, by recording multiple responses, the revised

question picks up some multiracial Asians who previously gave a non-Asian response when they

were forced to select a single race. If this were the only way that the revised race question

affected Asian identification, then the size of the multiracial Asian population provides a rough

upper bound on how much the revised question can raise ethnic identification among Asians.

Using CPS data for 2003-2013, we can measure the prevalence of multiracial responses for each

        34
             See Table A.2.
        35
             See Table A.3.
                                                                 36

of our Asian groups (see footnote 29), and these measurements generally are consistent with the

observed changes in ethnic identification. For example, 22 percent of second-generation Korean

adults give both Asian and non-Asian responses to the race question in the 2003-2013 CPS data,

and this prevalence of multiracial Asian identification is high enough to potentially account for

the 8 percentage point increase in the overall ethnic identification rate for second-generation

Koreans (from 74 percent in 1994-2002 to 82 percent in 2003-2013) following the CPS

questionnaire changes. The only Asian national origin group to go against form is Indians. The

rate of multiracial identification for second-generation Indian adults (5 percent) is too low to

explain the corresponding increase (of 28 percentage points) in overall ethnic identification

observed following the questionnaire changes. This finding suggests that aspects of the CPS

questionnaire changes besides allowing multiple race responses may have had an impact on the

propensity for Indians to identify as Asian.

          In this appendix, we have shown that the 2003 changes to the CPS Hispanic origin and

race questions have produced substantially higher rates of ethnic identification for second- and

third-generation Hispanics and Asians. 36 By asking directly about Hispanic ethnicity and by

allowing multiple race responses, the CPS now elicits higher rates of subjective ethnic

identification among the descendants of Hispanic and Asian immigrants. Ethnic attrition

remains a significant problem, however, even in the 2003-2013 CPS data derived from the

improved questionnaire. In these more recent data, overall rates of ethnic identification remain

well below 100 percent for second-generation members of some Hispanics groups (84 percent

for Cubans and 72 percent for Salvadorans) and all Asian groups (below 84 percent for Chinese,



          36
            In calculations not reported here, we also investigated whether these changes to the CPS questionnaire altered the
educational selectivity of ethnic attrition. In general, the patterns of selectivity are similar before and after the questionnaire
changes.
                                                37

Koreans, and Filipinos, 76 percent for Indians, and 68 percent for Japanese). 37 For third-

generation children, the corresponding rates vary from 88 percent for Mexicans to 36 percent for

Indians, with Cubans, Salvadorans, and the remaining Asian groups all in the 48-66 percent

range. 38




        37
             See Table A.2.
        38
             See Table A.3.
                                              38


References

Alba, Richard D. Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of White America. New Haven, CT: Yale
       University Press, 1990.

Alba, Richard D., and Islam, Tariqul. “The Case of the Disappearing Mexican Americans: An
       Ethnic-Identity Mystery.” Population Research and Policy Review, April 2009, 28(2):
       pp. 109-21.

Bailey, Benjamin. “Dominican-American Ethnic/Racial Identities and United States Social
        Categories.” International Migration Review, Fall 2001, 35(3), pp. 677-708.

Barnes, Jessica S., and Bennett, Claudette. The Asian Population: 2000. Census 2000 Brief
       C2KBR/01-16. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, February 2002.

Blau, Francine D., and Kahn, Lawrence M. “Gender and Assimilation among Mexican
       Americans,” in George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the United States.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 57-106.

Borjas, George J. “Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill Differentials: The Children and
        Grandchildren of the Great Migration.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July
        1994, 47(4), pp. 553-73.

Bowler, Mary; Ilg, Randy E.; Miller, Stephen; Robison, Ed; and Polivka, Anne. “Revisions to
      the Current Population Survey Effective in January 2003. Employment and Earnings,
      February 2003, 50(2), pp. 4-23.

Card, David. “Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?” Economic Journal, November 2005,
       115(507), pp. 300-323.

del Pinal, Jorge, and Schmidley, Dianne. “Matched Race and Hispanic Origin Responses from
       Census 2000 and Current Population Survey February to May 2000.” Working Paper 79.
       Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Population Division, December 2005.

Duncan, Brian; Hotz, V. Joseph; and Trejo, Stephen J. “Hispanics in the U.S. Labor Market,” in
      Marta Tienda and Faith Mitchell, eds., Hispanics and the Future of America.
      Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006, pp. 228-90.

Duncan, Brian, and Trejo, Stephen J. “Ethnic Identification, Intermarriage, and Unmeasured
      Progress by Mexican Americans,” in George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the
      United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 227-69.

Duncan, Brian, and Trejo, Stephen J. “Ancestry versus Ethnicity: The Complexity and
      Selectivity of Mexican Identification in the United States.” Research in Labor
      Economics, 2009, 29 (Ethnicity and Labor Market Outcomes, edited by Amelie F.
      Constant, Konstantinos Tatsiramos, and Klaus F. Zimmerman), pp. 31-66.
                                              39



Duncan, Brian, and Trejo, Stephen J. “Intermarriage and the Intergenerational Transmission of
      Ethnic Identity and Human Capital for Mexican Americans.” Journal of Labor
      Economics, April 2011, 29(2), pp. 195-227.

Farley, Reynolds, and Alba, Richard. “The New Second Generation in the United States.”
        International Migration Review, Fall 2002, 36(3), pp. 669-701.

Feliciano, Cynthia. “The Benefits of Biculturalism: Exposure to Immigrant Culture and
        Dropping Out of School among Asian and Latino Youths.” Social Science Quarterly,
        December 2001, 82(4), pp. 865-79.

Furtado, Delia. “Human Capital and Interethnic Marriage Decisions.” Discussion Paper no.
       1989. Bonn, Germany: IZA, February 2006.

Furtado, Delia. “Human Capital and Interethnic Marriage Decisions.” Economic Inquiry,
       January 2012, 50(1), pp. 82-93.

Furtado, Delia, and Theodoropoulos, Nikolas. “Interethnic Marriage: A Choice Between Ethnic
       and Educational Similarities.” Journal of Population Economics, October 2011, 24(4),
       pp. 1257-79.

Goyette, Kimberly, and Xie, Yu. “Educational Expectations of Asian American Youth:
       Determinants and Ethnic Differences.” Sociology of Education, January 1999, 72(1), pp.
       22-36.

Grieco, Elizabeth M., and Cassidy, Rachel C. Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin. Census
       2000 Brief C2KBR/01-1. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, March 2001.

Grogger, Jeffrey, and Trejo, Stephen J. Falling Behind or Moving Up? The Intergenerational
      Progress of Mexican Americans. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California,
      2002.

Guzman, Betsy. The Hispanic Population. Census 2000 Brief C2KBR/01-3. Washington, DC:
     U.S. Census Bureau, May 2001.

Hirschman, Charles. “The Educational Enrollment of Immigrant Youth: A Test of the
      Segmented-Assimilation Hypothesis.” Demography, August 2001, 38(3), pp. 317-36.

Hout, Michael. “Social and Economic Returns to College Education in the United States.”
       Annual Review of Sociology, 2012, 38, pp. 379-400.

Itzigsohn, Jose; Giorguli, Silvia; and Vazquez, Obed. “Immigrant Incorporation and Racial
        Identity: Racial Self-Identification among Dominican Immigrants.” Ethnic and Racial
        Studies, January 2005, 28(1), pp. 50-78.
                                               40

Jaeger, David A. “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
        Recommendations for Researchers.” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, July
        1997, 15(3), pp. 300-09.

Jones, Nicholas A., and Symens Smith, Amy. The Two or More Races Population. Census 2000
       Brief C2KBR/01-6. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, November 2001.

Kalmijn, Matthijs. “The Educational Gradient in Intermarriage: A Comparative Analysis of
      Immigrant Groups in the United States.” Social Forces, December 2012, 91(2), pp. 453-
      76.

Lee, Jennifer, and Bean, Frank D. The Diversity Paradox: Immigration and the Color Line in
       21st Century America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2010.

Lichter, Daniel T., and Qian, Zhenchao. “Marriage and Family in a Multiracial Society,” in
       Reynolds Farley and John Haaga, eds., The American People: Census 2000. New York:
       Russell Sage Foundation, 2005, pp. 169-200.

Lichter, Daniel T.; Carmalt, Julie H.; and Qian, Zhenchao. “Immigration and Intermarriage
       among Hispanics: Crossing Racial and Generational Boundaries.” Sociological Forum,
       June 2011, 26(2), pp. 241-64.

Lieberson, Stanley, and Waters, Mary C. From Many Strands: Ethnic and Racial Groups in
       Contemporary America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1988.

Min, Pyong Gap, and Kim, Chigon. “Patterns of Intermarriages and Cross-Generational In-
       Marriages among Native-Born Asian Americans.” International Migration Review, Fall
       2009, 43(3), pp. 447-70.

Neidert, Lisa J., and Farley, Reynolds. “Assimilation in the United States: An Analysis of Ethnic
       and Generation Differences in Status and Achievement.” American Sociological Review,
       December 1985, 50(6), pp. 840-50.

Oreopoulos, Philip, and Salvanes, Kjell G. “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of
      Schooling.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2011, 25(1), pp. 159-84.

Perlmann, Joel. Italians Then, Mexicans Now: Immigrant Origins and Second-Generation
      Progress, 1890-2000. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2005.

Perlmann, Joel, and Waters, Mary C. “Intermarriage Then and Now: Race, Generation, and the
      Changing Meaning of Marriage,” in Nancy Foner and George M. Fredrickson, eds., Not
      Just Black and White: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives on Immigration, Race,
      and Ethnicity in the United States. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2004, pp. 262-
      77.

Perlmann, Joel, and Waters, Mary C. “Intermarriage and Multiple Identities,” in Mary C. Waters
                                              41

       and Reed Udea, eds., The New Americans: A Guide to Immigration Since 1965.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007, pp. 110-123.

Portes, Alejandro, and Rumbaut, Ruben G. Legacies: The Story of the Immigrant Second
        Generation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2001.

Rong, Xue Lan, and Grant, Linda. “Ethnicity, Generation, and School Attainment of Asians,
      Hispanics, and Non-Hispanic Whites.” Sociological Quarterly, Winter 1992, 33(4), pp.
      625-36.

Rumbaut, Ruben G. “The Making of a People,” in Marta Tienda and Faith Mitchell, eds.,
     Hispanics and the Future of America. Washington, DC: Washington, DC: National
     Academies Press, 2006, pp. 16-65.

Saenz, Rogelio. “Latinos and the Changing Face of America,” in Reynolds Farley and John
       Haaga, eds., The American People: Census 2000. New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
       2005, pp. 352-79.

Sakamoto, Arthur; Wu, Huei-Hsia; and Tzeng, Jessie M. “The Declining Significance of Race
      among American Men during the Latter Half of the Twentieth Century.” Demography,
      February 2000, 37(1), pp. 41-51.

Smith, James P. “Immigrants and the Labor Market.” Journal of Labor Economics, April 2006,
       24(2): 203-233.

Snipp, C. Matthew, and Hirschman, Charles. “Assimilation in American Society: Occupational
       Achievement and Earnings for Ethnic Minorities in the United States, 1970 to 1990.”
       Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 2004, 22, pp. 93-117.

Trejo, Stephen J. “Why Do Mexican Americans Earn Low Wages?” Journal of Political
        Economy, December 1997, 105(6), pp. 1235-68.

Trejo, Stephen J. “Intergenerational Progress of Mexican-Origin Workers in the U.S. Labor
        Market.” Journal of Human Resources, Summer 2003, 38(3), pp. 467-89.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Design and Methodology: Current Population Survey, Technical
       Paper 66. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, October 2006.

van Ours, Jan C., and Veenman, Justus. “How Interethnic Marriages Affect the Educational
      Attainment of Children: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Labour Economics,
      January 2010, 17(1), pp. 111-17.

Waters, Mary C. Ethnic Options: Choosing Identities in America. Berkeley, CA: University of
       California Press, 1990.

White, Halbert. “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct test
                                             42

       for Heteroskedasticity.” Econometrica, May 1980, 48(4), pp. 817-38.

Yang, Philip Q. “Generational Differences in Educational Attainment among Asian Americans.”
       Journal of Asian American Studies, February 2004, 7(1), pp. 51-71.

Zeng, Zhen, and Xie, Yu. “Asian-Americans’ Earnings Disadvantage Reexamined: The Role of
       Place of Education.” American Journal of Sociology, March 2004, 109(5), pp. 1075-
       1108.
                                          Figure 1: Education Selectivity of Ethnic Attrition and Interethnic Marriage


                                                                                    Second-Generation Adults
                                     A. Educational Selectivity of Ethnic Attrition                                                             B. Educational Selectivity of Interethnic Marriage
-1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0




                                                                                                                 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                Dominican Republic
                                 Mexico
     Educational Selectivity




                                                                                                                      Educational Selectivity
                                   Puerto Rico                                                                                                   Puerto Rico
                                                  Dominican Republic                                                                            Mexico     El Salvador
                                             El Salvador                                                                                                                    Cuba
                                                              Cuba                                                                                                                                          China
                                                                  Philippines

                                                                                                                                                                   Philippines       Japan
                                                                      Japan
                                                                                   Korea     China
                                                                                                         India                                                                                                          India
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Korea


                                   13                   14             15                          16                                             13                   14             15                          16
                                                      Avearge Years of Education                                                                                     Avearge Years of Education



                                                                                    Third-Generation Children
                                     C. Educational Selectivity of Ethnic Attrition                                                             D. Educational Selectivity of Interethnic Marriage
-1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0




                                                                                                                 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0


                                                                                                                                                       Mexico                  Dominican Republic
                                                                                                                                                                Puerto Rico                               China
   Educational Selectivity




                                                                                                                      Educational Selectivity




                                        Mexico                                                                                                                                               Cuba
                                                 Puerto Rico                Cuba                                                                                                     Philippines
                                                               Dominican Republic                                                                                El Salvador
                                                 El Salvador
                                                                     Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                         Japan
                                                                         Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       India
                                                                          Korea                                                                                                           Korea

                                                                                           China

                                                                                                        India

                                   13                   14             15                          16                                             13                   14             15                          16
                                                      Avearge Years of Education                                                                                     Avearge Years of Education




                               Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
                               Notes: See Table 1 and the text for further information about the samples. The measures of educational selectivity
                               of ethnic attrition represent estimated differences in education, by source country, between those who do not identify
                               with the relevant ethnicity and those who do so identify, after conditioning on the “other control variables” included
                               in specification (2) of Tables 6 and 7. The measures of educational selectivity of interethnic marriage represent
                               analogous differences in education between those with the relevant ethnicity on only one side of their family (i.e.,
                               father’s side or mother’s side) and those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family. The regression
                               lines shown above correspond to the estimates reported in columns (1) and (3) of Table 9.
                               Table 1: Rates of Ethnic Identification (%)

                                                                   Source Countries
                                                                 Hispanic     Asian

                       First-Generation Adults                    98.6              96.3
                                                                   (.05)             (.1)
                                                                 [62,165]         [24,663]

                       Second-Generation Adults                   93.1              79.1
                                                                   (.2)               (.5)
                                                                 [18,189]          [5,731]

                       Third-Generation Children                  81.7              57.5
                                                                    (.5)            (1.0)
                                                                  [7,297]          [2,396]
Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: The reported figures are the percentage of individuals who identify as members of the relevant ethnic group
(Hispanic or Asian). Standard errors are shown in parentheses, and sample sizes are shown in brackets. The
Hispanic source countries are Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, El Salvador, and the Dominican Republic, and the Asian
source countries are China, India, Japan, Korea, and the Philippines. First-generation adults are individuals ages 25-
59 who were born in a relevant source country (excluding those born abroad of an American parent). Second-
generation adults are U.S.-born individuals ages 25-59 who have at least one parent born in a relevant source
country. Third-generation children are U.S.-born individuals ages 17 and below who live in intact families and have
two U.S.-born parents but at least one grandparent born in a relevant source country.
                      Table 2: Educational Selectivity of Ethnic Identification

                                                                              Source Countries
                                                                            Hispanic     Asian
          First-Generation Adults
          Average education                                                     9.91           14.96
                                                                                (.02)           (.02)
          Second-Generation Adults
          Average education:
           Identified as ethnic group member                                  12.88            15.05
                                                                               (.02)            (.03)
            Not identified as ethnic group member                             13.64            14.43
                                                                               (.07)            (.07)
            All                                                               12.93            14.92
                                                                               (.02)            (.03)
          Third-Generation Children
          Average parental education:
           Child identified as ethnic group member                            13.17            15.15
                                                                               (.03)            (.06)
            Child not identified as ethnic group member                       14.00            14.45
                                                                               (.06)            (.07)
            All                                                               13.32            14.85
                                                                               (.02)            (.04)
Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: The reported figures are average completed years of education; for third-generation children, this measure
represents the average of father’s and mother’s education. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. See Table 1
and the text for further information about the samples.
                   Table 3: Ethnic Identification and the Source of Ethnic Ties

                                                                                   Source Countries
                                                                                Hispanic      Asian
       Second-Generation Adults
       Percent with:
        Both parents born in a relevant source country                           61.7             48.5
        Father only born in a relevant source country                            22.6             20.0
        Mother only born in a relevant source country                            15.7             31.6
        Total                                                                   100.0            100.0

       Percent identified as ethnic group member:
        Both parents born in a relevant source country                           97.0             94.6
                                                                                  (.2)             (.4)
         Father only born in a relevant source country                           87.4             67.6
                                                                                  (.5)            (1.3)
         Mother only born in a relevant source country                           86.1             62.5
                                                                                  (.6)            (1.1)
       Third-Generation Children
       Percent with:
        3 or 4 grandparents born in a relevant source country                    24.8              9.7
        2 grandparents born in a relevant source country                         35.5             31.0
        1 grandparent born in a relevant source country                          39.6             59.4
        Total                                                                   100.0            100.0

       Percent identified as ethnic group member:
        3 or 4 grandparents born in a relevant source country                    96.5             89.7
                                                                                  (.4)            (2.0)
         2 grandparents born in a relevant source country                        85.8             76.3
                                                                                  (.7)            (1.6)
         1 grandparent born in a relevant source country                         68.8             42.4
                                                                                  (.9)            (1.3)
       Percent with:
        Relevant ethnicity on both sides of family                               51.2             26.5
        Relevant ethnicity on father’s side only                                 25.2             32.5
        Relevant ethnicity on mother’s side only                                 23.6             41.0
        Total                                                                   100.0            100.0

       Percent identified as ethnic group member:
        Relevant ethnicity on both sides of family                               97.7             92.8
                                                                                  (.2)            (1.0)
         Relevant ethnicity on father’s side only                                67.2             40.0
                                                                                 (1.1)            (1.8)
         Relevant ethnicity on mother’s side only                                62.6             48.5
                                                                                 (1.2)            (1.6)

Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. See Table 1 and the text for further information about the
samples.
              Table 4: Ethnic Identification Regressions for Hispanic Source Countries

                                                            Second-Generation Adults            Third-Generation Children
  Regressor                                                  (1)      (2)       (3)              (1)      (2)        (3)

  Intercept                                                 .970         .965       .968         .977       1.051      1.058
                                                           (.002)       (.011)     (.010)       (.002)      (.028)     (.028)
  Source of Hispanic ethnicity:
   Both sides of family (reference group)
   Father’s side only                                      -.096        -.096                   -.305       -.272
                                                           (.005)       (.005)                  (.011)      (.015)
    Mother’s side only                                     -.110        -.110                   -.351       -.316
                                                           (.007)       (.007)                  (.012)      (.014)
  Hispanic source country:
   Mexico (reference group)
   Mexico × (Father’s side only)                                                   -.033                                -.195
                                                                                   (.005)                               (.017)
    Mexico × (Mother’s side only)                                                  -.054                                -.237
                                                                                   (.007)                               (.017)
    Puerto Rico                                                                     .006                                 .030
                                                                                   (.008)                               (.016)
    Puerto Rico × (Father’s side only)                                             -.136                                -.257
                                                                                   (.013)                               (.024)
    Puerto Rico × (Mother’s side only)                                             -.165                                -.314
                                                                                   (.018)                               (.025)
    Cuba                                                                           -.020                                -.003
                                                                                   (.011)                               (.022)
    Cuba × (Father’s side only)                                                    -.216                                -.376
                                                                                   (.030)                               (.040)
    Cuba × (Mother’s side only)                                                    -.259                                -.347
                                                                                   (.031)                               (.042)
    El Salvador                                                                    -.028                                 .008
                                                                                   (.012)                               (.008)
    El Salvador × (Father’s side only)                                             -.609                                -.610
                                                                                   (.038)                               (.048)
    El Salvador × (Mother’s side only)                                             -.275                                -.703
                                                                                   (.046)                               (.048)
    Dominican Republic                                                             -.011                                 .042
                                                                                   (.011)                               (.019)
    Dominican Republic × (Father’s side only)                                      -.243                                -.235
                                                                                   (.053)                               (.069)
    Dominican Republic × (Mother’s side only)                                      -.216                                -.216
                                                                                   (.049)                               (.072)
  Other control variables                                    No          Yes         Yes          No         Yes          Yes

  R2                                                        .039         .065       .133         .181        .200        .227

Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: The reported figures are estimates from least squares regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy indicating
whether the individual identifies as Hispanic in response to the CPS Hispanic origin question. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors are shown in parentheses. The sample sizes are 18,189 for second-generation adults and 7,297 for third-generation
children. See Table 1 and the text for further information about the samples. The “other control variables” in specifications (2)
and (3) include indicators for gender, geographic location, survey month, and survey year. For second-generation adults, the
“other control variables” also include indicators for the respondent’s age and whether he was the household member who
completed the survey. For third-generation children, these additional variables include the ages of the child and of his father and
mother, and indicators for who in the household completed the survey.
               Table 5: Ethnic Identification Regressions for Asian Source Countries

                                                             Second-Generation Adults             Third-Generation Children
  Regressor                                                   (1)      (2)       (3)               (1)      (2)        (3)

  Intercept                                                  .946       1.023       1.038         .928         .622       .515
                                                            (.004)      (.028)      (.030)       (.010)       (.068)     (.075)
  Source of Asian ethnicity:
   Both sides of family (reference group)
   Father’s side only                                       -.270       -.260                    -.528        -.420
                                                            (.014)      (.015)                   (.020)       (.028)
    Mother’s side only                                      -.321       -.291                    -.443        -.344
                                                            (.012)      (.012)                   (.019)       (.024)
  Asian source country:
   China (reference group)
   China × (Father’s side only)                                                     -.181                                -.261
                                                                                    (.026)                               (.052)
    China × (Mother’s side only)                                                    -.303                                -.112
                                                                                    (.032)                               (.054)
    India                                                                           -.027                                 .046
                                                                                    (.019)                               (.073)
    India × (Father’s side only)                                                    -.438                                -.461
                                                                                    (.046)                               (.088)
    India × (Mother’s side only)                                                    -.578                                -.373
                                                                                    (.062)                               (.084)
    Japan                                                                           -.031                                 .101
                                                                                    (.019)                               (.034)
    Japan × (Father’s side only)                                                    -.318                                -.471
                                                                                    (.038)                               (.048)
    Japan × (Mother’s side only)                                                    -.261                                -.428
                                                                                    (.024)                               (.043)
    Korea                                                                            .015                                 .086
                                                                                    (.015)                               (.046)
    Korea × (Father’s side only)                                                    -.309                                -.361
                                                                                    (.074)                               (.062)
    Korea × (Mother’s side only)                                                    -.228                                -.241
                                                                                    (.027)                               (.058)
    Philippines                                                                     -.026                                 .148
                                                                                    (.013)                               (.031)
    Philippines × (Father’s side only)                                              -.231                                -.445
                                                                                    (.021)                               (.037)
    Philippines × (Mother’s side only)                                              -.333                                -.372
                                                                                    (.023)                               (.031)
  Other control variables                                     No          Yes         Yes          No          Yes         Yes

  R2                                                         .139        .178        .198         .190        .250        .262

Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: The reported figures are estimates from least squares regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy indicating
whether the individual identifies as Asian in response to the CPS race question. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are
shown in parentheses. The sample sizes are 5,731 for second-generation adults and 2,396 for third-generation children. See
Table 1 and the text for further information about the samples. The “other control variables” in specifications (2) and (3) include
indicators for gender, geographic location, survey month, and survey year. For second-generation adults, the “other control
variables” also include indicators for the respondent’s age and whether he was the household member who completed the survey.
For third-generation children, these additional variables include the ages of the child and of his father and mother, and indicators
for who in the household completed the survey.
                    Table 6: Education Regressions for Hispanic Source Countries

                                                            Second-Generation Adults           Third-Generation Children
 Regressor                                                   (1)      (2)       (3)             (1)      (2)        (3)

 Intercept                                                 12.88      12.44        12.34       13.17       10.44       10.53
                                                            (.02)      (.10)        (.10)       (.03)       (.17)       (.16)
 Ethnic identification:
   Identified as Hispanic (reference group)
   Not identified as Hispanic                                 .76        .71                      .82        .52
                                                             (.07)      (.07)                    (.06)      (.06)
 Ethnic identification by source of ethnicity
   Hispanic on both sides of family:
    Identified as Hispanic (reference group)
    Not identified as Hispanic                                                        .36                                -.24
                                                                                     (.13)                               (.21)
    Hispanic on father’s side only:
     Identified as Hispanic                                                           .23                                 .74
                                                                                     (.05)                               (.06)
      Not identified as Hispanic                                                      .77                                 .93
                                                                                     (.10)                               (.09)
    Hispanic on mother’s side only:
     Identified as Hispanic                                                          .65                                 .99
                                                                                    (.05)                               (.06)
      Not identified as Hispanic                                                    1.38                                1.11
                                                                                    (.12)                               (.08)
 Other control variables                                     No         Yes         Yes          No         Yes         Yes

 R2                                                           .01        .03          .04         .03        .16          .19

Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: The reported figures are estimates from least squares regressions in which the dependent variable is completed years of
education; for third-generation children, this measure represents the average of father’s and mother’s education.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample sizes are 18,189 for second-generation adults
and 7,297 for third-generation children. See Table 1 and the text for further information about the samples. The “other control
variables” in specifications (2) and (3) include indicators for gender, geographic location, survey month, and survey year. For
second-generation adults, the “other control variables” also include indicators for the respondent’s age. For third-generation
children, these additional variables include the ages of the child and of his father and mother.
                     Table 7: Education Regressions for Asian Source Countries

                                                           Second-Generation Adults           Third-Generation Children
 Regressor                                                  (1)      (2)       (3)             (1)      (2)        (3)

 Intercept                                                15.05      14.35        14.57       15.15      10.77       10.74
                                                           (.03)      (.16)        (.16)       (.06)      (.30)       (.29)
 Ethnic identification:
   Identified as Asian (reference group)
   Not identified as Asian                                  -.62       -.74                     -.70       -.72
                                                            (.07)      (.08)                    (.09)      (.08)
 Ethnic identification by source of ethnicity
   Asian on both sides of family:
    Identified as Asian (reference group)
    Not identified as Asian                                                        -.51                               -3.06
                                                                                   (.22)                               (.44)
    Asian on father’s side only:
     Identified as Asian                                                           -.54                                 .04
                                                                                   (.09)                               (.14)
      Not identified as Asian                                                      -.76                                -.36
                                                                                   (.13)                               (.12)
    Asian on mother’s side only:
     Identified as Asian                                                           -.60                                .39
                                                                                   (.08)                              (.12)
      Not identified as Asian                                                     -1.25                               -.42
                                                                                   (.10)                              (.12)
 Other control variables                                    No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes

 R2                                                          .01        .08         .10          .03        .25         .28

Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: The reported figures are estimates from least squares regressions in which the dependent variable is completed years of
education; for third-generation children, this measure represents the average of father’s and mother’s education.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample sizes are 5,731 for second-generation adults and
2,396 for third-generation children. See Table 1 and the text for further information about the samples. The “other control
variables” in specifications (2) and (3) include indicators for gender, geographic location, survey month, and survey year. For
second-generation adults, the “other control variables” also include indicators for the respondent’s age. For third-generation
children, these additional variables include the ages of the child and of his father and mother.
                                 Table 8: Education and Selective Ethnic Identification, by Source Country

                                                           Second-Generation Adults                            Third-Generation Children
                                                                 Educational Selectivity of:              Average     Educational Selectivity of:
                                                      Average      Ethnic      Interethnic                Parental      Ethnic      Interethnic
                                                     Education    Attrition     Marriage                 Education     Attrition     Marriage
             Hispanic source country:
              Mexico                                   12.75              .76             .43              13.07              .57            .90
                                                        (.02)            (.11)           (.05)              (.03)            (.08)          (.06)
               Puerto Rico                             12.88              .63             .52              13.44              .37            .82
                                                        (.03)            (.13)           (.07)              (.04)            (.11)          (.09)
               Cuba                                    14.36              .15             .33              14.84              .30            .62
                                                        (.07)            (.18)           (.14)              (.08)            (.16)          (.17)
               El Salvador                             13.38              .30             .55              13.49             -.01            .29
                                                        (.10)            (.20)           (.19)              (.10)            (.19)          (.19)
               Dominican Republic                      13.65              .40             .88              14.10              .20           1.03
                                                        (.10)            (.27)           (.23)              (.14)            (.40)          (.26)
             Asian source country:
              China                                    15.64            -1.00             .02              15.51           -1.30              .82
                                                        (.07)            (.22)           (.13)              (.11)           (.23)            (.22)
               India                                   16.33            -1.11           -1.09              16.25           -1.70             -.66
                                                        (.08)            (.20)           (.18)              (.14)           (.24)            (.37)
               Japan                                   14.49             -.72            -.61              14.67            -.63             -.19
                                                        (.07)            (.15)           (.20)              (.10)           (.18)            (.26)
               Korea                                   15.06            -1.04           -1.37              14.72            -.90             -.79
                                                        (.08)            (.22)           (.15)              (.11)           (.18)            (.25)
               Philippines                             14.29             -.15            -.61              14.45            -.20              .46
                                                        (.05)            (.12)           (.09)              (.06)           (.11)            (.13)

Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. See Table 1 and the text for further information about the samples. The measures of educational selectivity of
ethnic attrition represent estimated differences in education, by source country, between those who do not identify with the relevant ethnicity and those who do
so identify, after conditioning on the “other control variables” included in specification (2) of Tables 6 and 7. The measures of educational selectivity of
interethnic marriage represent analogous differences in education between those with the relevant ethnicity on only one side of their family (i.e., father’s side or
mother’s side) and those with the relevant ethnicity on both sides of their family.
                     Table 9: Regressions for Education Selectivity of Ethnic Attrition and Interethnic Marriage

                                            Second-Generation Adults                                          Third-Generation Children
                                   Dependent Variable: Educational Selectivity of:                   Dependent Variable: Educational Selectivity of:
                                    Ethnic Attrition         Interethnic Marriage                     Ethnic Attrition         Interethnic Marriage
 Regressor                         (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)                    (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)

 Intercept                         8.18           8.29            6.72             5.73              9.57           8.76            5.46            4.96
                                   (.82)          (.76)          (1.72)           (1.64)            (1.12)         (1.39)          (2.25)          (1.66)

 Average education                 -.59            -.59           -.48              -.41             -.69            -.63            -.36            -.31
                                   (.06)           (.06)          (.13)             (.13)            (.08)           (.11)           (.16)           (.13)

 Weighted regression               No              Yes              No             Yes                No             Yes              No             Yes

 R2                                 .87             .90            .52              .60               .76             .78             .28             .40

Source: 2003-2013 CPS data.
Notes: The reported figures are estimates from least squares regressions in which the dependent variables are the measures of educational selectivity of ethnic
attrition and interethnic marriage shown in Table 8. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample size for each regression is
10 observations, with the source country as the unit of analysis. Regressions in the even-numbered columns are weighted by the inverse of the standard errors of
the dependent variables.
     Appendix Figure A.1: Ethnic Attrition Rates by Survey Year for Selected Groups
               A. First-Generation Dominicans
                            70
                            60
                  Percent   50
                            40
                            30
                            20
                            10
                             0
                              1994   1996   1998   2000   2002    2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                           Year
              B. Second-Generation Puerto Ricans with Only One
                 Parent Born in an Hispanic Country
                            70
                            60
                            50
                  Percent




                            40
                            30
                            20
                            10
                             0
                              1994   1996   1998   2000   2002    2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                           Year

              C. Third-Generation Mexicans with Hispanic Ethnicity
                 on Only One Side of Their Family
                            70
                            60
                            50
                  Percent




                            40
                            30
                            20
                            10
                             0
                              1994   1996   1998   2000   2002    2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                           Year
Source: 1994-2013 CPS data.
Notes: See Appendix Tables A.1-A.3 and the text for further information about the samples. The reported ethnic
attrition rates represent the percentage of individuals who are not identified as Hispanic.
                        Appendix Table A.1: Ethnic Identification of First-Generation Adults, by Survey Year

        A. Hispanic Source Countries                                                                                                 Dominican
                                                 Mexico              Puerto Rico             Cuba               El Salvador           Republic
                                              1994-  2003-         1994-    2003-        1994-  2003-         1994-    2003-       1994-   2003-
                                              2002    2013         2002      2013        2002    2013         2002      2013       2002     2013

        Percent identified as Hispanic         98.9       98.8      95.9       96.7      97.7       98.1       94.7      98.7       81.8      98.2
                                               (0.1)      (0.1)     (0.3)      (0.2)     (0.3)      (0.2)      (0.4)     (0.2)      (0.8)     (0.2)

        Sample size                           23,655    45,212      4,325     5,062      2,511     3,151      2,805     5,431      2,367     3,309

        B. Asian Source Countries                 China                India                 Japan                Korea              Philippines
                                              1994-   2003-        1994-   2003-         1994-   2003-        1994-   2003-        1994-     2003-
                                              2002    2013         2002     2013         2002     2013        2002    2013         2002      2013

        Percent identified as Asian            98.3       98.1      88.6       93.9      96.8       96.7       98.0      98.4       95.9      96.0
                                               (0.2)      (0.2)     (0.6)      (0.3)     (0.5)      (0.5)      (0.3)     (0.2)      (0.3)     (0.2)

        Sample size                            3,188     5,257      3,207     6,803      1,216     1,314      2,505     3,727      5,088     7,562

Source: 1994-2013 CPS data.
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The samples include individuals ages 25-59 born in the relevant source country (excluding those born abroad
of an American parent).
                       Appendix Table A.2: Ethnic Identification of Second-Generation Adults, by Survey Year

  A. Hispanic Source Countries                                                                                                             Dominican
                                                        Mexico              Puerto Rico            Cuba               El Salvador           Republic
                                                     1994-  2003-         1994-    2003-       1994-  2003-         1994-    2003-       1994-   2003-
                                                     2002    2013         2002      2013       2002    2013         2002      2013       2002     2013
  Percent identified as Hispanic:
   Both parents born in an Hispanic country          97.8       97.9       94.8      96.4       95.8      93.8       48.8       94.9      78.6       96.1
                                                     (0.3)      (0.2)      (0.5)     (0.3)      (1.0)     (1.0)      (5.6)      (1.4)     (3.3)      (1.0)
    Father only born in an Hispanic country          89.7       93.9       65.6      84.3       61.4      77.3        6.4       41.0      74.0       82.9
                                                     (0.7)      (0.5)      (2.0)     (1.2)      (3.3)     (2.3)      (1.2)      (3.6)     (5.2)      (3.4)
    Mother only born in an Hispanic country          88.0       91.8       65.5      82.9       64.5      71.1        7.7       74.0      63.6       82.8
                                                     (0.9)      (0.6)      (2.4)     (1.5)      (3.9)     (2.7)      (1.1)      (3.6)     (6.0)      (3.1)
    All                                              93.2       95.9       85.8      91.8       79.8      84.4       10.1       71.8      74.2       90.4
                                                     (0.3)      (0.2)      (0.6)     (0.4)      (1.4)     (1.0)      (0.9)      (1.9)     (2.5)      (1.2)

  Sample size                                        6,241     11,547     3,126      4,528      773       1,257     1,143       575        298       625

  B. Asian Source Countries                              China                India                Japan                Korea              Philippines
                                                     1994-   2003-        1994-   2003-        1994-   2003-        1994-   2003-        1994-     2003-
                                                     2002    2013         2002     2013        2002     2013        2002    2013         2002      2013
  Percent identified as Asian:
   Both parents born in an Asian country             97.0       94.2       80.2      89.2       97.7      97.5      100.0       96.7      93.8       96.2
                                                     (0.8)      (0.9)      (3.8)     (1.4)      (1.3)     (1.4)      (0.0)      (1.0)     (1.1)      (0.5)
    Father only born in an Asian country             66.8       76.9       14.5      47.8       81.4      62.0       46.7       68.6      66.7       70.8
                                                     (3.3)      (2.4)      (4.5)     (4.3)      (3.0)     (3.6)     (13.3)      (6.6)     (2.3)      (2.0)
    Mother only born in an Asian country             50.8       64.0        7.9      32.8       52.7      64.5       55.6       71.6      39.9       58.3
                                                     (4.4)      (3.1)      (4.4)     (6.1)      (2.4)     (1.8)      (5.6)      (2.4)     (3.3)      (2.2)
    All                                              80.7       83.6       47.9      75.5       66.8      68.0       73.8       82.1      73.7       81.9
                                                     (1.5)      (1.1)      (3.4)     (1.7)      (1.7)     (1.5)      (3.4)      (1.4)     (1.3)      (0.8)

  Sample size                                         734      1,202       211        662       747       1,007      168        717       1,142     2,187

Source: 1994-2013 CPS data.
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The samples include U.S.-born individuals ages 25-59 who have at least one parent born in the relevant source
country.
                      Appendix Table A.3: Ethnic Identification of Third-Generation Children, by Survey Year

     A. Hispanic Source Countries                                                                                                        Dominican
                                                     Mexico              Puerto Rico            Cuba                El Salvador           Republic
                                                  1994-  2003-         1994-    2003-       1994-  2003-          1994-    2003-       1994-   2003-
                                                  2002    2013         2002      2013       2002    2013          2002      2013       2002     2013
     Percent identified as Hispanic:
      Hispanic on both sides of family             98.0      98.2       88.7      96.0       91.3      93.2       57.6     100.0       83.0       98.6
                                                   (0.3)     (0.2)      (1.4)     (0.8)      (2.8)     (1.8)      (6.1)     (0.0)      (5.5)      (1.4)
       Hispanic on one side of family only         38.8      71.7       23.4      64.5       21.8      52.6        1.1      24.6       20.0       68.6
                                                   (1.3)     (1.0)      (1.5)     (1.5)      (2.4)     (2.5)      (0.4)     (3.2)      (6.0)      (4.6)
       All                                         74.0      88.0       49.7      75.7       39.2      65.4        5.3      49.5       52.2       80.9
                                                   (0.8)     (0.5)      (1.4)     (1.1)      (2.4)     (1.9)      (0.8)     (3.0)      (5.2)      (3.0)

     Sample size                                  3,363      4,922     1,341      1,610       411       601        883       279         92       173

     B. Asian Source Countries                        China                India                Japan                 Korea              Philippines
                                                  1994-   2003-        1994-   2003-        1994-   2003-         1994-   2003-        1994-     2003-
                                                  2002    2013         2002     2013        2002     2013         2002    2013         2002      2013
     Percent identified as Asian:
      Asian on both sides of family                97.4      87.2        NA       84.4       99.0      97.6      100.0     100.0       98.5       96.1
                                                   (1.8)     (2.6)                (6.5)      (1.0)     (1.7)      (0.0)     (0.0)      (1.1)      (1.1)
       Asian on one side of family only            34.5      53.3       12.0      35.8       18.2      36.8       18.4      47.3       22.6       46.8
                                                   (3.1)     (2.9)      (4.6)     (3.7)      (2.2)     (2.5)      (5.6)     (3.0)      (2.2)      (1.9)
       All                                         50.3      65.5       12.0      35.8       38.1      47.8       29.8      55.4       42.8       62.9
                                                   (2.9)     (2.2)      (4.6)     (3.7)      (2.4)     (2.3)      (6.1)     (2.8)      (2.2)      (1.5)

     Sample size                                   306        455        50        197        409       462        57        327        502      1,009

Source: 1994-2013 CPS data.
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The samples include U.S.-born individuals ages 17 and below who live in intact families and have two U.S.-
born parents but at least one grandparent born in the relevant source country. For Indians, the sample for the years 1994-2002 contains no observations with
Asian ethnicity on both sides of the family.
