                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 INTERNATIONAL TRADE WITH INDIRECT ADDITIVITY

                                          Paolo Bertoletti
                                           Federico Etro
                                          Ina Simonovska

                                       Working Paper 21984
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21984


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Pedro Bento, Matteo Cervellati, Arnaud Costinot, Paolo Epifani, Robert
Feenstra, Emanuele Forlani, Antonio Lijoi, Walter Steingress, especially Andres Rodriguez-Clare
and David Weinstein, and seminar participants at NBER ITI 2015 Winter Meeting, UCSD, UCLA,
UC Davis, Boston College, Brown University, University of Bologna, University of Milan Bicocca,
University of Rennes and the University of Minnesota International EconomicsWorkshop for their
comments and suggestions. Luca Macedoni provided outstanding research assistance. Ina Simonovska
acknowledges financial support from the Hellman Fellowship and the Institute of Social Sciences at
UC Davis. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Paolo Bertoletti, Federico Etro, and Ina Simonovska. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Trade with Indirect Additivity
Paolo Bertoletti, Federico Etro, and Ina Simonovska
NBER Working Paper No. 21984
February 2016
JEL No. D11,D43,F12,L11

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop a general equilibrium model of monopolistic competition and trade based on indirectly
additive preferences and heterogenous firms. It generates markups independent from destination population
but increasing in destination per capita income, as documented empirically. Trade liberalization delivers
an increase in consumed variety and incomplete cost pass-through. This leads to welfare gains that
can be much lower than those predicted by comparable models with different preferences. We introduce
a tractable utility function that further predicts that small firms grow more during trade liberalization
and pass through cost changes more than do large firms. Once we estimate the model to match moments
from cross-firm and cross-country data we (i) find quantitatively large differences in the welfare gains
from trade relative to models based on homothetic preferences, and (ii) evaluate the gains and losses
from the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership agreement.


Paolo Bertoletti                                    Ina Simonovska
Department of Economics and Management              Department of Economics
University of Pavia Via San Felice                  University of California, Davis
5 I-27100 Pavia                                     One Shields Avenue
Italy                                               Davis, CA 95616
paolo.bertoletti@unipv.it                           and NBER
                                                    inasimonovska@ucdavis.edu
Federico Etro
University of Venice Ca' Foscari
federico.etro@unive.it
1    Introduction
Gains from intra-industry trade derive largely from the consumption of new and cheaper im-
ported varieties (Broda and Weinstein, 2006). These gains have been the focus of international
trade theory at least since Krugman (1980) and the subsequent large literature based on CES
preferences. Summarizing this literature, Arkolakis et al. (2012, ACR) have shown that: i) the
gains from trade liberalization can be simply captured by a formula featuring only the change
in the domestic expenditure share and a “trade elasticity”, namely the elasticity of the relative
imports with respect to variable trade costs; ii) for heterogeneous firm models with an untrun-
cated Pareto distribution of productivities (including the celebrated Melitz-Chaney model: see
Melitz, 2003 and Chaney, 2008), the trade elasticity depends only on the shape parameter of
the productivity distribution. Arkolakis et al. (2015, ACDR) have proved that the same welfare
formula applies to general homothetic preferences, noticing that in this case liberalization does
not produce gains from variety (see also Feenstra, 2014). Finally, ACDR have shown that the
welfare gains from trade are only marginally smaller in comparable models based on the class of
directly additive preferences (à la Dixit and Stiglitz, 1977). These surprising results appear to
suggest that not only the supply side dimensions, but also consumer preferences, have a limited
role in shaping the gains from trade.
    We reconsider the role of preferences in affecting trade and its gains. We introduce to the
international trade literature a class of preferences which generates variable demand elasticities
(encompassing models with isoelastic, linear and more general demand functions) and show that
they are crucial in shaping pricing, trade patterns and the gains from trade. Our preferences
are indirectly additive (IA), which means that they are represented by an indirect utility which
is additive in prices (Houthakker, 1960). The class includes CES preferences as the only case
in common with the classes of directly additive and homothetic preferences. In addition, it
contains an entire family of well-behaved non-homothetic preferences with the unique property
that the elasticity of demand for each good depends on its own price and on income, but not
on other prices (Bertoletti and Etro, 2016a,b). Such IA preferences are represented by the
following indirect utility:                Z               
                                                       p(ω)
                                     V =       v              dω,
                                           Ω            E
where Ω is the variety space and the subutility v for each variety ω is decreasing in the ratio
between its price p(ω) and income E. Our assumptions on the supply side are standard. Each
variety is produced by a firm after paying an entry cost with a productivity drawn from a
known distribution. Monopolistic competition reigns.
   We initially analyze the equilibrium in autarky for general IA preferences and cost distri-
butions. Firms adopt markups that can be variable in their marginal cost and in the income of

                                                   1
consumers, but that are always independent of the size of the market. Therefore, opening up to
costless trade induces gains from variety that are qualitatively à la Krugman (1980). However,
except for the CES case, the equilibrium is inefficient: too many goods are consumed (relative
to the mass of created goods) and low-cost firms produce too little. In the case of costly trade
between identical countries, firms set lower markups for exports and selection effects à la Melitz
(2003) arise as long as production involves fixed costs.
   To make headway in a multi-country framework with costly trade, we abstract from over-
head production costs as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and ACDR, and we adopt a Pareto
distribution of productivity. Our model predicts that firms extract higher mark-ups from richer
destinations, but that they do not set different mark-ups in countries of different population size.
These predictions are in line with the empirical results obtained by Simonovska (2015) from
cross-country price data of identical products sold via the Internet. In particular, controlling for
the cost to deliver products to a destination, the author finds that a typical monopolistically-
competitive apparel producer charges higher prices for identical goods in richer destinations,
but she does not find evidence that prices vary with the population size of the market. Dingel
(2015) obtains similar results using data on unit values for individual US producers across many
destinations. We confirm these findings using prices for 110 products with identical character-
istics sold in retail locations in 71 countries. Notice that traditional models of monopolistic
competition cannot account for prices increasing in destination income when they are based
on quasilinear preferences (Melitz and Ottaviano, 2008) or homothetic preferences (Feenstra,
2014), and generate prices that are decreasing in destination population when they are based on
directly additive or homothetic preferences (for instance, see Behrens et al., 2014, Simonovska,
2015, and ACDR).1
   The model generates further firm-level predictions that are consistent with data. First, more
productive firms enjoy higher mark-ups, in line with the evidence in De Loecker and Warzynski
(2012). Second, when trade costs are large, exporters are more productive and represent a
minority of the active firms, as documented in Bernard et al. (2003), yet they may sell tiny
amounts per export market, as documented in Eaton et al. (2011). New implications emerge
for the margins of trade. The extensive margin is increasing in destination per-capita income,
neutral in destination population, and falling in the trade cost to the destination. Hence, the
model predicts that the extensive margin is falling in the distance to the destination (to the
   1
     Our theoretical results are also in line with empirical findings by Handbury and Weinstein (2014) for
U.S. cities. Identifying varieties with barcode data, and controlling for all retail heterogeneity and purchasers’
characteristics, the authors provide convincing evidence that larger cities do not feature different prices of
individual varieties, but have more varieties available, which yields lower price indices there. Using the same
data source, Broda et al. (2009) document that richer consumers pay more for identical products even after
controlling for average income in the zip code in which they live, where the latter aims to capture local costs to
operate the store.


                                                        2
extent that trade costs are increasing in distance) and potentially rising in overall GDP of the
destination country (the product of per-capita income and population), which is in line with
Bernard et al. (2007) who document that the US extensive margin is falling in the distance to
the destination and rising in the destination’s GDP.2 Finally, the intensive margin of trade is
increasing in a destination’s overall GDP and decreasing in the destination’s per-capita income,
which is in line with exploratory findings by Eaton et al. (2011) for several exporting countries
across their export destinations.
   As in Melitz (2003) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), trade liberalization reallocates pro-
duction across exporting and non-exporting firms and across countries. A qualitative difference
is that trade liberalization expands the set of exporters but does not affect the set of domestic
producers (unless fixed costs are introduced).3 Consumers exploit the reductions in the price of
imports by expanding the number of imported varieties and consuming the same set of domestic
goods (but in lower amounts). We obtain an exact quantitative measure of the welfare gains
from trade liberalization for the IA class. Its approximation (valid for small trade cost changes)
is:
                                                         d ln λ
                                    d ln W = −(1 − ǭE )        ,
                                                            κ
where ǭE ∈ (0, 1) is a sales-weighted average across firms of the elasticity of price with respect
to per-capita income, κ is the shape of the Pareto distribution of productivity, which can be
interpreted as the trade elasticity, and λ is the share of domestic expenditure. For reference,
recall that the gains calculated by ACR and ACDR for a variety of models based on homothetic
preferences are given by d ln W = − d lnκ λ .4 The differences between the two classes of models
are very stark. Not only do IA models yield strictly lower welfare gains than homothetic ones,
but the magnitude of the difference falls within a very wide range. In fact, the more firms price
   2
      The evidence on the relationship between the extensive margin and the components of destination GDP,
per-capita income and population size, is mixed. Hummels and Klenow (2002) find that the number of product
categories is increasing with respect to the importer’s per-capita income with a larger elasticity than with
respect to its population across a large number of exporting countries. Recently, Macedoni (2015) confirms
these predictions using firm- and product-level data for a number of exporting countries featured in the Exporter
Dynamics Database. When the author focuses on large firms that sell their products online, he finds that firms
offer more varieties in richer destinations, but not in larger countries. The different findings in the literature
point to the heterogeneity in fixed costs across countries, industries, and modes of operation (brick-and-mortar
versus electronic sales). Our baseline theory abstracts from fixed costs of production, but the extension à la
Melitz described in Section 2.2 would restore the standard role that destination size plays in driving export
market entry patterns, without affecting the model’s desirable pricing predictions.
    3
      It should be noted that the selection effects of Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and ACDR are not due to a
supply-side increase of competition (they cannot be due to strategic interactions in models with a continuum
of competitors). Namely, domestic firms exit during a liberalization because there is a demand-side change of
substitutability among goods which reduces the domestic choke price: see Bertoletti and Epifani (2014) and
Bertoletti and Etro (2016b) for a discussion.
    4
      ACDR also consider directly additive preferences and obtain gains that are marginally smaller than the
case of homothetic preferences: their lower bound is given by d ln W = − dκ+1ln λ
                                                                                  .


                                                        3
to market (the less elastic is demand) the lower are the welfare gains from trade liberalization
because a smaller portion of the cost reduction is translated into lower prices for the consumers.
Thus, preferences, which govern the degree to which firms can price to market in monopolistic
competition models, are critical in understanding the magnitude of the welfare gains from trade.
   To obtain further predictions and to quantify the welfare gains from trade liberalization,
                                                                                        1+γ
we introduce a convenient “addilog” specification of preferences, with v (s) = (a−s)
                                                                                 1+γ
                                                                                     , where
a represents the maximum willingness to pay for each variety in terms of its normalized price
s = p/E, and the parameter γ > 0 governs demand, which is perfectly rigid for γ → 0,
linear in prices for γ = 1 and perfectly elastic for γ → ∞. This yields closed form solutions
of firm-level and aggregate variables as well as the welfare gains, and delivers two additional
predictions in line with the data. First, trade liberalization increases sales more for smaller
firms, as documented by Eaton et al. (2008) and Arkolakis (2015). Together with the fact
that trade liberalization induces entry of foreign varieties, this implies that adjustments on
the extensive margin (changes to new and least traded varieties) are critical in understanding
the welfare gains from trade (as argued by Broda and Weinstein, 2006, and Kehoe and Ruhl,
2013). Second, the degree of cost pass-through is falling in firm productivity, as documented
by Berman et al. (2014). This implies that larger firms change prices less with changes in costs
and more with changes in income, and it is precisely this behavior that directly impacts the
measured welfare gains in the formula above.
   We estimate the addilog model and directly compare the welfare cost of autarky predicted
by the ACR framework based on CES preferences and our framework with IA preferences.
In particular, we obtain data on λ for 123 countries in year 2004 and fix the supply-side
(trade elasticity) parameter κ to 5 - in line with ACR, ACDR and estimates in Caliendo and
Parro (2015). An estimate for ǭE , the sales-weighted average elasticity of price with respect
to per-capita income, is not readily available, but the addilog specification implies that the
sales-weighted average elasticity of price with respect to income is a constant that depends on
the supply-side parameter κ and the demand-side parameter γ. Therefore, given κ, we identify
γ from the following two moments: (i) the average elasticity of price with respect to income
from micro-level data, as reported in Simonovska (2015); and (ii) the domestic sales advantage
of exporters over non-exporters for the US, as reported in Bernard et al. (2003). We choose
these moments for the following reasons. First, our model differs from existing alternatives
precisely along the pricing dimension, therefore, targeting the price elasticity with respect to
income seems to be a natural choice. Second, it is the price elasticity with respect to income,
weighted by each firm’s relative sales, that constitutes ǭE - the object that governs the welfare
gains in our model. Therefore, the distribution of firm sales and the price elasticity with respect
to income are crucial elements in determining the magnitude of the welfare gains from trade.


                                                4
    We follow Eaton et al. (2011) and we estimate all the parameters that are necessary in
order to simulate micro- and macro-level predictions from bilateral trade data for 123 countries
via the gravity equation that holds for a large class of models, including ours, and, conditional
on these parameters as well as on κ, we pin down γ using the simulated method of moments
(SMM) estimator. This strategy obtains a value for γ ≈ 1, which implies that, when κ = 5,
the IA specification that best fits the data is approximately the case of linear demand. Using
the welfare formula that is applicable for large changes in trade costs in the IA model, the
mean welfare cost of moving from the trade equilibrium in year 2004 to autarky is 6%. The
corresponding statistic for the ACR class of models based on CES preferences is 14%, which is
more than double that of IA.5 Hence, the mismeasurement of welfare is both quantitatively and
economically large, which leads us to conclude that the demand side is crucial in understanding
the welfare gains from trade.
   Given the unique set of predictions that our theoretical framework yields and the novelty
of the parametric preference specification to the international trade literature, we engage in an
additional quantitative exercise that aims to test the ability of the model to account for micro-
and macro-level facts in the data. In particular, rather than imposing restrictions on the model’s
parameters, κ and γ, we estimate both via SMM targeting the moments (i) and (ii) above as
well as (iii) the measured productivity advantage of exporters over non-exporters for the US, as
reported in Bernard et al. (2003). On the micro-level, the estimated model predicts that 16%
of US manufacturing firms export, which compares favorably to the 18-21% statistic reported
by Bernard et al. (2003) and Bernard et al. (2012) from U.S. data over the past couple of
decades, and the export intensity is highly concentrated suggesting that firms export very tiny
amounts. On the macro-level, the model yields an average mark-up among U.S. manufacturing
firms of 19%, which falls within the middle of the range of 5-40% reported by Jaimovich and
Floetotto (2008). Mean cost pass-through amounts to 0.57, which is in the range of estimates
obtained by De Loecker et al. (2015) and others. The average elasticity of price with respect
to per-capita income amounts to 0.43, while the average plus one standard deviation is 0.51;
hence, more productive firms price to market more, though these values exceed estimates in
the literature.
   Given the model’s favorable quantitative performance with respect to data, we use it to
evaluate the welfare gains from a bilateral reduction in trade costs between the US and the
European countries that are currently involved in the negotiation of the Transatlantic Trade
and Investment Partnership. We find an average gain in welfare of 0.3% to the potential
   5
    To relate our finding to ACR’s, consider their reported US domestic expenditure share of 0.93 and their
preferred value for κ of 5. In this case, the welfare cost of autarky for the US is 1.4% according to the CES
model and 0.6% according to the (IA) linear demand model.



                                                     5
members, with the US enjoying roughly 0.7% GDP increase and small open economies like
Ireland and Belgium (together with Luxembourg and the Netherlands) enjoying roughly 2%
and 0.8% income improvement, respectively. While non-TTIP members, and especially USA’s
major trade parters Canada and Mexico, suffer losses, there are positive gains in world welfare.
  The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present the general theory.
In Section 3, we study trade between heterogenous countries. In Section 4, we describe the
estimation procedure. In Section 5, we present the quantitative results. We conclude in Section
6.


2    The Framework
Consider a market populated by L identical agents, each one with labor endowment e. Firms
can produce a good from a set Ω at a constant marginal cost after paying a sunk entry cost
Fe > 0. Upon entry, the “intrinsic” marginal cost c of each firm is independently and identically
drawn from a distribution G(c) with support [0, c] for a large, and possibly infinite, c > 0. All
costs are in (efficiency) units of labor and the labor market is perfectly competitive: in this
section we normalize the wage to unity so that c is marginal cost and, given zero expected
profits, per capita income E just equals the labor endowment.
   The indirect utility of each agent depends (exploiting homogeneity of degree zero) on the
normalized prices s(ω) = p(ω)/E, for ω ∈ Ω, according to the following additive specification:
                                             Z
                                       V =        v(s(ω))dω,                                   (1)
                                              Ω


where v is a decreasing and convex function up to a (possibly infinite) choke value a ≡ v −1 (0),
so that aE is the maximum willingness to pay for each variety, with v(s) = 0 for all s ≥ a.
With the exception of CES preferences that it encompasses (with an infinite choke price), (1)
represents a class of preferences that are neither homothetic nor directly additive (see Bertoletti
and Etro, 2016a). By Roy identity, the individual demand for each variety ω that is actually
consumed is given by:
                                                  v ′ (s(ω))
                                        x(ω) =               ,                                 (2)
                                                        µ
           R
where µ = Ω v ′ (s(ω))s(ω)dω = −E(∂V /∂E) is simply related to the marginal utility of income,
and thus depends on all prices and on the measure of consumed varieties. Accordingly, demand
faced by a producer of variety ω is decreasing in its own price p(ω) and vanishes if this is above
the choke level:
                                             pb = aE,                                          (3)


                                                  6
which depends linearly on income.6


2.1     Autarkic equilibrium
Let N be the measure of firms paying the entry cost: we analyze monopolistic competition
among a measure n of active firms producing different varieties for a given distribution of costs.
The profits of a firm with marginal cost c choosing a price p(c) can then be written as:
                                                                              
                                                                ′       p(c)
                                                (p(c) − c)v              E
                                                                                   L
                                       π(c) =                                          ,                    (4)
                                                            µ

where µ is unaffected by a single firm which faces a demand whose elasticity is just the elasticity
of v ′ (s), namely θ(s) ≡ −sv ′′ (s)/v ′(s). The optimal pricing rule is:
                                                                              
                                                         θ (p(c)/E)
                                       p(c) = c                                    ,                        (5)
                                                      θ (p(c)/E) − 1

for any c > 0. To satisfy the conditions for the existence of a well-defined optimal price
p(c), we assume that θ (s) > 1 and that the second-order condition 2θ(s) > ζ(s), where ζ(s) ≡
−v ′′′ (s)s/v ′′ (s) is a measure of demand curvature, is satisfied for all s ∈ (b, a) where b ≡ p(0)/E.
The markup of each firm, m(c) = (p(c) − c)/c, is independent from the number of goods
available and from the price of any other firm. However, it is immediate to verify that the
markup increases in income and decreases in the marginal cost whenever the demand elasticity
is increasing (Bertoletti and Etro, 2016a).
    Let us actually assume θ′ ≥ 0,7 which is equivalent to what Mrázová and Neary (2013)
define as “subconvexity” of the demand function, and it is sometimes called “Marshall’s Second
Law of Demand”. When demand elasticity is strictly increasing, the model has four main
implications for pricing. First, prices are lower but markups are higher for more productive
firms, which differs from the Melitz (2003) model. Second, markups increase with the income
of consumers: this effect is absent in any model based on homothetic preferences (Melitz, 2003;
Feenstra, 2014) or quasilinear preferences (Melitz and Ottaviano, 2008). Third, and differently
from models based on directly additive preferences (Behrens et al., 2014; Bertoletti and Epifani,
2014 and Simonovska, 2015) or quasilinear utility (Melitz and Ottaviano, 2008), markups are
also independent from market size. Fourth, it is easy to verify that the elasticities of prices
   6
     The dependence of the choke price on income alone is a key property of IA. In other models based on
homothetic or directly additive preferences, the choke price depends on the marginal utility of income, i.e., on
the price distribution and on the measure of consumed varieties (see Feenstra, 2014, and ACDR). While the
marginal utility of income is unitary in the quasilinear model of Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), the choke price
depends on the number of varieties and on their average price.
   7
     This implies θ′ s/θ = θ + 1 − ζ ≥ 0 (see Bertoletti and Etro, 2016a, for details).

                                                        7
with respect to income and marginal cost sum to one:

                                ∂ ln p   θ+1−ζ       ∂ ln p
                     ǫE (c) ≡          =         =1−        ≡ 1 − ǫc (c) ∈ (0, 1) ,                        (6)
                                ∂ ln E    2θ − ζ     ∂ ln c

which shows the inverse relation between pricing to market and incomplete pass-through.
   The individual consumption of the variety produced by a c-firm is either x(c) = v ′ (p(c)/E)/µ,
or zero if its price if above the choke level pb. The equilibrium set of active firms is simply given
by the interval [0, bc], where the marginal cost cutoff:

                                                                 b
                                                                 c = aE                                    (7)

is just the choke price.8 The model is closed equating the expected gross profits:
                                                   Z     c
                                                         b
                                                             (p(c) − c)v ′ (p(c)/E)L
                                E {π(c)} =                                           dG(c)
                                                     0                 µ
                                           R bc
to the entry cost Fe . Since µ = N             0
                                                   v ′ (s(c))s(c)dG(c), this gives:
                                                    "Z                                           #−1
                                                             c
                                                             b
                     EL                                              1         p(c)x(c)
                  N=              with θ ≡                                R bc           dG(c)         ,   (8)
                     θ̄Fe                                0       θ(p(c)/E) p(c)x(c)dG(c)
                                                                           0


where θ̄ is the harmonic average of demand elasticities weighted by the market shares. In
particular, notice that the equilibrium distribution of normalized prices Fs (s) has support [b, a]
and is given by:

                             Fs (s) = Pr {p(c) ≤ sE; c ≤ b
                                                         c}
                                                                                G (h(s)E)
                                      = Pr {c ≤ h(s)E; c ≤ b
                                                           c} =                           ,
                                                                                 G (aE)

where h = s θ(s)−1
             θ(s)
                   (h′ > 0). This allows us to express the average demand elasticity as:

                                      Z       a                                    −1
                                                    1       sv ′ (s)
                                 θ=                    Ra                 dFs (s)         ,                (9)
                                           b       θ(s) b sv ′ (s)dFs (s)

which is independent from the market size (but can depend on income). Accordingly, the
measure of consumed varieties n = NG(bc) must be linear in population.
  The familiar case of CES preferences should clarify the nature of the equilibrium. Consider
  8
      This assumes that the constraint b
                                       c ≤ c never binds.




                                                                    8
v(s) = s1−θ with θ > 1, which delivers the isoelastic demand x(ω) = (θ − 1)s(ω)−θ / |µ|, or:9

                                                    p (ω)−θ E
                                         x(ω) = R               .
                                                   Ω
                                                     p(ω)1−θ dω

In this case there is no finite choke price, the equilibrium prices are p(c) = θc/(θ − 1) and θ̄ = θ.
                                                           EL
Therefore, the number of goods created is just N = θF       e
                                                              and all these goods are consumed in
positive quantity (since we have abstracted from fixed costs of production).
   Consider now a new example with v(s) = (a − s)2 /2, which, as we will see in Sections 3.3
and 5, is not only tractable but also appealing from an empirical point of view. Notice that
the subutility for variety ω is quadratic in a − s(ω), and the Roy identity (2) delivers a linear
demand function x(ω) = (a − s(ω))/ |µ|, or:

                                                  aE − p (ω)
                                x(ω) = R                              .
                                           Ω
                                             (aE − p (ω))(p (ω) /E)dω

The demand elasticity θ(s) = s/(a − s) is now increasing in the price-income ratio s < a. It is
immediate to derive the optimal price as:

                                                      c + aE
                                             p(c) =          ,
                                                         2

which is indeed increasing less than proportionally in income and in the marginal cost, and
                                                                                           2
                                                                  c) are then π(c) = (ae−c)
independent from population. The profits of an active c-firm (c ≤ b                    4e|µ|
                                                                                             L
                                                                                               .
Further results can be obtained by assuming (as in Chaney, 2008, and the subsequent literature)
that the cost distribution corresponds to a productivity distribution that is Pareto (unbounded
above), namely G(c) = (c/c)κ with c > 0 finite and κ > 1 as the shape parameter. The expected
                                               a  e   κ+2 κ+1
                                                      L
profits can then be computed as E {π(c)} = 2(κ+1)(κ+2)cκ |µ| , and the free-entry condition provides

the equilibrium value for |µ| and the average demand elasticity θ̄ = κ + 1,10 so that the measure
of created firms is:
                                                     EL
                                            N=              .
                                                  (κ + 1)Fe
It is important to notice that only a fraction G(b
                                                 c) of the firms are active in this case, namely
n = N(aE/c)κ .
    The distinctive characteristic of IA preferences, namely the neutrality of population on
prices, finds empirical support in markets with a large number of firms as in a monopolistic
competition environment (see Handbury and Weinstein, 2014, Simonovska, 2015, Dingel, 2015
                                                                                        R                1/(θ−1)
  9
     The indirect utility can be expressed (up to a mononotic transformation)
                                                                            as V = E    Ω
                                                                                             p(ω)1−θ dω              .
  10                                                                   2s−a κ
     One can compute (9) by using the equilibrium distribution Fs =      a    .



                                                      9
and Section 5.2.1 below). As well known, a negative equilibrium relationship between mar-
ket size and prices emerges on the contrary in existing (non-CES) models based on directly
additive or homothetic preferences, and is often regarded as a pro-competitive effect. How-
ever, this relationship is not due to a strengthening of competition on the supply side, since
strategic interactions are absent under monopolistic competition. It depends only on changes
in substitutability between products on the demand side, whose nature and direction can be
hardly verified empirically. While we consider the neutrality of population on prices an attrac-
tive feature of our setting, competition effects could be easily introduced by adding strategic
interactions,11 or demand externalities.12


2.2     Welfare and trade among identical countries
The impact of an expansion of the market size under IA replicates a key property of the
Krugman (1980) model, for which a larger population (which is equivalent to opening up to
costless trade with identical countries) increases proportionally the number of firms/varieties
created in equilibrium without affecting markups. Since the range of created goods which are
actually consumed and their prices are independent from population, this generates pure gains
from variety due to opening up to costless trade. To see this, notice that welfare can be easily
computed as follows:                           Z                         
                                                    aE
                                                                  p(c)        dG(c)
                                       V =n              v                          .                             (10)
                                                0                  E          G(aE)
This is linear in the measure of consumed varieties n = G(aE)EL/θ̄Fe , which in turn is linear
in the population size. Therefore, costless trade leads to welfare gains that are due only to an
increase of the mass of consumed varieties for any IA preferences and cost distribution.
    With the notable exception of CES preferences, our setting implies an inefficient market
allocation. To verify this, in Appendix A we solve the social planner problem for the maximiza-
tion of utility under the resource constraint.13 The optimal allocation delivers the following
number of firms:
                                                         Z       cb∗
                   ∗    EL                                                               v(s(c))
                N =                      with η̄ ≡                     η (s(c)) R bc∗                    dG(c),   (11)
                    (η̄ + 1)Fe                               0                          v (s(c)) dG(c)
                                                                                  0
  11
     It is well known that markets with a small number of firms would exhibit equilibrium markups decreasing
in the size of the market due to strategic interactions (which depend on the number of competitors). For recent
trade models with strategic interactions see Atkeson and Burstein (2008) and Etro (2015).
  12
     As a simple example, if the model choke price a(n) is decreasing in the number of consumed varieties n,
the latter solves as n = N G(a(n)E) in a free entry equilibrium, which must increase less than proportionally in
population: this implies that larger markets have lower prices and select a more efficient set of firms.
  13
     Dhingra and Morrow (2015) and Nocco et al. (2014) have analyzed optimality in the cases of direct additivity
of preferences and of quasilinearity, respectively.


                                                             10
where η̄ > 0 is a weighted average of the elasticity of the subutility function v, η = −v ′ (s)s/v(s) >
0, with relative utilities as weights, and is independent from L. This allows for equilibrium en-
try either above or below optimum (θ should be compared to η̄ + 1). More important, the
social planner sets a constant mark up m∗ = 1/η̄, as needed to equalize the marginal rate of
substitution between any two produced goods to their marginal cost ratio:
                                                                  
                                              ∗               1
                                             p (c) =       1+          c.                                    (12)
                                                              η̄

Finally, the optimal marginal cost cutoff is smaller than the equilibrium one (when they are
finite):
                                                      aE η̄
                                               c∗ =
                                               b             <b
                                                              c.                                             (13)
                                                      1 + η̄
It follows that the equilibrium prices must be above optimal for the most efficient firms and
below optimal for the most inefficient firms.14 Therefore, a redistribution of production from
high cost to low cost firms would indeed improve the allocation of resources.
   To gain further insights, our two examples can be useful. With CES preferences η̄ = θ−1 and
the equilibrium is optimal (Dhingra and Morrow, 2014). Instead, for any other IA preferences
with a finite choke price, we can derive a simple result assuming that the cost distribution
corresponds to a productivity distribution that is Pareto: in such a case we have η̄ = κ (see
Appendix A). This shows an interesting property of our earlier example with linear demand:
this (as its “addilog” generalization of Section 3.3) delivers in equilibrium the creation of the
optimal number of firms. Nevertheless, a pervasive inefficiency remains: too many goods are
consumed relative to the mass of firms created and low-cost firms produce too little while
high-cost firms produce too much.
   In conclusion we should notice that our framework can be easily extended to trade frictions
between identical countries for any IA preferences, which indeed include the CES case of Melitz
(2003). First, notice that identical countries must have the same wage and the same value of
µ. Second, given an iceberg transport cost τ > 1, the pricing rules are the same as before,
with p(c) given by (5) for domestic sales and p(τ c) for foreign sales, both independent from
the market size. However, as long as θ′ > 0, each exporting firm applies a lower markup on
exports compared to the markup on domestic sales. Moreover, as long as there are positive
fixed costs of production, the model delivers an equilibrium partition of firms between exporters
and non-exporters and selection effects of trade liberalization.15 With empirical applications in
mind, the next section develops a fully-fledged multicountry model.
  14
    Indeed p∗ (0) = 0 ≤ p(0) and p∗ (b
                                     c∗ ) = b     c∗ ), and p∗′ (c) > 1 > p′ (c) under the assumption that θ′ > 0.
                                            c > p(b
  15
    Assume that production in each market requires a fixed cost F ≥ 0. The net profits from domestic sales are
π(c) − F and those from exports are π(τ c) − F , where π(c) is always given by (4). The cutoff cost for domestic


                                                       11
3     Trade among Heterogeneous Countries
From this section we consider costly trade between heterogeneous countries (with respect to the
population size and per-capita labour endowment) assuming a cost distribution that corresponds
to a productivity distribution that is Pareto, G(c) = (c/c)κ , where c is now finite but large
enough to exceed the relevant marginal cost cutoffs, and κ > 1 is the shape parameter of the
distribution. The “iceberg” cost of exporting from country i (source) to country j (destination)
is τij ≥ 1, with τii = 1 for i, j = 1, .., I where I ≥ 2 is the number of countries. Country i has
Ni firms paying the entry cost Fe , population Li , wage wi , marginal costs τij wi c in destination
country j and per-capita labor endowment ei , so zero expected profits imply that individual
income is Ei = wi ei . For tractability, we neglect fixed costs of production (as in Melitz and
Ottaviano, 2008 and ACDR), whose role is already well understood in the literature.
    The gross profit function of a c-firm from country i selling to country j is:
                                                                                                 
                                                                                ′       pij (c)
                                                  (pij (c) − τij wi c) v                 Ej
                                                                                                      Lj
                                    πij (c) =                                                              ,     (14)
                                                                           µj

where |µj | is as usual the marginal utility of income (times per capita income) of country j.
Maximizing these profits delivers the price rule:
                                                                                                 
                                                                     θ (pij (c)/Ej )
                                        pij (c) = τij wi c                                             .         (15)
                                                                  θ (pij (c)/Ej ) − 1

   This confirms that prices and markups are higher in countries that enjoy higher per-capita
income levels, but they are independent of the population of the destination country. As noticed
earlier, this prediction is supported by evidence at the international level. Moreover, since the
markup in expression (15) is falling in the firm’s intrinsic cost of production, c, the model
predicts that more productive firms enjoy higher markups, which is in line with wide evidence,
for instance with observations in Slovenian data documented by De Loecker and Warzynski
(2012). As before, for any firm from country i selling in j, the elasticities of prices with respect
to income, ǫE                                                   c
            ij (c) ≡ ∂ ln pij /∂ ln Ej , and to marginal cost, ǫij (c) ≡ ∂ ln pij /∂ ln c, sum to 1.
    The individual quantity sold by a c-firm of country i to destination j is given by xij (c) =
         c = π −1 (F ), and the cutoff for the marginal exporting firm is b
sales is b                                                                cx = b
                                                                               c/τ . The free-entry condition:
                               Z    c
                                    b                         Z      c/τ
                                                                     b
                                        [π(c) − F ] dG(c) +                [π(τ c) − F ] dG(c) = Fe
                                0                                0

closes the model. As long as F > 0, one can easily obtain by total differentiation that ∂b c/∂τ > 0. The intuition
is simple: lower trade costs increase the expected profits of exporting firms at the expense of non-exporters,
which implies that the domestic cut-off firm must now be more efficient (for a similar result with directly additive
preferences see Bertoletti and Epifani, 2014).

                                                                  12
v ′ (pij (c)/Ej ) / |µj |. The value of the corresponding sales tij (c) = pij (c)xij (c)Lj is:
                                                                                        
                                                                       ′       pij (c)
                                                            pij (c)v            Ej
                                                                                             Lj
                                                tij (c) =                                         .
                                                                           µj

The most inefficient firm in country i which is actually able to serve country j, has therefore
the cutoff marginal cost:
                                                                    aEj
                                                            b
                                                            cij =          ,                                                         (16)
                                                                    τij wi
(remember that a = v −1 (0)) which simplifies to b
                                                 cii = aei for the domestic sales of country
i. Therefore, in our model the range of the firms active domestically is wider in the country
with higher individual labor endowment, and depends neither on the population size (since
there are no fixed costs) nor on the trade costs. Instead, the set of exporters from a country
enlarges with per capita income of the importing country and shrinks with the trade cost and its
domestic wage. A key consequence is that trade liberalization does not affect the range of the
firms active at home but enlarges the set of exporters, and therefore the measure of imported
varieties. However, like in other models, production is reallocated across firms toward exporters
and across countries. If trade costs are sufficiently high, exporters are more productive than
non-exporters and represent a minority of the active firms, as documented by Bernard et al.
(2003), and they may sell tiny amounts per export market (in fact, the marginal exporter
realizes zero sales), as documented in Eaton et al. (2011).
                    PI
    Defining nCj ≡     i=1 nij the measure of goods consumed in country j we have:

                          I
                          X           Z   cij
                                          b                                                           Z       a
                                                 ′                 dG(c)
                   µj =         nij             v (sij (c))sij (c)          = nC
                                                                               j                                  v ′ (s)sdFs (s),
                          i=1         0                            G (b
                                                                      cij )                               b


where Fs (s) is the equilibrium distribution of normalized prices. This distribution has support
[b, a] and is equal across countries and independent from incomes and trade costs:
                                                                    κ
                                                Ej                h(s)
                          Fs (s) = Pr c ≤ h(s)        ;c ≤ b
                                                           cij =          ,
                                               τij wi              a

where h(s) = s [1 − 1/θ(s)]. The neutrality of the distribution of normalized prices (as well
as markups) from trade costs is due to the fact that while liberalization reduces prices of the
inframarginal exporting firms (and increases their markups), it also attracts the entry of new
exporters with higher prices (and smaller markups), and these effects exactly balance each
other. Instead, it is immediate to verify that the distribution of individual consumption is



                                                                13
affected by any change in µi and, in particular, by changes in trade costs.16
    Taking the expectations of sales and profits, we obtain the constant ratio:

                                                  E {πij }  1
                                                           = ,                                             (17)
                                                  E {tij }  θ

where the constant θ is the same equilibrium harmonic average of demand elasticity defined
in (9), which under the Pareto distribution is identical across countries. Under endogenous
                                         P
entry, total expected profits E {Πi } = Ij=1 E {πij } in country i must equate the fixed cost
                                                                             P
of entry wi Fe . Let us define total (expected) sales from country i, as Yi = Ij=1 Tij , where
Tij = Ni E {tij } are the (expected) sales in country j that originated from country i. The
endogenous entry condition reads as:

                                                 E {Πi } = wi Fe ,
                                                                                 P
and the income/spending equality for country i implies wi ei Li = Yi , where Yi = j Tji is GDP
in country i. Therefore, we can derive the number of firms created in country i as:
                                                     PI
                                      wi ei Li  ei Li j=1 E {πij }   ei Li
                           Ni = PI            =      PI            =       ,                               (18)
                                 j=1 E {tij }    F e  j=1 E {tij }   θF  e


which is the same as in autarky. Accordingly, trade will not affect the number of firms created
in each country or the number of domestic firms active in each country.17


3.1     Trade margins and general equilibrium
We can now derive the measure of firms actually exporting to any country j from country i,
           cij ), the so-called extensive margin of trade, as:
nij = Ni G(b
                                                                       κ
                                                ei Li         aEj
                                          nij =                              .                             (19)
                                                θFe          τij wi c

This depends negatively on the trade cost and positively on per-capita income of the destination
country, and on the “aggregate labor supply” ei Li of the exporting country, but it is independent
from the population size of the destination country. Hence, the model predicts that the extensive
  16
     This is just the opposite of models based on directly additive preferences with a finite choke price, where
changes in trade costs are neutral on the distribution of individual consumption and modify the distribution of
prices.
  17
     Notice that only if trade costs are high enough (or countries are symmetric) we can exclude that some firms
produce only to export to other countries with higher per capita income. We will assume this to be the case.



                                                        14
margin is falling in the distance to the destination (to the extent that trade costs are increasing
in distance) and potentially rising in overall GDP of the destination country (which is the
product of per-capita income and population), as reported in Bernard et al. (2007).
   The positive relationship between destination population size and the extensive margin can
be restored by the introduction of fixed costs à la Melitz (2003) (see footnote 28 for the case
of “addilog” preferences). The evidence on the relationship between the extensive margin and
population size is mixed. Authors who use internet data (ex. Macedoni, 201518 ) find that
the extensive margin is neutral in population size as predicted by the baseline IA model. In
contrast, authors who use traditional trade data such as firm-level or product-category-level
manufacturing data (ex. Macedoni, 2015 when using the Exporter Dynamics Database or
Hummels and Klenow (2002) when using disaggregate bilateral trade-flow trade), find that
the extensive margin is increasing in population size and the coefficient estimates vary across
countries and industries. This suggests that there is heterogeneity in fixed costs across countries
and industries, ranging from nearly zero in online markets to positive and potentially large costs
in traditional retail markets.
   Another implication of our model is that the extensive margin is increasing as the importing
country gets richer, which is in line with the growth in the measure of imported varieties docu-
mented by Broda and Weinstein (2006) for the US over three decades. The authors document
that, during the three decades spanning 1972-2001, the number of imported varieties in the
United States has increased by a factor of three. They also note that half of the rise can be
attributed to new products sold by existing trade partners. We should remark that, contrary
to the predictions of the IA framework, models based on directly additive or homothetic pref-
erences (without fixed costs of production, as in ACDR) imply that the extensive margin is
decreasing in the population of the destination country and it is neutral (increasing) with re-
spect to income under homotheticity (direct additivity), while the Melitz-Chaney model (with
fixed costs expensed in source country wages) generates an extensive margin that is increasing
in both destination income and population.
    The total measure of varieties consumed in country j can be expressed as follows:

                                                  I
                                           aκ Ejκ X
                                    nC
                                     j =     κ
                                                         ei Li (τij wi )−κ ,                          (20)
                                           θc Fe   i=1


which crucially depends on its per-capita income, on the trade costs and on the dimensions of
its trading partners. It follows that countries that are richer in per capita income (and larger
in labor endowment) tend to consume more goods. This makes a remarkable difference with
  18
    The author collects data for Samsung and verifies the results using data for Zara, Apple, H&M, and Ikea
from the Billion Prices Project.


                                                    15
analogous models based on homothetic preferences and (untruncated) Pareto distribution (see
Arkolakis et al., 2010, and Feenstra, 2014), in which the number of consumed goods is equal
across countries and independent of their income, population and trade costs.
       Expected sales from country i to country j can be derived, by computing E {tij }, as follows:

                                              nij          ei Li (τij wi )−κ
                     Tij = Ni E {tij } = Yj       = Y j P                       = nij tij ,
                                              nC
                                               j
                                                         I
                                                         k=1 ek Lk (τkj wk )
                                                                             −κ



where we decomposed trade into the product of the extensive margin and the intensive margin
tij . We can rewrite the latter as:

                                      E {tij }        θFe Lj Ej1−κ
                                tij =          =   P                        .                               (21)
                                      G(bcij )   aκ Ik=1 ek Lk (τkj wk c)−κ
This is independent from the country of origin of the commodities, but it depends on both per-
capita income and population of the destination country, which is in contrast with the intensive
margin of the Melitz-Chaney model, that is constant as long as the (fixed) costs of export are
in labor of the source country.19 Two direct effects are immediately observable: the intensive
margin is increasing in the destination’s population size and decreasing with respect to the
destination’s per capita income. Therefore, the model can jointly generate a positive (and in
fact linear) relationship between the intensive margin and the overall GDP of a destination,
and a negative relationship with the destination’s per-capita income, as documented for several
source countries by Eaton et al. (2011). Notice that these implications are in contrast also with
comparable models without fixed costs of production (ACDR): directly additive and homothetic
preferences generate an intensive margin which is always increasing in destination income.
   To close the model in general equilibrium, notice that:
                                                            −(κ+1)
                                         Tij   Yi       wi
                                             =                         τij−κ .                              (22)
                                         Tjj   Yj       wj

This simple result can be interpreted as follows: the assumption of a Pareto distribution gives
rise to a generalized “gravity” equation that governs the trade shares (see e.g. Head and Mayer,
2014, and Allen et al., 2014), where κ is the “trade elasticity” according to the terminology
  19
     The Melitz-Chaney model relates the intensive margin to the fixed cost to serve a destination and to the
unit in which it is expensed. If this cost is parameterized to be source- and destination-specific as in Eaton et
al. (2011), and if one assumes that the cost is systematically related to destination characteristics, the model
can generate a systematic relationship between the intensive margin and destination characteristics.




                                                        16
suggested by ACR. In particular, the trade share of i-goods in country j is given by:

                                      Tij  nij     ei Li (τij wi )−κ
                                λij =     = C = PI                   −κ
                                                                        .                               (23)
                                      Yj   nj    k=1 ek Lk (τkj wk )


       Finally, using the expressions for the trade shares we can express the income-spending
equation of each country i as:
                                                            I
                                                            X
                                             wi ei Li =           λij Ej Lj .                           (24)
                                                            j=1

Using (23) and (24) provides the equilibrium wage system:

                                      I
                                      X      wj ej Lj (τij wi )−κ
                               wi =         PI                   −κ
                                                                                i = 1, .., I,           (25)
                                      j=1    k=1 ek Lk (τkj wk )


which is similar to those of related models (ACR; ACDR; Simonovska, 2015). It implies wage
equalization only under free trade or identical countries (as in the previous sections). Moreover,
it can be proved (Alvarez and Lucas, 2007) that (25) has a unique solution (up to a normal-
ization) and that the relative wage of country j is increasing in its aggregate labor supply ej Lj
and decreasing in its trade costs τ j ′ = [τ1,j , .., τI,j ].


3.2       Welfare and comparison with other models
Utility for a consumer of country j can be expressed as:
                                                        Z   a
                                            Vj =   nC
                                                    j           v (s) dFs (s),                          (26)
                                                        b


which is the product of the total mass of consumed (domestic and imported) varieties nC
                                                                                      j and
the expected utility from each good: the former depends on trade costs (as well as on size
and income of all countries) as shown in (20), but the latter depends only on preferences and
the cost distribution. Accordingly, trade liberalization affects welfare only through a change
in the consumed varieties. More precisely, a reduction in trade costs reduces prices for each
imported good, but consumers exploit this by increasing the number of imported varieties
without dropping any of the domestic varieties (indeed, the domestic cutoff cost does not
change). Since the equilibrium distribution of the (normalized) prices of the purchased varieties
remains the same, welfare changes in our setting only with changes in the number of imported
varieties.20
  20
    It is worth noticing that, in contrast to the implication of the Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) model, in
our setting the welfare gains from trade do depend (through nCj ) not only on the trade costs but also on the



                                                            17
    Our final aim is to derive a global quantitative measure of the gains from trade liberalization
as in ACR. First of all, taking logs and differentiating (26) with respect to τ j and w′ = [w1 , .., wI ]
for a given Ej (we can always normalize wage changes in such a way that d ln wj = 0) we get:
                                                              PI
                                                         −κ     i=1,i6=j   nij (d ln τij + d ln wi )
                          d ln Vj =     d ln nC
                                              j    =                                                        ,                 (27)
                                                                               nC
                                                                                j


where the last step exploits the differentiation of (20) with respect to τ j and w for a given Ej .
Let us indicate the proportional change of a variable z from z to z as zb = z/z. Integrating
(27), we obtain that the proportional utility change Vbj due to a (possibly large) trade shock
                                                             bC
to τ = [τ1 , .., τI ] (and then to w) is equal to the change nj . In turn, through (23), the latter is
simply related to the change in the domestic share λjj by d ln nC                          bC   b−1
                                                                      j = −d ln λjj (i.e., nj = λjj ).
   Notice that, by (23) and (25), the changes in the domestic share λjj do not depend on the
specific preferences. In fact, similarly to ACR, one can actually determine the impact of any
reduction in trade costs by computing:21

                          I
                          X          λij (ŵi τ̂ij )−κ                                              (ŵj τ̂jj )−κ
               ŵi Yi =         PI                          ŵj Yj       and λ̂jj = PI                                    .   (28)
                                                       −κ                                                            −κ
                          j=1      k=1 λkj (ŵk τ̂kj )                                           k=1 λkj (ŵk τ̂kj )


However, the specific preferences matter for translating these changes into a “quantitative”
measure of the welfare gains from liberalization, to be compared with those arising in other
models. In particular, here we want to derive the (proportional) variation of per-capita income
              cj , which is “equivalent” to the welfare change Vbj due to trade liberalization.
in country j, W
   A convenient “money metric” is provided by the Equivalent Variation of income, EVj , such
that a consumer would be indifferent between the post-shock prices induced by the change of
trade costs and the new income level Wj = Ej + EVj evaluated at pre-shock prices (see Varian,
                                              cj = Wj /Ej . To compute EVj is convenient to
1992, Par. 10.1), with proportional variation W
write the equilibrium value of utility as:

                                                         I
                                                         X           Z   aWj               
                                                                                       p
                                Vj (Wj , Ej ; Fij ) =           Ni             v                dFij (p),
                                                          i=1        bEj               Wj

where Fij is the unconditional distribution of prices pij posted by all firms of country i in
country j (varieties with prices above the cut-off value aWj are welfare irrelevant). By taking
dimensions of the trading partners.
  21
     Since the present model satisfies the requirements of what Allen et al. (2014) define as “universal gravity”,
we can also rely on their comparative statics results to guarantee that any trade cost reduction increases “world
welfare”, defined as a weighted average of the welfare of all countries. We will verify this in our counterfactual
analysis.


                                                                18
logs and differentiating with respect to Wj the last expression (see Appendix C), one can get:

                                                         κ
                                 d ln Vj =                          d ln Wj ,
                                              1−   ǭE
                                                     j   (Wj , Ej )

where ǭE
        j (Wj , Ej ) captures the average (across firms) elasticity of price with respect to income
Wj , and it is thus related to the shape of the demand function. Therefore, the income variation
that is equivalent to the impact of trade liberalization is implicitly determined by the solution
of the equation:
                                Z   Wj
                                             κ                      bjj .
                                                      d ln t = − ln λ                           (29)
                                 Ej          ǭE
                                         1 − (t, Ej )
                                               j

To understand this formula, notice that a rigid demand function implies that firms set high
prices and that prices react a lot to changes in income and not to changes in costs (ǭE
                                                                                       j (Wj , Ej )
is high). Accordingly, high prices generate a high marginal utility of income, which in turn
reduces the income variation needed to match a given cost shock. As a consequence, a rigid
demand is associated with low gains from trade liberalization. Instead, when the demand
function becomes more elastic, cost reductions due to trade liberalization are shifted more into
lower prices and the gains are higher.
   We can then approximate small changes in welfare by:

                                                                d ln λjj
                                    d ln Wj = −(1 − ǭE )                ,                      (30)
                                                                   κ
where ǭE = ǭE
              j (Ej , Ej ) ∈ (0, 1) is the weighted average across firms (with relative sales as
weights) of the elasticity of prices with respect to income - which is the same as in (6).
   This result can be compared to those of a variety of traditional models. ACR have shown
that a formula for the welfare gains as d ln Wj = −d ln λjj /σ, where σ is the elasticity of relative
imports with respect to variable trade costs, applies to models different on the supply side but
all based on CES preferences (as Anderson, 1979, Krugman, 1980, Eaton and Kortum, 2002,
Melitz, 2003, Chaney, 2008 and others). Thus, estimating such a trade elasticity allows one to
measure the welfare gains from liberalization episodes. Notice that in models with homogenous
firms, such as the Armington model (Anderson, 1979) and the Krugman (1980) model, the trade
elasticity is related to the constant elasticity of substitution (namely σ = θ − 1 in our notation):
in these cases low substitutability between goods induces high imports of foreign varieties,
which leads to high gains from trade liberalization. However, in a large class of heterogeneous
firm models with an untruncated Pareto distribution of productivities, including the celebrated
Melitz-Chaney model (Melitz, 2003; Chaney, 2008), ACR show that the trade elasticity σ is
independent from preference parameters and just related to the shape of the Pareto distribution

                                                     19
(namely σ = κ in our notation), and therefore the gains from trade liberalization are neutral
with respect to the underlying model details.22
   In a further generalization of the heterogenous firm models, ACDR have adopted general
homothetic preferences, confirming the ACR formula for the welfare gains:

                                                         d ln λjj
                                          d ln Wj = −             .                                   (31)
                                                            κ

As already noticed for translog preferences by Arkolakis et al. (2010) and for a larger class of
homothetic preferences by Feenstra (2014), trade liberalization induces consumers to replace the
most expensive domestic goods with an identical number of cheaper imported varieties, which
excludes any gains from variety associated with trade. In the terminology of ACDR, reductions
in marginal costs due to trade liberalization are here the only source of gains because what
they call the “direct” markup effect (which tends to induce an increases of the average markup
on exports due to incomplete pass-through) is exactly counterbalanced by what they call the
“indirect” markup effect due to the reduction of the choke price (which induces a selection effect
on the set of domestic firms).
   ACDR also derive the following approximation of the welfare changes (valid for small re-
ductions of trade costs) in the case of directly additive preferences:
                                                              
                                                          ρ        d ln λjj
                                  d ln Wj = − 1 −                           ,                         (32)
                                                         κ+1          κ

where ρ, a weighted average (with relative sales as weights) of the elasticity of markups to pro-
ductivity, is positive but smaller than unity in common models with incomplete pass-through.
In this case, by reducing the choke price, trade liberalization not only creates a selection effect
but affects the equilibrium distribution of prices increasing the measure of consumed goods
(while leaving unchanged the distribution of individual consumption levels). As shown by
ACDR, the domestic gains from the reduction of the choke price compensate only in part the
losses due to the average increase in markup, leading to smaller gains compared to homothetic
                                                                  ρ         κ
preferences. However, the difference is quite limited since (1 − κ+1 ) ∈ ( κ+1 , 1).
                             E
    On the contrary, since ǭ ∈ (0, 1) in (30), indirectly additive preferences emphasize the
crucial role of the demand side in determining the gains from trade liberalization. Trade
liberalization leads to an increase in the number of imported and consumed goods - see (20) -
whose impact on welfare depends crucially on the preferences. The less elastic is demand, the
smaller are the gains from trade liberalization because cost reductions are poorly translated into
  22
    A similar result applies even to Ricardian models as the one by Eaton and Kortum (2002), which adopts a
Fréchet distribution of productivities.



                                                    20
price reductions. Accordingly IA preferences generate welfare gains that can be substantially
different from models based on CES or homothetic preferences, and even from those based on
directly additive preferences.


3.3        An “addilog” example
In the remainder of the paper and in the empirical application we will adopt a new convenient
specification of IA preferences, which we define as “addilog” in honour of Houthakker (1960),
who used this terminology for generic IA preferences. Our specification is the following:23
                                                  Z
                                                       (a − s(ω))1+γ
                                            V =                      dω.                         (33)
                                                   Ω       1+γ

Here γ > 0 is the key preference parameter (notice that the subutility function for each variety
ω is isoelastic in a − s(ω)). By Roy identity, the demand for each variety ω is now:

                                                           (a − s(ω))γ
                                               x(ω) =                  .                         (34)
                                                               |µ|

The elasticity of demand with respect to price is θ(s) = γs/(a − s), which is increasing in γ.
Clearly, demand is linear (as in the example of Section 2) for γ = 1, it tends to become perfectly
elastic for γ → ∞ and perfectly rigid for γ → 0. The rest of the model is the same as above.
We can summarize the relevant exogenous variables/parameters in our setting by the objects
P̃ = {a, κ, γ, τ , e, L, Fe } in matrix notation, where e′ = [e1 , .., eI ] and L′ = [L1 , .., LI ].
       The optimal price of a c-firm from country i willing to sell to country j is easily derived as:

                                                           γτij wi c + aEj
                                             pij (c) =                     ,                     (35)
                                                                1+γ

which shows that the degree of pass-through is increasing in γ. Indeed, for γ → 0 any reduction
in costs would be exploited by the firms without price reduction (prices would approach the
limit aEj with full expropriation of consumer welfare), while for γ → ∞ any reduction in costs
would be fully translated into a price reduction (prices would approach the nominal marginal
cost τij wi c as in perfect competition).
  23
       As shown in Bertoletti and Etro (2016a), the direct utility dual to (33) is:
                                                       R        1+γ
                                                   a x(ω)dω − 1
                                                       Ω
                                           U=        R      1+γ
                                                                    γ ,
                                              (1 + γ) Ω x(ω) γ dω

which is not directly additive.



                                                             21
   The individual quantity sold by a c-firm from country i to destination j is then given by:

                                                     cij − c)γ (τij wi )γ
                                                γ γ (b
                                   xij (c) =                              .                       (36)
                                                   (1 + γ)γ Ejγ |µj |

where bcij is always given by (16). Notice that consumption decreases in c and it has a finite
value even when marginal cost is null. The value of the sales of a c-firm from country i to
country j is:
                                       γ γ (γc + b      cij − c)γ (τij wi )1+γ Lj
                                                 cij ) (b
                           tij (c) =                                              .               (37)
                                                (1 + γ)1+γ (Ej )γ |µj |
The corresponding profits are given by:

                                              cij − c)1+γ (τij wi )1+γ Lj
                                         γ γ (b
                               πij (c) =                                  ,                       (38)
                                               (1 + γ)1+γ Ejγ |µj |

and are a decreasing and convex function of c.

3.3.1   Markups, prices and sales

We now derive the model’s key prediction regarding markup and price variation across desti-
nations and across firms. Denote by mij (c) the mark-up that a firm with cost draw c from
country i enjoys in destination j (assuming that it actually serves that market, i.e. c ≤ ĉij ):
                                                                       
                                                     1          b
                                                                cij − c
                                   mij (c) =                                  .                   (39)
                                                    1+γ             c

This markup is decreasing in γ, reflecting a more elastic demand, and rising in the cost cutoff
ĉij , reflecting pricing to market. Moreover, more productive firms set lower prices but enjoy
higher markups.
   Furthermore, from (35), the elasticity of prices with respect to the “intrinsic” marginal cost
c (or the transport cost τij , or the wage of the source country wi ) can be expressed as:
                                                                 
                                                  γc           γ
                                  ǫcij (c)   =           ∈ 0,       .                             (40)
                                               γc + bcij      1+γ

Similarly, the elasticity of prices with respect to income of the destination country Ej is its
complement to one:                                              
                                   E          bcij          1
                                  ǫij (c) =            ∈       ,1 .                       (41)
                                            γc + b cij     1+γ
It is easy to verify that the latter is also the elasticity of prices with respect to the real exchange
rate between the source and the destination country, which is often the subject of empirical

                                                      22
investigations.24
   We can think of ǫcij (c) as a pass-through index because it says which percentage of cost
changes is reflected in price changes, and we can think of ǫE ij (c) as an index of pricing-to-
market because it says which percentage of income or exchange rate changes is reflected in
price changes. Moreover, both of them vary with a firm’s productivity in a monotonic way.
For instance, pass-through is zero for the most efficient firms (ǫcij (0) = 0) and the highest for
the least efficient firms (ǫcij (b
                                 cij ) = γ/(1 + γ)). Pricing-to-market in turn is as high as 1 for the
most productive firm and only 1/(1 + γ) for the least productive one. These differences are
due to the fact that efficient firms set their prices low and change them mainly on the basis of
changes in income, while inefficient firms set high prices and change them mainly on the basis
of changes in costs. These predictions are in line with empirical evidence provided by Berman
et al. (2012) that pricing to market is more sensitive for more productive firms.25
    Finally, let us consider the reaction of the sales of a firm of country i toward country j
when the relevant trade cost decreases. We know from (40) that such a bilateral liberalization
reduces prices pij (c) more for the small (high-c) firms. As a consequence, these small firms
increase more their production, as can be verified by evaluating the elasticity of quantity xij (c)
in (36). Whether the sales tij (c) of small firms are more or less reactive is not obvious. However,
computing the elasticity d ln tij (c)/d ln τij (after normalizing d ln wi = 0)26 and differentiating
it with respect to c we obtain:
                                                  "                         #
                      ∂        d ln tij (c)            −γbcij         γbcij     d ln b
                                                                                     cij
                                                  =            2 +          2            < 0,
                      ∂c        d ln τij            (b
                                                     cij + γc)      cij − c) d ln τij
                                                                   (b

where d ln bcij /d ln τij = d ln wj /d ln τij − 1 < 0. Since a reduction of τij corresponds to trade
liberalization, this shows that smaller firms respond more to trade liberalization, which is in line
  24
     It is straightforward to extend the model to feature nominal and real exchange rates: let rij be the nominal
exchange rate between i and j, so that pij /rij is the export price in the currency of country j. Define rij =
rij wj /wi as the real rate of exchange (see e.g. Berman et al., 2012): accordingly the profit-maximizing rule of
a c-firm from country i is

                                       τij wi (b
                                               cij + γc)                   arij Ej   arij ej
                           pij (c) =                     ,   where b
                                                                   cij =           =         .
                                             1+γ                            τij wi    τij
  25
     Using detailed French exporter data, these authors find that the exporter with average productivity raises
prices by 0.8% when experiencing a 10% home currency depreciation. Furthermore, the response is 1.3% for
exporters with a productivity level equal to the mean plus one standard deviation, namely, for more productive
exporters.
  26
     Taking logs of pij and xij and differentiating we get:
                                                                                            
              ∂ ln tij (c)   ∂ ln xij (c) ∂ ln pij (c)     ∂ ln |µj |        b
                                                                             cij         c     ∂ ln b
                                                                                                    cij
                           =             +             =1−            +            +γ                   .
               ∂ ln τij        ∂ ln τij    ∂ ln τij         ∂ ln τij      b
                                                                          cij + γc    b
                                                                                      cij − c ∂ ln τij




                                                             23
with the evidence presented by Eaton et al. (2008) and Arkolakis (2015). Together with the
fact that trade liberalization induces entry of foreign varieties in our model, this implies that
adjustments on the extensive margin (changes to new and least traded varieties) are critical
in understanding the welfare gains from trade (as argued by Broda and Weinstein, 2006, and
Kehoe and Ruhl, 2013).

3.3.2       Equilibrium distributions

Given our functional form, we can fully characterize the equilibrium in closed form solutions
                                                                          a
(see Appendix B). The distribution of normalized prices on the support [ 1+γ , a] can be derived
as:                                                     κ
                                            (1 + γ) s 1
                                 Fs (s) =            −      ,                               (42)
                                               γa      γ
which depends only on the three parameters γ, κ and a. Analogously, prices in country j,
given by expression (35), are distributed according to Fj (p) = [(1 + γ) p/γaEj − 1/γ]κ , which
is independent from trade costs and the identities of the exporting countries, but depends
crucially on the income of the importing country j. The markup distribution can be derived as
follows:
                                                      1
                                 Fm (m) = 1 −                  ,                         (43)
                                              [1 + (1 + γ) m]κ
which is also the same across countries.
   The expected profit and expected sales of a firm from country i selling in country j can be
expressed as (see Appendix B):

                    γ γ κB(κ, γ + 2)aκ+γ+1 Ejκ+1 Lj                          aκ+γ+1 γ γ+1 B(κ + 2, γ)Ejκ+1 Lj
       E {πij } =                                        and E {tij } =                                       ,
                        (1 + γ)1+γ cκ (τij wi )κ |µj |                          (1 + γ)γ cκ (τij wi )κ |µj |
                                                                     R1
where we introduced the Euler Beta function B(z, h) =                 0
                                                                          tz−1 (1−t)h−1 dt.27 Using its properties
expression (17) yields a value for θ̄ of:

                                                     θ̄ = κ + 1,                                              (44)

which is independent from the preference parameters: this implies that the return on sales
(17) is uniquely determined by the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution. Moreover,
  27
       Its value is also given by:
                                                             Γ(z)Γ(h)
                                                 B(z, h) =            ,
                                                             Γ(z + h)
where Γ(t) is the Euler Gamma function (see Appendix B). Its basic recursive properties can be expressed as
B(z + 1, h) = zB(z, h)/(z + h) and B(z, h + 1) = hB(z, h)/(z + h).



                                                         24
it allows us to solve for the number of firms created in country i in closed form solution as
Ni = ei Li /(κ + 1)Fe , which is the same as in autarky (both in the decentralized equilibrium and
in the social optimum). The extensive margin nij = Ni G (ĉij ) is independent from population
and demand elasticity.28 The number of goods consumed in country j is:29

                                                       XI
                                              aκ Ejκ
                                    nC
                                     j   =          κ      ei Li (τij wi )−κ .                                   (45)
                                           (κ + 1)c Fe i=1

which is independent from the preference parameter γ, while it increases in the willingness to
pay for each good, a. Finally, we can also evaluate the market share in country j of an exporting
c-firm from country i, αij (c) ≡ tij (c)/tij . This can be expressed as:
                                                                           γ
                                                    1 + γ bccij   1−     c
                                                                        cij
                                                                        b
                                       αij (c) =                                   ,                             (46)
                                                    γ(1 + γ)B(κ + 2, γ)

and it can be verified that also the distribution of the market share is identical across countries
and depends only on the two parameters γ and κ.30 This result demonstrates an attractive fea-
ture of this framework relative to alternatives: the distribution of (normalized) firm sales is not
uniquely tied to the distribution of firm productivities. Given a certain degree in productivity
dispersion, governed by κ, the dispersion in firm sales is pinned down by γ.31 Hence, the model
can potentially reconcile both the measured productivity and sales advantages of exporters over
non-exporters reported by Bernard et al. (2003).
  28
    Notice that our model can generate an extensive margin that is increasing in population simply by adding
small fixed export costs. If these are in units of local labor, say Fj , it is easy to derive from (38) the modified
cutoff:                                            "                       1 #
                                             aEj        1 + γ |µj | Fj 1+γ
                                     ĉij =          1−
                                            τij wi        a     γ γ ej L j
so that the extensive margin is directly increasing in the destination population Lj . Notice that the same
extension induces selection effects on the measure of domestic firms through the negative impact of the price
aggregator |µi | on the domestic cutoff ĉii .
  29
     We can also compute |µj | as a linear function of the number of consumed varieties, with |µj | =
aγ+1 γ γ+1 B(κ+2,γ) C
       (1+γ)γ      nj .
  30                                                                                   γ
      The crucial element is the distribution of l = H (t) = (1 + γt) (1 − t) , where t = c/b         cij with Ft (t) =
Pr {c/b cij ≤ t} = tκ on the support [0, 1]. Notice that H ′ (t) < 0 and H ′′ (t) < 0 if and only if t < 1/2, therefore
l is distributed on [0, 1] according to Fl (l) = 1 − (H −1 (l))κ .
   31
      Jung et al. (2015) demonstrate that the distributions of firm sales and productivity depend uniquely
on the Pareto productivity shape parameter in existing models that feature consumers with directly additive
preferences, including quadratic preferences (as in Melitz and Ottaviano, 2008, but without the outside good)
and those of Behrens et al. (2014) and Simonovska (2015). Therefore, these models cannot jointly reconcile
moments from the two distributions observed in US data. The authors outline a flexible, albeit not tractable,
extension of Simonovska (2015) that falls within the directly-additive class and has more desirable quantitative
features.



                                                          25
3.3.3     Welfare

Our specification of the indirect utility allows us to characterize the impact of trade in detail.
The equilibrium value of utility in country j is now:
                                 Z   a
                                           (a − s)γ+1            C κ (γa)
                                                                          γ+1
                                                                              B (κ, γ + 2)
                     Vj =   nC
                             j                        dFs (s) = nj                         ,                (47)
                                      a
                                     1+γ
                                              1+γ                       (γ + 1)γ+2

which is linear in the number of consumed goods (45). The coefficient represents the utility
expected from each consumed good and depends on the willingness to pay a, on the preference
parameter γ, which governs the level of market competitiveness, and on κ, which governs the
cost distribution.
   It is useful to examine how changes in this utility translate into a “quantitative” measure
of welfare changes. As in the general model (see Appendix C), we calculate the equivalent
variation on income EVj keeping prices unchanged at their initial level before the trade shock.
To this end, it is convenient to use the unconditional distribution of prices pij of goods from i
faced by consumers in country j, Fij . This is the distribution of prices posted by all firms from
country i in country j, and, using (35), it can be expressed as:
                                                                             κ
                                                            (1 + γ) p − aEj
                                            Fij (p) =                                                       (48)
                                                                γτij wi c

on the interval [p, p], where p = p(0) = aEj / (γ + 1) and p = p(c) = (γτij wi c + aEj ) / (γ + 1).
Notice that this distribution and its support depends on τij , wi , and Ej , to be taken as given
at their levels before the shock.32 Since the expected utility from varieties with prices in the
interval [aWj , p] is null, we can write the welfare of a consumer in country j after receiving the
income variation EVj , as follows:

                                    I     Z aWj         γ+1
                               1 X                     p
       Vj (Wj , Ej ; Fij ) =           Ni         a−           dFij (p)
                             γ + 1 i=1     p          Wj
                               Z aWj         γ+1                          XI
                                            p
                           = κ         a−          [(1 + γ) p − aEj ]κ−1 dp     Ni (γτij wi c)−κ .
                                bEj        Wj                               i=1

  32
    The optimal prices of the varieties unsold in country j are not uniquely defined above the cutoff price aEj ,
because demand and profits are zero. For the sake of simplicity (and to avoid any asymmetry between positive
and negative equivalent variations), we assume that they follow the same pricing rule (35) as the varieties
actually sold.




                                                              26
      Taking logs of Vj (Wj , Ej ; Fij ) and differentiating with respect to Wj , we obtain:

                                                   (γ + 1) (κWj + Ej )
                                      d ln Vj =                        d ln Wj .                               (49)
                                                     (γ + 1) Wj − Ej

For “small” income changes (i.e., evaluating the previous differential at Wj = Ej ), we obtain
the approximation d ln Vj = (γ + 1) (κ + 1) d ln Wj /γ. Recalling that gravity implies that nCj =
aκ eκj Nj /cκ λjj , and a shock to trade costs causes a proportional change of utility denoted by
d ln Vj = d ln nC
                j = −d ln λjj , this immediately delivers the local measure:


                                                                  γd ln λjj
                                              d ln Wj = −                      ,                               (50)
                                                               (γ + 1) (κ + 1)

                                       1
whose coefficient is in the range (0, κ+1 ) for γ ∈ (0, ∞). Notice that the upper bound of this
range is the lower bound of the range obtained by ACDR for directly additive preferences in
(32).
   The exact measure of the gains from trade liberalization, W cj , valid also for “large” trade
shocks, can be obtained by integrating (49), which implicitly characterizes Wj as follows:
                                     Z   Wj
                                              (γ + 1) (κt + Ej )               bjj ,
                                                                 d ln t = − ln λ                               (51)
                                      Ej        (γ + 1) t − Ej

where we can further compute:
              Z    Wj
                        (γ + 1) (κt + Ej ) dt                                                W
                                              = [(γ + κ + 1) ln(γt + t − Ej ) − (γ + 1) ln t]Ejj .
                  Ej      (γ + 1) t − Ej t

    It is easy to verify that the approximation derived from (50) provides a lower bound for the
exact welfare changes in (51),33 therefore it can be used as a conservative measure of the benefits
of trade liberalization. The welfare gains from trade liberalization depend on κ, as in ACR,
but also on γ, which governs the level of competitiveness in the markets. Accordingly, for given
values of the Pareto shape parameter κ, the gains from trade liberalization are larger in more
competitive markets: intuitively, a more competitive environment implies lower prices, which
in turn requires a larger equivalent income variation due to the decreasing marginal utility of
income.34
 33
      This follows from the concavity of function:
                                                     Z   W
                                                             (γ + 1) (κt + E)
                                           g(W ) =                            d ln t.
                                                      E        (γ + 1) t − E

 34
      Similarly, the exact income variation equivalent to a positive trade shock is larger when we take into account


                                                               27
4     Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we design several exercises that aim to quantify the welfare gains from trade
predicted by the model. To proceed, we outline several strategies to estimate the addilog model’s
parameters with the ultimate goal to evaluate the quantitative fit of the model to observations
from cross-firm and cross-country data. To that end, we revisit the model’s implications and
we derive testable predictions that can be compared to moments in the data.


4.1    Background
In order to quantify the welfare gains from trade predicted by the addilog model, we need data
on trade shares and per-capita income as well as estimates of two key parameters, κ and γ.
We opt for a structural approach toward identifying these two parameters. In particular, the
identification approach demands that we also take a stand on a number of additional (but not
all) parameters that characterize the model. The model falls within a large class of models
that generate a log-linear gravity equation of trade. As a consequence, the two key parameters,
κ and γ, together with a set of country- and country-pair-specific parameters that can be
estimated using the model’s structural gravity equation of trade, are sufficient to generate a set
of moments that can be used to judge the model’s fit to the data.35
    We begin by deriving the theoretical gravity equation of trade. Taking the log of the ratio
of country j’s import share from source i, λij in expression (23), and j’s domestic expenditure
share, the corresponding expression for λjj , obtains
                                                  
                                             λij
                                   log                 = S̃i − S̃j − κ log τij ,                     (52)
                                             λjj
where S̃i = log(ei Li wi−κ ) for all i = 1, .., I. Let Si = exp(S̃i ), a transformation that will be used
extensively as we proceed.
    Once we have obtained estimates for the parameters κ and γ, as well as for the objects Si
for all i = 1, .., I and τij for all country-pairs i, j, using data for actual trade shares λij for all
i, j pairs and population size Lj for all countries j, we can compute predicted per-capita income
levels for each country from the model’s predicted market clearing conditions. In particular,
refer to (24), where by definition per-capita income in country i is Ei = wi ei . After normalizing
population size, Li , relative to a numeraire, we can obtain per-capita incomes, Ei , relative to a
numeraire, using data on Li and λij for all i, j from this very expression. Let P denote the vector
of the parameters necessary for simulation in matrix notation, namely P = {κ, γ, τ , E, L, S},
the decreasing marginal utility of income.
  35
     Simonovska and Waugh (2014,a,b) demonstrate this fact for models that rely on homothetic preferences,
while Jung et al. (2015) analyze models that belong to a class of directly additive preferences.

                                                           28
where E′ = [E1 , .., EI ] and S′ = [S1 , .., SI ], and let Λ denote the bilateral trade-share matrix with
typical element λij .
   With P and Λ in hand, we can compute all endogenous objects in the model that are
necessary to derive a number of moments that we can use to identify κ and γ. We begin by
computing cost cutoffs. Expression (16) suggests that a value for the parameter a would be
needed in order to obtain cost cutoffs. As it turns out, it is sufficient to compute cost cutoffs
relative to a numeraire cutoff, in order to derive the moments of interest. Below we will describe
how we select this numeraire. We begin by revisiting the model’s predictions and translating
them into moments from the model that are expressed as functions of normalized cutoffs, P,
and Λ.36


4.2        Empirical predictions
4.2.1       Prices across destinations

A key testable prediction of our model relates to cross-country price variation. Prices should
be increasing in destination per-capita income and independent of destination population size:
∂pij /∂Ej > 0 and ∂pij /∂Lj = 0. In the absence of data on firms’ costs, the expected values of
the elasticities of prices are of particular interest for a comparison with corresponding moments
in the data. In particular, we can derive an explicit expression for the average elasticity of price
with respect to per-capita income:

                                         E {ǫE } = F2,1 (1, κ; 1 + κ; −γ),                                   (53)

where F2,1 is the hypergeometric function defined in Appendix B. Hence, with estimates of
κ and γ in hand, we can compute this average elasticity and also the average pass-through
E {ǫc } = 1 − E {ǫE } and compare them to estimates from existing data. In turn, the predicted
elasticity of price with respect to population size in the model is zero. This is another object
that we can compare to estimates from data.

4.2.2       Pass-through and mark-ups across firms

In the model, more productive exporters price to market more or, alternatively, they enjoy
lower cost pass-through. In expression (62) in Appendix B we have derived the distribution of
the elasticity of price with respect to income, which, as already mentioned, corresponds to the
  36
       It is worth to note that we will not need to estimate the parameter Fe for the purpose of our exercises.




                                                         29
elasticity with respect to the real exchange rate. We reproduce it below for convenience:
                                                                        κ
                                                               1−ǫ
                                 Pr ǫE ≤ ǫ = 1 −                                 .
                                                                 γǫ

Given estimates of κ and γ, in addition to the mean of this distribution as illustrated above,
we can also compute the mean plus one standard deviation response to exchange rate changes.
This allows us to compare both measures to the corresponding moments in the data so as to
test the prediction that small (or less productive) firms pass through cost changes more.
    Finally, the distribution of mark-ups is given in expression (43). With estimates of κ and γ
at hand, we can derive moments from the mark-up distribution and compare them to data. In
particular, the mean markup is:

                                                         1
                                    E {m} =                       ,
                                                  (γ + 1) (κ − 1)

which is decreasing in κ > 1 and γ.

4.2.3   Extensive margin of trade

The extensive margin of trade was derived in expression (19) for general IA preferences. It varies
across source and destination countries. Given a source country i, let j ∗ denote a numeraire
destination. The ratio of the extensive margin for destination j, relative to the numeraire, is:
                                                       κ            −κ
                                                 Ej            τij
                                   extij =                                   .                (54)
                                                 Ej ∗          τij ∗

Taking logs of the above expression allows us to obtain elasticities of the extensive margin with
respect to destination specific characteristics. Hence the model predicts that, for a given source
country, the extensive margin of trade is increasing in per-capita income with an elasticity of
κ and falling in trade costs with an elasticity of −κ. With an estimate of trade costs at hand,
we can also compute the elasticity of the extensive margin with respect to distance to the
destination, and compare it to data.

4.2.4   Intensive margin of trade

The intensive margin of trade was derived in expression (21) for general IA preferences. It
measures the average sales for firms in a particular destination and it is independent of the
source country. Letting country j ∗ be a numeraire destination, and using the definition of the
gravity object Si , the ratio of the intensive margin for destination j, relative to the numeraire,


                                                    30
can be rewritten as:                                              P           !
                                                       −κ               −κ −1
                                     Ej Lj       Ej                  S  τ
                                                                       k kj
                               intj = ∗ ∗                         Pk      −κ                          (55)
                                     Ej Lj       Ej ∗              k Sk τkj ∗

Taking logs of both sides of the expression yields the following: controlling for aggregate effects,
the elasticity of the intensive margin with respect to destination GDP is 1 and the elasticity of
the intensive margin with respect to destination per-capita income is −κ. The second elasticity
is negative and its value can be computed with an estimate of κ in hand.

4.2.5    Sales and measured productivity advantage of exporters

More efficient firms realize higher sales. Moreover, trade barriers prevent less efficient firms
from exporting, which implies that exporters enjoy an efficiency and sales advantage over non-
exporters. Below, we derive two moments of interest from the distributions of measured pro-
ductivity and sales of firms: the measured productivity and sales advantage of exporters over
non-exporters. We derive these moments because we can readily compare them to their data
counterparts.

Exporter sales advantage In order to derive moments for exporters and non-exporters
from any source country i, it is useful to define a cost cutoff that separates firms into these two
groups. In particular, using the characterization for cost cutoffs in expression (16), define the
cost cutoff for exporters from country i as

                                                               aEk
                                            c̃ij ≡ max                                                (56)
                                                        k6=i   τik wi

Notice that any firm from country i with cost c < c̃ij is an exporter to some country k and
any firm with cost c ∈ [c̃ij , ĉii ] serves the domestic market only.37 This follows from the fact
that firms differ only along the cost dimension, so there is a strict ordering of markets by
toughness, with the destination k ′′ being toughest for i’s producers if ĉik′′ ≤ ĉik′ ∀k ′ . Thus,
we can refer to country j that satisfies the definition in expression (56) as the most accessible
foreign destination for firms from i.
    Having categorized firms into exporters and non-exporters, the first moment we are inter-
ested in is the ratio between the average domestic sales of exporters and the average sales of
non-exporters from any country i.38 Consider any firm from country i; its domestic sales are
given by expression (37), where destination j = i. Integrating over all exporters, then inte-
  37
   The definition implicitly assumes that trade barriers are high enough so that ĉii > ĉik ∀k 6= i.
  38
   We follow Bernard et al. (2003) and derive this ratio because we will be comparing the model’s predicted
moment to the corresponding moment from the US distribution reported by these authors.



                                                        31
grating over all non-exporters, and finally taking the ratio of the two yields the exporter sales
advantage at home, which we denote by H̃1 :

                    h          κ ih                                             i
                         ĉii             c̃                       c̃
                          − 1 B ĉijii ; κ, γ + 2 + (1 + γ) B ĉijii ; κ + 1, γ + 1
                         c̃ij
   H̃1 =                                           h                                          i ,
                           c̃                                                 c̃
         B (κ, γ + 2) − B ĉijii ; κ, γ + 2 + (1 + γ) B (κ + 1, γ + 1) − B ĉijii ; κ + 1, γ + 1

where B(u; z, h) is the incomplete (Euler) Beta function:
                                                      Z       u
                                     B(u; z, h) =                 tz−1 (1 − t)h−1 dt.
                                                          0

                                                                    maxk6=i Ek τik −1
To see that H̃1 depends on P only, define yij ≡                             Ei
                                                                                      . Using the expressions for   cost
                                                                       ĉii      −1
cutoffs in (16) and (56), it immediately follows                  that c̃ij = yij . Then, our desired moment,       now
denoted by H1 , can be rewritten as:
                       
      H1 (P) = yij−κ − 1 ·
                      B(yij ; κ, γ + 2) + (1 + γ) B(yij ; κ + 1, γ + 1)
                                                                                          ,                         (57)
      B(κ, γ + 2) − B(yij ; κ, γ + 2) + (1 + γ) [B(κ + 1, γ + 1) − B(yij ; κ + 1, γ + 1)]

where the dependence on P is made explicit.

Exporter measured productivity advantage The second moment of interest is the mea-
sured productivity advantage of exporters over non-exporters. In the absence of intermediate
goods, the value added of a firm is the ratio of its sales to the number of employees. Firm
sales are given in expression (37). To derive the number of workers, notice that the production
function of a c−firm from country i selling in country j is xij = lij /(τij c), where τij c is its “unit
labor requirement” and lij (c) = τij cxij (c) its conditional labor demand. The corresponding
number of employed workers is given by τij cxij (c)/ei .
   With this in mind, the measured productivity, or the value added per worker, of a non-
exporter with cost draw c ∈ [c̃ij , ĉii ] from country i is:

                                              ei tii (c)
                                 vanx
                                   i (c) =                = wi ei [1 + mii (c)] .
                                             cτii xii (c)

Similarly, the measured productivity, or the value added per worker, of an exporter with cost
draw c < c̃ij is:                            P
                                  x
                                           ei k∈Ki(c) tik (c)
                                vai (c) = P                      ,
                                          c k∈Ki (c) τik xik (c)


                                                              32
where Ki (c) is the set of destinations k such that c ≤ b
                                                        cik .
   Taking logs of both variables, integrating over all exporters and non-exporters, respectively,
and taking the difference of the two yields the exporter measured productivity advantage (in
percentage terms)39 , which we denote by H̃2 :
                           Z       c̃ij                            Z   ĉii
                                                       κcκ−1                                    κcκ−1
                   H̃2 =                  log(vaxi (c)) κ dc   −              log(vanx
                                                                                    i (c))                 dc.
                               0                        c̃ij       c̃ij                      ĉκii − c̃κij

As was the case for H̃1 above, it can be shown that H̃2 can be re-expressed in terms of P and
Λ, and denoted by H2 (P, Λ). Due to the length of the argument, we relegate the details to
Appendix D.

Wages The two firm-level moments derived above rely on the endogenous wage, wi , of the
country whose exporters are simulated. In principle, should we simulate exporters for all
countries, we would need to separately identify wages for all countries. However, the exporter
moments that we will try to reconcile are only made available for US exporters by Bernard et
al. (2003). Assuming that the two key parameters, κ and γ, are not country-specific, we can
generate the moments from the model for US exporters by only simulating observations for US
exporters. In this case, we let wU S = 1.


4.3    Simulation algorithm
In this model, there exists a continuum of firms; hence, the first step in the simulation is to
recognize that the continuum needs to be discretized and the number of simulated draws has to
be large enough so as to best approximate the entire continuum. In principle, one would need to
simulate a very large number of draws for each country; which can be a daunting task. The task,
however, is greatly simplified due to the fact that cost draws are transformations of random
variables drawn from a parameter-free uniform distribution, where the transformation function
depends on P. This powerful insight draws on arguments first made transparent by Bernard
et al. (2003) within the context of a model with a fixed measure of firms and subsequently by
Eaton et al. (2011) within a model with an endogenous measure of firms.
     Recall that our goal is to simulate a large number of cost draws, c, from the pdf given by
gi (c) = κcκ−1 /ĉκii , which ensures that c ∈ [0, ĉii ] for all i.40 Given these draws, we can proceed to
compute exporting costs and determine the subset of firms from each source country i that serve
  39
   See the preceding footnote.
  40
   It would be futile to simulate firms with higher cost draws than this upper bound because they would
immediately exit in equilibrium.



                                                           33
each destination j. With this in mind we proceed as follows. We draw 500,000 realizations41 of
the uniform distribution on the [0, 1] domain, U[0, 1], we order them in increasing order, and
                                                                             1
find the maximum realization, denoted by umax . Then, we let c = (u/umax) κ ĉii . Notice that
                                                                        κ−1
c ∈ [0, ĉii ] by construction, and it has pdf of gi (c) = κ c ĉκ ; yet the normalization allows us to
                                                                 ii
utilize all draws. Multiplying each c by the appropriate wage rate and trade cost yields the
cost to serve each market. Comparing this cost to the cost cutoff for each source-destination
pair determines the set of exporters to every destination.
   What remains is to decide the source-destination cost cutoff pair that serves as numeraire.
This choice depends on the particular exercise that one intends to engage in. The objective
of the normalization, however, is always the same: the numeraire is chosen so as to maximize
the usage of the 500,000 draws from the uniform distribution. As we describe below, we choose
to identify the key parameters of interest, κ and γ, from moments for US firms; thus, we need
to simulate observations for all US producers—both domestic and exporting. To maximize the
number of draws used, we choose the numeraire cost cutoff to be ĉU S,U S . Hence, all simulated
firms serve at least the US and a subset of them serve different export markets.


4.4     Estimation
In order to numerically generate the moments from the model that we outline above, we first
need to estimate the model’s parameters and then simulate micro-level data. The estimation
can be divided into the following three steps: (i) estimate a set of country(-pair) parameters
using the model’s predicted gravity equation of trade and data; (ii) use gravity-based estimates,
together with data on population size, to estimate per-capita income levels from the model’s
market clearing condition; (iii) use parameters from (i) and (ii), together with moments of
choice to identify the remaining parameters, γ and κ.

Step 1 The empirical gravity equation of trade that corresponds to the theoretical prediction
derived in expression (52) is given by:
                                                 
                                            λij
                                  log                 = S̃i − S̃j − κ log τij + εij ,                      (58)
                                            λjj

where εij is a country-pair residual error term. We assume that the bilateral trade cost takes
on the following functional form:

                                log τij = βd log dij + exi + β k dk + βh dh ,                              (59)
  41
   The quantitative results are nearly identical when we use a grid of 2,000,000. One key difference is that US
exporters serve a larger number of destinations in this case; namely, there are fewer zeros in the trade matrix.


                                                             34
where βd is the coefficient estimate on the log of the bilateral distance in kilometers, dij , exi
is an exporter fixed effect as in Waugh (2010), dh is an indicator that takes on the value of 1
if trade is internal with coefficient βh , and β k is a 5 × 1 vector of coefficients on a matrix of
5 indicators, dk , where each indicator takes on the value of 1 if countries i and j: (i) share
a border, (ii) have a common official or primary language, (iii) have a common colonizer post
1945, (iv) have a regional trade agreement (RTA) in force, and (v) share a common currency.
    After substituting expression (59) into (58), we estimate the coefficients for 123 countries
via OLS using source and destination fixed effects.42 We exclude trade share observations that
take on the value of zero. A description of the (standard) datasets used in the estimation and
the results from the gravity estimation can be found in Appendix E. We present the estimates
of the gravity equation in Appendix G, and we plot the predicted and actual trade shares in
Appendix F.
    A couple of notes are in order. First, all parameter estimates pertaining to the trade costs
are scaled by κ. Thus, the gravity equation allows us to estimate κ log τij only, rather than to
separately identify κ from τij . We present our identification strategy for κ in Step 3 below.
Second, domestic trade costs are also estimated in this step and they are not necessarily equal
to unity. Hence, before we proceed, we normalize all international trade costs, relative to their
domestic counterparts.

Step 2 We compute per-capita incomes using the model’s implied market clearing equation
together with data on trade shares and population size for all 123 countries. In particular, we
employ the first equality in expression (24), where by definition per-capita income in country i
is Ei = wi ei . After normalizing population size, Li , relative to a numeraire country, which we
take to be the US, we can obtain per-capita incomes, Ei , for all i 6= US, relative to the US,
using data on Li and λij for all i, j from this very expression. We describe the data sources in
Appendix E and we plot the predicted and actual per-capita income in Appendix F.

Step 3 It remains to choose an identification strategy for the key remaining parameters that
characterize the welfare gains from trade: κ and γ. In principle, these two parameters govern
more than two moments in the model. Hence, different sets of moments will result in different
estimates for these parameters, different fits of model to data, and different estimates of the
gains from trade. The main challenge is to select the moments that are (i) most informative
about these two parameters and (ii) directly informative about the welfare gains from trade. To
the extent that we also intend to quantify the importance of the assumptions made regarding
  42
   For a detailed discussion on how to separately identify the coefficients Si from exi see Simonovska and
Waugh (2014a).



                                                   35
consumer preferences, and to compare the welfare gains of our model to the ones predicted
by the standard homothetic model, an additional challenge is to select moments that yield
identical parameter estimates of κ across models so that all departures relative to the standard
framework are due to the “demand” side of the model. With these challenges in mind, we engage
in alternative identification exercises, which we describe below.

Step 3.a.—Fixing the Supply Side The parameter κ is a supply-side parameter in models
of micro-level heterogeneity. It is the shape parameter that governs the dispersion of the
intrinsic productivity distribution, Pareto, in our model as well as in the ACR class of models
based on CES preferences.43 Since these models differ in their pricing predictions, however, the
distribution of the measured productivity, defined above as the value added per worker of each
firm, differs across them. Thus, targeting moments from the measured productivity distribution
will result in different estimates of κ across models, which will make it difficult to distinguish
the contribution of the demand versus the supply side of each model toward welfare. From the
gravity equation of trade, however, κ can be interpreted as the partial elasticity of trade flows
with respect to variable trade costs. Crucially, since both models yield an identical gravity
equation of trade, if the parameter could be estimated using the gravity moment alone, then
both models would have to yield identical estimates of κ.
    Estimating this parameter using the gravity equation alone is challenging and has been the
focus of many papers—see Simonovska and Waugh (2014a,b) and Caliendo and Parro (2015) for
recent contributions and a discussion of the related literature. Such a task is beyond the scope
of this paper. Instead, for the purposes of this exercise, we let κ = 5, which is the preferred
estimate of ACR and ACDR, and approximately the average estimate of the trade elasticity
across sectors obtained by Caliendo and Parro (2015). For robustness, we will propose below
another strategy to identify this parameter and we will explore the quantitative implications of
our model within that setting.
   The parameter γ is a demand-side parameter in our model—it governs the elasticity of
demand with respect to price as well as the elasticity of price with respect to income. Con-
sequently, the parameter is at the heart of the model’s pricing predictions, which are the key
departure from the standard ACR framework. In addition, for given κ, γ governs the dis-
tribution of firm sales. These two observations imply that γ is a critical input into the firm
sales-weighted elasticity of price with respect to income, which quantifies the differences in wel-
fare gains predicted by our and the homothetic model. Hence, we proceed with an overidentified
estimation strategy for γ and target (i) the average elasticity of price with respect to income
from micro-level data and (ii) the domestic sales advantage of exporters over non-exporters for
 43
      The same statement applies to the class of directly additive models in ACDR.


                                                      36
the US.
    We choose these moments for the following reasons. First, our model differs from existing
alternatives precisely along the pricing dimension—it predicts that the price elasticity with
respect to income is positive, while the price elasticity with respect to market size is zero.
Therefore, targeting the price elasticity with respect to income seems to be a natural choice.
Second, it is the price elasticity with respect to income, weighted by each firm’s relative sales,
that constitutes the object that governs the welfare gains in our model. Therefore, the distribu-
tion of firm sales together with the price elasticity with respect to income are crucial elements
in determining the magnitude of welfare gains from trade.
    In sum, we let κ = 5 and, to identify γ, we combine objects from Steps 1 and 2 with the
following model-generated moments: (i) the domestic sales advantage of US exporters over
non-exporters, or H1 (P) given in expression (57) and (ii) the average elasticity of price with
respect to income from micro-level data, or E {ǫE } given in expression (53). To compute the first
moment, we fix the source country i = US and we consider all 123 potential destinations referred
to in Steps 1 and 2 above (the second moment is country invariant in the model). Finally, we
employ the simulated methods of moment (SMM) estimator with an identity weighting matrix.

Step 3.b—Flexible Estimation The previous exercise aims at quantifying the differences
in welfare gains predicted by our model and the ACR benchmark. Another interesting exercise
is to let our model attempt to match a number of moments in the data and to evaluate its
quantitative fit along different dimensions. Once parameterized as such, the model can be used
to perform counterfactual exercises of interest.
   For this purpose, we engage in the following quantitative exercise: We identify γ and κ by
jointly targeting the following three moments: (i) the average elasticity of price with respect to
income from micro-level data, (ii) the domestic sales advantage of exporters over non-exporters
for the US, and (iii) the measured productivity advantage of exporters over non-exporters for
the US. The third moment, which is new to this strategy, seems natural as κ governs the shape
of the productivity distribution in the model. We proceed to evaluate the estimated model’s
performance along a number of dimensions including moments from the cost pass-through
elasticity and mark-up distributions, export intensity, and the margins of trade. Finally, we
use the estimated model to quantify the welfare gains and losses from the Transatlantic Trade
and Investment Partnership to negotiating members as well as non-members.
   In sum, to identify κ and γ we combine objects from Steps 1 and 2 with three model-
generated moments: (i) the domestic sales advantage of US exporters over non-exporters, or
H1 (P) given in expression (57); (ii) the value-added advantage of US exporters over non-
exporters, or H2 (P, Λ) given in expression (69) in Appendix D; and (iii) the average elasticity


                                               37
of price with respect to income from micro-level data, or E {ǫE } given in expression (53). To
compute the first two moments, we let the source country i = US and we consider all 123
potential destinations referred to in Steps 1 and 2 above (the third moment is country invariant
in the model). Once again, we employ the SMM estimator with an identity weighting matrix.
    On the technical side, to compute the first two moments, we need to separately identify
wU S from eU S because only wU S enters unit costs of production as well as cost cutoffs. Since
we normalize all per-capita incomes (and sizes) relative to the US, this would imply that both
wU S = 1 and eU S = 1. Notice that by construction this implies that we need to normalize
all Sk ’s relative to SU S so that SU S = 1. Because log(Sk ) is the object that we estimate from
gravity, we first exponentiate this object for every k and then we divide it through by the
exponent of the object for the US.


5     Quantitative Results
In this section we report the results from the two quantitative exercises described above.


5.1     Welfare Gains from Trade: Addilog vs CES
Let us focus on the first exercise described in Step 3.a. Table 1 summarizes the two mo-
ments that we target, the data sources, as well as the resulting parameters that match those
moments.44 The price elasticity moment is the preferred estimate obtained by Simonovska
(2015).45 In this overidentified approach, we employ the identity matrix to weigh the two
moments that the two parameters attempt to jointly match.46
   44
      The firm-level moments reported in Bernard et al. (2003) are for the universe of US firms in 1992. Bernard
et al. (2007) document similar statistics using 2002 US firm-level data.
   45
      In Table 1 of their paper, Alessandria and Kaboski (2011) estimate this parameter using HS-10 digit unit
value data for US exports of final/consumption goods recorded at the port of shipping to 28 destinations during
the 1989-2000 period. While the prices do not include shipping costs and destination-specific non-tradable
components, they may reflect quality variations, which is why we opt to target the moment in Simonovska
(2015) instead. Two observations are in order. First, our model predicts that the mean price elasticity is
country invariant; thus, combining the sales moment for the US with the price elasticity moment for Spain is
not problematic. Second, re-estimating the model with Alessandria and Kaboski’s (2015) moment as a target
yields a value for γ of 1.0304, which is nearly identical to the estimate obtained in this section.
   46
      For robustness, we added a third moment to the estimation in this section, namely, the measured produc-
tivity advantage of US exporters over non-exporters. Using the identity weighting matrix, we obtain a value
for γ of 1.0307, which is nearly identical to the estimate obtained in this section. Hence, this moment does not
contain much additional information on γ, given κ.




                                                      38
                              Table 1: Moments and Parameters
              Moment                                Model        Data     Source
              US Exporter Sales Advantage            4.81         4.8     BEJK
              Mean Price Elasticity of Income        0.54        0.14   Simonovska
              Population, relative to US        (N-1)x1 vector             WDI
              Bilateral trade shares               Gravity               Comtrade
              Parameter                             Value
              γ                                     1.031
              κ                                        5
              L                                 (N-1)x1 vector
              τ                                    Gravity


5.1.1   The estimated demand is linear

Table 1 shows that our model matches the sales advantage moment nearly perfectly. However,
this comes at a cost: the model is unable to perfectly match the average price elasticity reported
in the data and it predicts an elasticity that is considerably higher. Intuitively, for a given κ,
there is a tension between the sales advantage and the price elasticity moment. The sales
advantage moment is relatively more sensitive to changes in values of γ than the price elasticity
moment — the former rises very rapidly with increases in γ — so the model requires γ to
remain relatively low. The quantitative result, however, is striking: the estimate of γ is nearly
unity, which corresponds to the linear demand case of the addilog preferences.
   Therefore, to proceed with the quantitative comparison of welfare relative to the ACR
framework based on CES preferences, we focus on this simple linear demand model. First of
all, a comparison of our approximate formula for the welfare gains (50) and the formula (31)
that holds for CES and homothetic preferences provides an immediate “back of the envelope”
calculation. Given κ = 5 and γ = 1, the linear demand model implies gains from any liber-
                                                 γ
alization experiment that are approximately (γ+1)(κ+1) / κ1 = 12
                                                              5
                                                                 of the ACR gains. Hence, the
mismeasurement of welfare is quantitatively large (our model yields welfare gains that are less
than one half of the ACR gains). In the next section we make this insight more precise looking
at the exact formula for the welfare gains (51).

5.1.2   Welfare cost of autarky

We now compute the exact welfare gains of moving from autarky to the observed trade share
for each country in year 2004 as predicted by the ACR framework for the CES model and by
our “addilog” model. For the first case, we let κ = 5 and we use the formula (31) to arrive at
the welfare measure. For the “addilog” model, we let κ = 5, and we use the welfare measure
for large shocks (51) with γ = 1. For both models, we use the domestic expenditure shares


                                                39
(1-trade share) before and after the shock. In the case of the linear demand model, the welfare
gains due to a global shock require values for per-capita income, and we let those correspond
to the values before the shock. In this particular exercise, the domestic expenditure share goes
from the observed share in the data to unity (autarky).


                                                                   IRL
                                                                            ZMB
                                   50                                                                                                                50
     Welfare Cost of Autarky (%)




                                                                                                                       Welfare Cost of Autarky (%)
                                                                   GEO

                                   40                     EST                                                                                        40
                                                          GMB
                                                                                  BEL
                                   30                                SVK
                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                    DJI               TGO
                                                                LVAMDA                          std. dev.=9.21
                                                   CYP           MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                    IRL    ZMB
                                                                           AGO
                                                       MUS             HUN
                                                                     BDI MLI     MYS
                                   20                  GAB
                                                               BIHDNKAUT
                                                                       CZE GHA
                                                                      GIN
                                                                                         PHL                                                         20                             GEO
                                        STP     CPV       MKD    KGZ
                                                                  JORBGR                    NGA
                                                          SVN        BEN
                                                                   PRYAZE
                                                                       TUN                        mean=13.97                                                               EST
                                                 COMFJI GNBOMNLTU             ROM    ZARVNM
                                                                                        ETH
                                            ISL   BTN                      KAZ   MAR
                                                                                  TZA
                                                                                 CAN                                                                                        GMB
                                                              COG
                                                                HRV CHE
                                                                NORISR       SYRUGA                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                      SWE
                                                                       BLR
                                                                        PRT
                                                                         MWI                                                                                         DJI           SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                     TGO                               std. dev.=3.95
                                               GNQ           URY        GRC
                                                                        SEN  LKA KEN
                                                                             MOZ  POLGBR  MEX                                                                                LVA
                                                                                                                                                                              MRTMDA
                                   10                          NZL    BOL
                                                                  FIN RWAECU             DEU                                                         10             CYP
                                                               LBN        BFASAUSDNESPFRA
                                                                                    UKR                                                                                 MUS            BDIHUNAGO MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                           MLI
                                                                       TCD AUS        THA                                                                                GABMKD  BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                   DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                   KGZ  AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                          CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                         GIN    GHA         PHLNGA     mean=5.89
                                                                                    COLEGY                                                                STP    CPV               JOR BGR
                                             BRN            ARMCAFTJK      CHLNPL ZAF  IRN RUS
                                                                                       TUR
                                                                                      ITA    BGD
                                                                                             PAK USA                                                          ISL COM
                                                                                                                                                                   BTN
                                                                                                                                                                            SVN
                                                                                                                                                                     FJI GNBOMN LTU PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                COG
                                                                                                                                                                                  HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                        BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                        AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                          TUN ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                             KAZ    TZAZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                               SYRUGA      VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ETH
                                                          LSO                   PER KOR                                                                          GNQ           URYNORISRSWE
                                                                                                                                                                                          BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                          PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                            MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                           GRC LKA KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                               MOZ   POLGBR  MEX
                                                         BWA
                                                          NAM     LAO        CIVVEN
                                                                            CMR
                                                                                  ARG           IDN
                                                                                              BRA            CHN
                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                 LBN       SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                         BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                    FIN RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                         TCDECU
                                                                                                                                                                                            BFA  SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                AUS SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NPL ESPFRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      COLTHADEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                            JPN                                                                BRN            ARM
                                                                                                                                                                            LSO  CAF  TJK    CHL  PER  ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                       KORIRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ITA    BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAK  USA
                                                      SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                           BWA
                                                                                                                                                                            NAM     LAO        CIVVEN
                                                                                                                                                                                              CMR   ARG            IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               JPN                CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IND
                                   0                                                                                                                 0                 SWZ
                                   −8              −6           −4           −2                  0                 2                                 −8              −6           −4           −2                     0                 2
                                                          Population size L (log), US=0                                                                                     Population size L (log), US=0


    Figure 1: Welfare Cost of Autarky in CES and Linear Demand Models, 123 Countries

   The left panel of Figure 1 plots the results for the ACR framework based on CES preferences,
while the right shows the predictions of our linear demand model. The differences are striking.
The average country enjoys an 14% welfare gain from trade according to the ACR framework.
In contrast, our linear demand model yields a mean value of only 6%, less than a half of that
predicted by the homothetic model. While the ranking of countries according to welfare gains
is identical in the two models, the dispersion in the ACR framework is much larger than the
one predicted by the linear demand model.
   To further understand the difference in magnitudes that we obtain relative to the literature,
we focus attention on the US. ACR report that, for a US domestic expenditure share of 0.93
and a value for the Pareto shape parameter of 5-10, the welfare gains of moving away from
autarky range from 0.7% to 1.4%. First, we point out that, in our database, for year 2004,
we obtain a US domestic expenditure share on manufacturing, adjusted for trade imbalances,
of 0.75. Thus, we cannot directly compare the estimate for the US reported in the plot above
to the estimate reported in ACR. Second, let us assume that indeed the domestic expenditure
share is 0.93 as reported in ACR and that κ is 5. Then, the welfare gains from trade for the
US predicted by the ACR framework would amount to 1.4%. In contrast, the welfare gains
predicted by the linear demand model would amount to a mere 0.6%, less than half of the value
predicted by ACR. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that the welfare gains from trade may be



                                                                                                                 40
substantially overestimated, should one rely on CES (or homothetic) preferences.47


5.2       Quantitative Performance of the Addilog Model
In this subsection, we focus on the second exercise described in Step 3.b above.

                                   Table 2: Moments and Parameters
              Moment                                             Model          Data     Source
              US Exporter Productivity Advantage                  0.35          0.33     BEJK
              US Exporter Sales Advantage                         4.81           4.8     BEJK
              Mean Price Elasticity of Income                     0.43          0.14   Simonovska
              Population, relative to US                     (N-1)x1 vector               WDI
              Bilateral trade shares                            Gravity                 Comtrade
              Parameter                                          Value
              γ                                                  1.919
              κ                                                  2.772
              L                                              (N-1)x1 vector
              τ                                                 Gravity


                                Table 3: Predicted VS. Actual Moments
              Moments                          Model           Data                 Source
              US Exporters, % All firms        16.27          18 - 21         Bernard et al., BEJK
              Export Intensity (%)                                                   BEJK
              0-10                               80.2             66
              10-20                              10.5             16
              20-30                              4.4             7.7
              30-40                              2.0             4.4
              40-50                              1.2             2.4
              50-60                              0.7             1.5
              60-100                             1.0             2.8
              Mark-up, mean, %                 19.34            5 - 40     Jaimovich & Floetotto
              Cost pass-through, mean, %         0.57        0.36 - 0.57      De Loecker et al.
              Log E, rel. US, mean              -3.03           -2.70              WDI
              (standard deviation)             (2.67)          (1.66)
              Moments                           Corr     (model,data)
              Log E, 123 countries              0.87
              λ , 123 countries                 0.91


       Table 2 summarizes the three moments that we target in the estimation as well as the
resulting parameter estimates. When we let κ and γ jointly match moments from the sales,
  47
    It is important to remark that ACDR estimate a model based on directly additive preferences that generalizes
CES preferences and obtain a measure of welfare gains that is 96% of the value predicted by the standard ACR
framework.


                                                        41
measured productivity, and price elasticity distribution, the estimated γ amounts to 1.92, while
κ centers around 2.77. In practice, the estimate implies a slightly convex demand function
and higher dispersion of costs. Moreover, the model generates roughly the same values for
the targeted moments as in the previous exercise, although the predicted welfare gains nearly
double (plugging the values for κ and γ in the local welfare formula in expression (50) arrives
at this conclusion).
    In Table 3 we explore the basic fit of the estimated model to a variety of moments. Unlike the
moments displayed in Table 2, which we target in the identification of the model’s parameters,
the moments in Table 3 serve for external validation as they are not targeted. The model
predicts that the share of US firms that export is roughly 16%, in line with US data for year
1992 reported in Bernard et al. (2003). The resulting export intensity in the model is even
more skewed than observed in the data and it reflects the prediction that a large number of US
firms that export sell very little abroad—that is to say most exporters sell tiny amounts abroad
even though they enjoy a large domestic sales advantage over non-exporters.
   Furthermore, the mean price elasticity with respect to the real exchange rate is equivalent
to the mean price elasticity with respect to per-capita income of 0.43 (the median being 0.4),
while the mean plus one standard deviation estimate is 0.51. We interpret these elasticities as
equilibrium elasticities for the broad manufacturing sector. These estimates are qualitatively
in line with, but exceed in magnitude, the findings in Berman et al. (2012) for a set of French
exporters to non-Eurozone destinations.
    The average cost pass-through predicted by the model is exactly one minus the pricing-
to-market elasticity reported above and amounts to 0.57, which is within the range of 0.36-
0.57 reported by De Loecker et al. (2015) for Indian manufacturing firms. Finally, given our
estimated parameters, the average markup amounts to 19%, which is in line with common
findings in the macroeconomic literature (see Jaimovich and Flotetto, 2008).

5.2.1   Prices across destinations

Our model predicts that prices are increasing in destination per-capita income and are indepen-
dent of destination population size. Given our estimates of κ and γ , the mean elasticity of price
with respect to per-capita income is 0.43. In turn, the price elasticity with respect to population
is zero. These estimates compare qualitatively to estimates reported in the empirical literature,
although the predicted elasticity of price with respect to income does exceed the corresponding
moment in the data. In particular, Simonovska (2015) finds that a Spanish apparel retailer
systematically price discriminates according to the per-capita income of destinations. The typ-
ical elasticity estimate that the author obtains circles around 0.14, which corresponds to one of
the targets that we use in our estimation. While the predicted moment exceeds the target, we

                                                42
interpret the model as representing the broad manufacturing sector rather than apparel alone.

                             Table 4: The Cross-Section of Prices
                                                           (1)       (2)
                            Log(pcincome)              0.137***   0.130***
                                                        (0.030)    (0.036)
                            Log(L)                        0.021     0.016
                                                        (0.023)    (0.025)
                            Log(τ )                       0.044
                                                        (0.056)
                            Log(weighted tariff)         -0.006    0.001
                                                        (0.029)   (0.040)
                            Landlocked                             -0.016
                                                                  (0.111)
                            Island                                  0.027
                                                                  (0.088)
                            Eurozone                                0.067
                                                                  (0.073)
                            R2                          0.47         0.47
                            # Observations              7480        7480
                           Notes: All variables are relative to US. *** indi-
                           cate significance at 1%-level. Standard errors in
                           parentheses.


   Estimates of the elasticity of price with respect to destination income and population size
for a broad set of manufacturing products are not available as detailed price data as the dataset
employed by Simonovska (2015) are only available for a handful of producers/sectors. We do,
however, find supporting evidence in favor of the author’s findings, which are in line with the
indirectly additive model, using more aggregate data. In particular, we obtain prices for 110
products with identical characteristics available in a subset of 71 of the countries used in the
analysis above. The source of the data is the International Economist Unit (EIU), which we
describe in Appendix E. Unlike in Simonovska (2015), our data are not sufficiently detailed
so as to be able to argue that price variation across destinations is entirely due to pricing to
market; in particular, prices in our dataset may differ across destinations due to differences in
quality or non-tradable components as well. Nonetheless, we can use the data to verify whether
similar patterns hold true as in the existing empirical literature.
    In Table 4, we perform two sets of exercises whereby we regress logged prices, relative to the
price in the US, against logged per-capita income and logged size, controlling for trade costs. In
the first exercise, we approximate trade costs by the average tariff in each destination and the
average iceberg trade cost as estimated from the gravity equation of trade, weighted by trade
shares. In the second exercise, we replace the estimated iceberg trade cost with three indicator
variables that take on the value of one if the destination is: (i) landlocked; (ii) an island; or

                                                  43
(iii) in the Eurozone. We estimate the coefficients via OLS, using product-level fixed effects,
and we cluster all standard errors by country. We describe all data sources in Appendix E.
     The elasticity of price respect to per-capita income that we obtain from the two regressions
is roughly 0.13 and it is statistically significant at the 1% level. Hence, we confirm that, even
in a broader set of countries and industries, the positive elasticity of price with respect to per
capita income persists. The elasticity with respect to size in both regressions is not statistically
different from zero, which is in line with our theory.

5.2.2   Aggregate moments and the margins of trade

In Appendix F, we report the model’s predicted per-capita income levels and bilateral trade
flows for all 123 countries used in the quantitative analysis. As summarized in Table 3, the
correlation between predicted and actual per-capita income is 0.87 (in logs), and the correlation
between bilateral trade flows is 0.91. In the same Appendix we discuss the model’s quantitative
predictions regarding the extensive and intensive margin of trade. The model predicts that the
elasticity of the extensive margin with respect to destination per-capita income equals κ, while
the same elasticity with respect to trade costs equals −κ (see expression (54)). Since trade
barriers are increasing in distance, our model’s predicted elasticity with respect to distance is
necessarily negative. In Appendix F, we show that the estimated model yields elasticities of the
US extensive margin with respect to destination per-capita income, size, and distance of 2.8,
0.05, and -1.9, respectively, and only the first and the last are statistically significant. Along
the intensive margin dimension, the model predicts that, controlling for aggregate effects, (i)
the elasticity of the intensive margin with respect to destination GDP is 1; (ii) the elasticity
of the intensive margin with respect to destination per-capita income is −κ, or −2.8 given our
estimate.
    Both findings are potentially in line with the existing empirical literature; however, the
literature typically does not distinguish between the effects that per-capita income and market
size have on the margins of trade. We leave for future research to conduct empirical investiga-
tions using detailed firm-level data to help discern the role of these two variables in driving the
margins of trade so as to better evaluate the performance of different models.

5.2.3   Counterfactual analysis: the TTIP

Given the addilog model’s favorable performance with respect to data, in this section, we use
the estimated addilog model to evaluate the welfare gains from a bilateral reduction in trade
costs between the US and the European countries that are currently involved in the negotiation




                                                44
of the TTIP.48 We view the exercise as a first pass toward understanding the welfare gains from
such an agreement. Clearly, a detailed multi-sector model as well as detailed recent data would
be needed in order to carefully analyze the gains from the agreement for the countries involved.



                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                    IRL                                                                                                                                  GBR
                                      2
                                                                                                                                                     0.3                                                     DEU
       Welfare gains from TTIP (%)




                                                                                                                      Welfare gains from TTIP (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                         DNKAUT
                                     1.5                                                                                                                                     EST                         FRA
                                                                                                                                                     0.2                                SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                             GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                   LVA     BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                     LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                      HRV HUNCZE ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                             PRT         ITA
                                      1
                                                                                                                                                     0.1                                               ESP
                                                                                   BEL                                                                                         SVN                     POL
                                                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                                                                       CYP
                                     0.5                                                                                                              0          BRN     SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                              LSOURYKGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IDN
                                                                                         GBR                                                                         BTN GNB  NAM     TJK
                                                                                                                                                                                     LAO  BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                        RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                         BOL  CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                            BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                             KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                               CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                             CHL  NPLARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                      UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                  VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                AUS   ZAF IRN JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         THA     BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN
                                                                                                                                                                             BWAARM
                                                                                                                                                                                  NZL BDITCD
                                                                                                                                                                                        BENSEN   SAU  COLEGY   BGD
                                                                                             DEU                                                                       FJI        CAF
                                                                                                                                                                                  LBNPRY
                                                                                                                                                                                    JOR AZE MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                            ECULKA
                                                                                                                                                                                               SYR   TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    KEN   TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           VNM
                                                                         SWE
                                                                         AUT                                                                                                     COG
                                                                                                                                                                                  MDA
                                                          EST LVA DNK
                                                                    SVK     GRC           FRA                                                              STP      COM        OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                MRT TGO    ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                           MLI     MAR
                                                                 LTU FINBGR
                                                                   HRV     CZE
                                                                           HUN
                                                                           PRT   ROM      ITA                                                                      CPV     GABMKD BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                   NORISR
                                                                                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                         GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                          TUN MOZ  MYS ZAR  PHLNGA
                                                                                       ESP                                                                                  GMB
                                                                                                                                                                          MUS                              ETH
                                                     CYP     SVN                      POL                                                           −0.1          GNQ                                        MEX
                                      0    STP
                                                BRN BTN
                                                   COM
                                                  CPV
                                                        SWZ
                                                      FJI    NAM
                                                             LSOARM
                                                           GNB
                                                            BWA
                                                              OMNURYKGZ
                                                                  NZL
                                                                  CAF
                                                                  LBN
                                                                 COG
                                                                MRT
                                                                       TJK
                                                                     LAO
                                                                     PRY
                                                                    JOR
                                                                  MDA
                                                                  BIH
                                                                        BDI
                                                                      TGO
                                                                           BLR
                                                                         RWA
                                                                          BOL
                                                                          TCD
                                                                         BEN
                                                                         AZE
                                                                       ISR
                                                                        CHE
                                                                               CMR
                                                                              KAZ
                                                                             BFACIV
                                                                              CHL
                                                                            SENLKA
                                                                             MWI
                                                                             ECU
                                                                            ZMB
                                                                            MLI
                                                                                   NPL
                                                                                  SAU
                                                                                SYR   ARG
                                                                                     SDN
                                                                                    MAR
                                                                                        KOR
                                                                                   UGAUKR
                                                                                   PER
                                                                                   VEN
                                                                                 AUS   COL
                                                                                      TZA
                                                                                     KEN  THA
                                                                                        ZAFIRN
                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                           EGY
                                                                                         ZARVNM
                                                                                             PHL
                                                                                                JPN
                                                                                                 RUS
                                                                                                 PAK
                                                                                                 BGD
                                                                                                NGA
                                                                                                    IDN
                                                                                                  BRA      IND
                                                                                                            CHN                                                ISL                 GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                             AGOGHA
                                                         GAB MKD
                                                           GMB
                                               ISLGNQ DJIMUS       NOR    GIN
                                                                           TUN  MOZ
                                                                              AGO   MYS     ETH
                                                                                              MEX
                                                                   GEO           GHACAN                                                                                DJI                         CAN

                                      −8              −6           −4           −2                    0           2                                   −8               −6          −4           −2                  0          2
                                                             Population size L (log), US=0                                                                                   Population size L (log), US=0


                                                                     Figure 2: Welfare Gains From TTIP, 123 Countries

   To quantify the gains from TTIP, we proceed as follows. First, we set the RTA indicator in
the trade-cost function in expression (59) to unity for the country pairs that involve the USA
and each of the European TTIP potential members. Second, we use the gravity coefficient
estimates, as well as the estimate of κ, to compute new bilateral trade barriers. Third, we
compute the percent reduction on trade barriers for the US and the European TTIP potential
members. The mean percent reduction in trade barriers among TTIP countries is 16%, while the
trade barriers for non-TTIP countries remain unchanged by construction. Finally, to compute
the welfare gains, we plug the computed change in trade barriers into the system (28), using
actual trade shares and predicted income, which jointly satisfy the market clearing conditions
given by the system of equations in (24).
  We report the results for all the countries in the left panel of Figure 2. Clearly, TTIP
members gain from the liberalization, but the gains are asymmetric. The US enjoys welfare
gains of roughly 0.7% and Belgium (alongside Luxembourg and the Netherlands) gains by
roughly 0.8%. Ireland is the biggest winner with gains amounting to more than 2%. To obtain
a better sense of the results, in the right panel of Figure 2, we zoom in on the countries with
gains below 0.4%. The mean gains among TTIP members are 0.3% with a standard deviation of
  48
    These countries include: Austria, Belgium (together with Luxembourg and the Netherlands in our dataset),
Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Estonia, Finland, France, United Kingdom,
Greece, Croatia, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Latvia, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia,
Sweden. Malta is also involved in the TTIP negotiations, however, it is not in our sample due to data limitations.


                                                                                                                  45
0.4%. Non-members suffer losses which amount to an average of -0.04%. Among non-members,
USA’s major trade partners Mexico and in particular Canada experience some of the largest
losses.49 Overall, however, the gains far exceed the losses in world welfare.


6         Conclusion
The contribution of this work is to introduce IA preferences to the international trade literature,
quantify the welfare gains from trade under this class of preferences, and propose a paramet-
ric specification, the addilog, that is highly tractable and useful for quantitative work. The
model avoids the pervasive markup neutralities emerging in the CES model (Melitz, 2003) and
the limits of quasilinear preferences in general equilibrium applications (Melitz and Ottaviano,
2008). Between variable markup models, this is the only one able to deliver prices increasing
in destination income, independent from population of the destination country and character-
ized by incomplete pass-through, with variable elasticities for firms of different productivity.
Moreover, the model has novel implications for the extensive and intensive margins of trade
that appear promising in front of the limited evidence. The implication of such a model for the
gains from trade liberalization, however, is our main result: these gains can be much lower than
those implied by the models based on homothetic or directly additive preferences analyzed in
ACR and ACDR.
   Our setting could be usefully extended to consider strategic interactions (Atkeson and
Burstein, 2008 and Etro, 2015), heterogenous consumers and quality differentiation (Fajgel-
baum et al., 2011), more general preferences,50 endogenous labor supply and a 2x2x2 model
with an outside good sold in a perfectly competitive setting to study the interplay with inter-
industry trade. Our tractable non-homothetic preferences could also be exploited for dynamic
analysis of structural change and business cycles.


         References
Anderson, J. E., 1979, A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation, American Economic
  Review, 69, 106-16
Alessandria, G. and J. P. Kaboski, 2011, Pricing-to-Market and the Failure of Absolute PPP,
    American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 91-127
    49
     The losses suffered by TTIP non-member countries in our exercise are of some interest since it is often
claimed by the proponents that the benefits for the EU and the US would not be at the expense of the rest of
the world (see e.g. Francois, 2013). However, it is also usually recognized that it will be somehow necessary to
harmonize TTIP with NAFTA on the American side and with EFTA on the European side.
  50
     A first analysis of monopolistic competition with general symmetric preferences (including any non-additive
and non-homothetic preferences) can be found in Bertoletti and Etro (2016b).

                                                      46
Allen, T., C. Arkolakis and Y. Takahashi, 2014, Universal Gravity, mimeo, Northwestern Uni-
  versity
Alvarez, F. and R. J. Lucas, 2007, General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum Model
  of International Trade, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1726–1768
Arkolakis, C., 2015, A Unified Theory of Firm Selection and Growth, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, in press
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot and A. Rodriguez-Clare, 2010, Gains From Trade under Monop-
  olistic Competition: A Simple Example with Translog Expenditure Functions and Pareto
  Distributions of Firm-Level Productivity, mimeo, Yale University
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot and A. Rodriguez-Clare, 2012, New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?,
  American Economic Review, 102, 1, 94-130
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, D. Donaldson and A. Rodríguez-Clare, 2015, The Elusive Pro-
  Competitive Effects of Trade, WP 21370, NBER
Arkolakis, C., S. Demidova, P. J. Klenow, and A. Rodriguez-Clare, 2008, Endogenous Variety
  and the Gains from Trade, American Economic Review, 98, 2, 444-50
Atkeson, A. and A. Burstein, 2008, Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International Relative
  Prices, American Economic Review, 98, 5, 1998-2031
Behrens, K., G. Mion, Y. Murata and J. Südekum, 2014, Trade, wages, and productivity,
  International Economic Review, 55, 4, 1305-48
Berman, N., P. Martin and T. Mayer, 2012, How Do Difference Exporters React to Exchange
  Rate Changes?, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 437-492
Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, B. Jensen and S. S. Kortum, 2003, Plants and Productivity in
  International Trade, American Economic Review, 93, 4, 1268-90
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding and P. K. Schott, 2007, Firms in International
  Trade, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 3, 105-30
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding and P. K. Schott, 2012, The Empirics of Firm
  Heterogeneity and International Trade, Annual Review of Economics, 4, 1, 283-313
Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott, 2011, Multiproduct Firms and Trade Liberal-
  ization, Quarterly journal of economics, 126, 3, 1271-1318
Bertoletti, P. and P. Epifani, 2014, Monopolistic Competition: CES Redux?, Journal of Inter-
  national Economics, 93, 2, 227-38
Bertoletti, P. and F. Etro, 2016a, Monopolistic Competition when Income Matters, The Eco-
  nomic Journal, in press
Bertoletti, P. and F. Etro, 2016b, Preferences, Entry and Market Structure, The RAND Journal
  of Economics, in press
Broda, C., E. Leibtag, and D. E. Weinstein, 2009, The role of prices in measuring the poor’s


                                             47
  living standards, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, 2, 77-97
Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein, 2006, Globalization and the Gains From Variety, Quarterly
  journal of Economics, 121, 2, 541-585
Caliendo, L. and F. Parro, 2015, Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA, Review
 of Economic Studies, 88, 1, 1-44
Chaney, T., 2008, Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
 Trade, American Economic Review, 98, 4, 1701-121
De Loecker, J., P. Goldberg, A. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik, 2015, Prices, Markups and Trade
 Reforms, Econometrica, forthcoming
De Loecker, J. and F. Warzynski, 2012, Markups and Firm-Level Export Status, American
 Economic Review, 102, 2437-71
Dhingra, S. and J. Morrow, 2014, The Impact of Integration on Productivity and Welfare
 Distortions Under Monopolistic Competition, mimeo, L.S.E.
Dingel, J. I., 2015, The Determinants of Quality Specialization, mimeo, Chicago Booth.
Dixit, A. and J. Stiglitz, 1977, Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity,
  American Economic Review, 67, 297-308
Eaton, J., M, Eslava, M. Kugler, and J. Tybout, 2008, The Margins of Entry into Export
  Markets: Evidence from Colombia, in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thiery Verdier
  Eds., The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum, 2002, Technology, Geography, and Trade, Econometrica, 70, 5, 1741-9.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz, 2011, An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence
  From French Firms, Econometrica, 79, 1453-1498
Etro, F., 2015, Endogenous Market Structures and International Trade, Scandinavian Journal
  of Economics, 117, 3, 918-56
Fajgelbaum, P., G. Grossman and E. Helpman, 2011, Income Distribution, Product Quality,
  and International Trade, Journal of Political Economy, 119, 4, 721-65
Feenstra, R., 2003, A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models, with-
  out Constant Price Elasticity, Economics Letters, 78, 1, 79-86
Feenstra, R. C., 2014, Restoring the Product Variety and Pro-competitive Gains from Trade
  with Heterogeneous Firms and Bounded Productivity, WP 19833, NBER
Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. Timmer, 2013, The Next Generation of the Penn World
  Table, WP 19255, NBER
Feenstra, R. C., R. E. Lipsey, H. Deng, A. C. Ma, and H. Mo., 2005, World Trade Flows:
  1962-2000, WP 11040, NBER
Feenstra, R. C. and J. Romalis, 2014, International prices and endogenous quality, Quarterly


                                             48
  Journal of Economics, 129, 2, 477-527
Francois, J. , 2013, Reducing Transatlantic Barriers to Trade and Investment. An Economic
  Assessment (Final Project Report), CEPR, London
Handbury, J. and D. E. Weinstein, 2015, Goods Prices and Availability in Cities, Review of
 Economic Studies, 82, 1, 258-96
Head, K. and T. Mayer, 2014, Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook, Ch. 3 in
 Handbook of International Economics, Gopinath, G, E. Helpman and K. Rogoff (Eds), Vol.
 4, 131-95, Elsevier
Head, K., T. Mayer and J.Ries, 2010, The erosion of colonial trade linkages after independence,
 Journal of International Economics, 81, 1, 1-14
Houthakker, H. S., 1960, Additive Preferences, Econometrica, 28, 2, 244-57
Hummels, D., and P. J. Klenow, 2002, The variety and quality of a nation’s trade, WP 8712,
 NBER
Jaimovich, N. and M. Floetotto, 2008, Firm dynamics, Markup variations, and the Business
  Cycle, Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 1238-1252
Jung, J., I. Simonovska and A. Weinberger, 2015, Exporter Heterogeneity and Price Discrimi-
  nation: A Quantitative View, WP 21408, NBER
Kehoe, T. J. and K. J. Ruhl, 2013, How Important Is the New Goods Margin in International
 Trade?, Journal of Political Economy, 121, 2, 358-392
Krugman, P., 1979, Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition and International Trade,
 Journal of International Economics, 9, 469-79
Krugman, P., 1980, Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade, Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 70, 950-9
Macedoni, L., 2015, The Effect of Per Capita Income on the Product Scope of Exporters,
 mimeo, UC Davis
Mrázová , M. and J.P. Neary, 2013, Not so Demanding: Preference Structure, Firm Behavior,
 and Welfare, mimeo, Oxford
Melitz, M., 2003, The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity, Econometrica, 71, 6, 1695-725
Melitz, M. and G. Ottaviano, 2008, Market Size, Trade, and Productivity, Review of Economic
 Studies 75, 1, 295-316
Muendler, M.-A., 2009, Converter from SITC to ISIC, mimeo, University of California, San
 Diego
Nocco, A., G. Ottaviano and M. Salto, 2014, Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
  Selection, American Economic Review, 104, 5, 304-09
Simonovska, I., 2015, Income Differences and Prices of Tradables: Insights from an Online


                                              49
  Retailer, Review of Economic Studies, 82, 4, 1612-56
Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh, 2014a, The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,
  Journal of International Economics, 92, 1, 34-50
Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh, 2014b, Trade Models, Trade Elasticities, and the Gains from
  Trade, WP 20495, NBER
Varian, H., 1992, Microeconomic Analysis, Third Edition, New York: Norton
Waugh, M. E., 2010, International Trade and Income Differences, American Economic Review,
  100, 2093-2124



Appendix
A     Social Planner Solution with IA Preferences
Consider the Social Planner Problem for the model of Section 2:
                                                                          Z   c
                                                                               b                     
                                                       max             N v (s(c)) dG(c)
                                                   N,b
                                                     c,x(c),s(c)           0
                                                       Z bc                      
                                        s.v.   :   N            cx(c)LdG(c) + Fe = eL,
                                                            0
                                                                v ′ (s(c))
                                        x(c) =         R bc                                 ,
                                                   N    0
                                                              v ′ (s(c)) s(c)dG(c)

where the first is a resource constraint and the second is the demand associated with our preferences.
Combining the two constraints we simplify them to the condition:
                        Z   c
                            b                                                      Z   c
                                                                                       b
                                    ′
                    L           v (s(c)) cdG(c) = (eL − NFe )                              v ′ (s(c)) s(c)dG(c).
                        0                                                          0


Given positive values for N and b
                                c, consider the Lagrangian:
                        Z       c
                                b
                   ℓ=               {v (s(c)) − λv ′ (s(c)) [(eL − NFe ) s(c) − Lc]} g(c)dc.
                            0


Pointwise maximization for s(c) provides:


            v ′ (s(c)) − λv ′′ (s(c)) [(eL − NFe ) s(c) − Lc] − λv ′ (s(c)) (eL − NFe ) = 0,




                                                                   50
which can be rearranged as:

                                                                    λθ(c)Lc
                                             s(c) =
                                                          λ [θ(c) − 1] (eL − NFe ) + 1

after using θ(c) ≡ −v ′′ (s(c))s(c)/v ′ (s(c)), assumed larger than unity. Replacing in the constraint we
have:                 Z                                                               
                             c
                             b
                                  ′                            (eL − NFe ) λθ(c)L
                                 v (s(c)) c L −                                          dG(c) = 0,
                         0                                λ [θ(c) − 1] (eL − NFe ) + 1
which requires that the squared parenthesis is null, or λ = 1/ (eL − NFe ). This implies a linear
optimal price function:
                                                                               Lc
                                                             s(c) =                  .
                                                                            eL − NFe
    Using this, we can consider the residual problem:
                                                Z bc                                                  
                                                                              Lc
                                            max N    v                                             dG(c) .
                                             c,N
                                             b                 0           eL − NFe

Due to the absence of fixed costs of production, it is always optimal to consume any good that provides
positive utility by setting:                                             
                                                                      NFe
                                                        b
                                                        c(N) = ae 1 −       .
                                                                      eL
Therefore, the previous problem simplifies to:
                                                         Z     c(N )
                                                               b                                 
                                                                                  Lc
                                            max N                      v                              dG(c),
                                               N           0                   eL − NFe

whose first order condition is:
                  Z     c(N )
                        b                                                         Z       c(N )
                                                                                          b
                                                    NFe
                                 v (s(c)) dG(c) +                                                 v ′ (s(c)) s(c)dG(c) = 0.
                    0                             eL − NFe                            0

This can be solved for:
                                                                                eL
                                                               N∗ =                     ,
                                                                            Fe (1 + η̄)
where we defined η̄ as a weighted average of the elasticity of the subutility η(s) = −v ′ (s)s/v(s) > 0,
that is:                                Z   c(N ∗ )
                                            b
                                                                                v(s(c))
                                 η̄ ≡                 η (s(c)) R bc(N ∗ )                               dG(c) > 0.
                                        0
                                                                       0
                                                                                v (s(c)) dG(c)
    It follows that the optimal cost cutoff is:

                                                                            aeη̄
                                                               c∗ =
                                                               b                  < ae,
                                                                           1 + η̄

                                                                             51
which implies that an excessive fraction of goods is consumed in equilibrium. Finally, the optimal price
is:                                                                         
                                                              ∗           1
                                                            p (c) = c 1 +      ,
                                                                          η̄
which is linear in the marginal cost.
      Notice that, integration per parts (using the linearity of s(c) and assuming that v(s(0)) is finite)
delivers:
          Z     c(N ∗ )
                b                                                                       Z     c(N ∗ )
                                                                                              b
                                                                              ∗
                           ′
                          v (s(c)) s(c)dG(c) = [v           (s(c)) cg(c)]cb0(N )    −                   v (s(c)) [g(c) + cg ′ (c)] dc
            0                                                                             0

                                                  Z       c(N ∗ )
                                                          b
                                         =−                         v (s(c)) [g(c) + cg ′ (c)] dc,
                                                      0

which allows one to simplify η̄ as:
                                                  R bc(N ∗ )
                                                      0
                                                                  v (s(c)) [g(c) + cg ′ (c)] dc
                                         η̄ =                 R bc(N ∗ )                                 .
                                                                  0
                                                                           v (s(c)) dG(c)

If G is a Pareto distribution we then have g(c) + cg ′ (c) = κg(c), therefore η̄ = κ independently from
the specification of IA preferences.



B        Derivations for the “Addilog” Model
Under our assumption of a Pareto distribution, the prices pij of firms from country i which are actually
active at destination j (i.e., conditional on c ≤ ĉij ) are distributed on the support [aEj /(1 + γ), aEj ]
according to:
                                                                                                                      κ
                                                                    γc + b
                                                                         cij                              (1 + γ) p 1
                    Fj (p) = Pr {pij ≤ p} = Pr                               τij wi ≤ p         =                  −          .
                                                                     1+γ                                    γaEj     γ

This distribution is independent from trade costs and the identity of the exporting country, but depends
on the income of the importing country j . However, the distribution of the normalized prices sij =
                                                                 a
pij /Ej is identical across countries. Namely, on the support [ 1+γ , a] it is given by (42), which depends
only on the three parameters γ , κ and a. The average price in country j can then be easily calculated
as follows:                                 Z                                                   Z
                                                aEj                                                 aEj
                                                                                    aEj
                                E {pj } =       aEj
                                                      pdFj (p) = [pFj (p)] aEj −                    aEj
                                                                                                             Fj (p)dp
                                                                                    1+γ
                                                1+γ                                                 1+γ


                                                           κaEj       aEj
                                                  =             +                ,                                                      (60)
                                                           κ + 1 (γ + 1) (κ + 1)


                                                                           52
which is increasing in income and decreasing in γ .
   To verify the result concerning the distribution of the corresponding markups, notice that they are
distributed on [0, ∞] with:
                                                                                                        
                                                                              1            b
                                                                                           cij − c
                      Fm (m) = Pr {mij ≤ m} = Pr                                                           ≤m
                                                                             1+γ               c
                                                                                                          
                                                                                 G
                                                                                              cbij
                                             b
                                             cij                                           1+(1+γ)m
                            = Pr                     ≤c                      =1−
                                       1 + (1 + γ) m                                    G (b
                                                                                           cij )
                                                                      1
                                                   =1−                         .                                                  (61)
                                                              [1 + (1 + γ) m]κ
The average markup can be calculated as follows:
                                   Z   ∞                                               Z        ∞
                      E {m} =              mdFm (m) =               [mFm (m)]∞
                                                                             0     −                 Fm (m)dm
                                   0                                                        0

                                                                 1
                                                     =                    .
                                                          (γ + 1) (κ − 1)
This value averages low markups by marginal firms (selling virtually nothing) and high markups
by better producers, especially by the extremely productive exporters. Given the skewed distribu-
tion, the median mark-up is also of interest: this can be computed directly from (61) as mM ed =
         
 21/κ − 1 /(1 + γ).
   Furthermore, it is straightforward to derive the distributions of the pass-through and pricing-to-
market elasticities across all producing firms and compute moments from them. Using the Pareto
distribution, the distributions of pass-through and pricing-to-market elasticities, which are the same
across countries and independent from trade cost, satisfy:
                                                         κ                                                            κ
                  c                           ǫ                                                                   1−ǫ
             Pr {ǫ ≤ ǫ} = 1 −                                       and Pr ǫE ≤ ǫ = 1 −                                       ,   (62)
                                           γ(1 − ǫ)                                                                 γǫ

respectively. Given these closed-form distributions, the mean and median values can be easily com-
puted, while the means plus standard deviations can be derived numerically. The average elasticity of
                                       
price with respect to income, E ǫE , is:

                                                      Z      cij                       Z       cij
                           E     b
                                  cij                        b
                                                                    dG(c)      κ               b
                                                                                                      cκ−1
                       E ǫ (c) =                                            = κ−1                             dc
                                 G(b
                                   cij )                 0         γc + b
                                                                        cij  b
                                                                             cij           0         γc + b
                                                                                                          cij
                                           Z   1
                                                                                                  c
                                =κ                 tκ−1 (1 + γt)−1 dt with t ≡
                                           0                                                     b
                                                                                                 cij


                                                                    53
                                                       = F2,1 (1, κ; 1 + κ; −γ),                                        (63)

where F2,1 is the hypergeometric function
                                                                                       Z       1 β−1
                                                 Γ(δ)                                           t    (1 − t)δ−β−1
                         F2,1 (α, β; δ; z) =                                                                      dt,
                                             Γ(β)Γ(δ − β)                                  0        (1 − tz)α

with vector (α, β) = (1, κ), scalar δ = κ + 1 and argument z = −γ ,51 and
                                                                 Z       ∞
                                                       Γ(t) =                z t−1 e−z dz
                                                                     0


is the Euler Gamma function (if the real part of t is positive). The median elasticity of price with
                                                             
respect to income is ǫE
                      M ed = 1/ 1 + γ2
                                       −1/κ
                                            . One can also evaluate a weighted average elasticity with
relative sales as weights, which corresponds to:

                                                                    1+γ+κ
                                                        ǭE =
                                                                 (1 + γ)(1 + κ)

and is higher because more productive firms have larger market shares.
       Finally, to derive the distribution of market shares in the text and to demonstrate that profits are
a constant share of sales which does depend neither on the source country nor on the destination, we
compute the expected value of the exports to country j of a firm based in country i as follows:
                                                                 Z    cij
                                                                      b
                                             E {tij } =                      tij (c)dG(c) =
                                                                  0

                                         Z
                  −γ γ (τij wi )γ+1 Lj           cij
                                                 b                                                 
                =                                             cij − c)γ − γ (γc + b
                                                           γ (b                          cij − c)γ−1 Gi (c)dc
                                                                                  cij ) (b
                  (1 + γ)γ+1 Ejγ |µj |       0
                                                                         Z       cij
                                                                                 b
                                   γ γ+1 aγ+1 Ej Lj
                              =                                                         cij − c)γ−1 cκ+1 dc,
                                                                                       (b
                                                  cγ+1
                                (1 + γ)γ cκ |µj | bij                        0

where we integrated by parts. Changing the variable of integration with t = c/b
                                                                              cij we obtain:
                                                                                   Z
                                        γ γ+1 aγ+1 Ej Lj b
                                                         cκij                              1
                             E {tij } =                                                        (1 − t)γ−1 tκ+1 dt
                                         (1 + γ)γ cκ |µj |                             0

                                                                       κ+1
                                      aκ+γ+1 γ γ+1 B(κ + 2, γ) Lj Ej
                                  =                                            .                                        (64)
                                            (1 + γ)γ cκ       |µj | (τij wi )κ
  51
    In Matlab, however, the Hypergeometric function, hypergeom(a, b, z), corresponds to the generalized Hy-
pergeometric function where a is a vector of “upper parameters”, b is vector of “lower parameters” and z is the
argument. F2,1 (α, β; δ; z) is the special case where a = (α, β) is a 1 by 2 matrix and b = δ is a scalar.



                                                                         54
This allows to derive the average sales and the expression for the market share (46). Similarly, the
expected profit E {πij } in country j for a firm based in country i is given by:

                                Z    cij
                                     b                                                   κ+1
                                                          γ γ κB(κ, γ + 2)aκ+γ+1 Lj Ej
                   E {πij } =              πij (c)dG(c) =                                        .                              (65)
                                 0                              (1 + γ)1+γ cκ   (τij wi )κ |µj |

The ratio of the two aggregate objects is then obtained by the recursive properties of the Euler Beta
function:
                                     E {πij }      κB(κ, γ + 2)        1
                                              =                     =
                                     E {tij }   γ(1 + γ)B(κ + 2, γ)   κ+1


C      Equivalent Variation of Income
Consider the general case of IA preferences. In this case it is convenient to work with the “uncondi-
tional" distribution, Gij (χ), of the marginal cost χ = τij wi c in country j by firms from country i,
which has a support [0, τij wi c] and it is given by:
                                                                                                                    κ
                                             χ                                        χ                        χ
                          Gij (χ) = Pr c ≤                                     = G(        )=                               .
                                           τij wi                                   τij wi                  τij wi c

Let pj (χ) be the equilibrium mapping between marginal costs and prices which only depends on Ej .52
We can then write welfare (26) as:

                                                        I
                                                        X            Z    aWj                  
                                                                                           p
                                           Vj =               Ni                   v                dFij (p)
                                                        i=1              bEj               Wj

                                                    I
                                                    X            Z   χj                    
                                                                                   pj (χ)
                                               =            Ni            v                     dGij (χ)
                                                    i=1          0                  Wj

                                      Z        χj                                     I
                                                                                        X
                                                            pj (χ)                  κ
                                =                   v                     d (χ)               Ni (τij wi c)−κ ,
                                           0                 Wj                         i=1

where Wj = Ej + EVj (see the discussion concerning the definition of the Equivalent Variation EVj
in the text) and χj is defined by the condition pj (χj ) ≡ aWj . Accordingly, taking logs, differentiating
  52
     This is given by (15) for all the varieties actually sold in country j when income is Ej , but it is not uniquely
defined above the cutoff aEj . One can make the mild assumption that pj (χ) is everywhere monotonic and
differentiable: however, in computing the EVj in the "addilog" case we assume that all prices follow the same
pricing rule (35).




                                                                               55
and integrating by parts we obtain :
                                                                               Z       χj                                  
                                                                                                     pj (χ)               κ
                                                d ln Vj = d ln                               v                    d (χ)
                                                                                    0                 Wj
                                                             R χj                      
                                                                               pj (χ)        pj (χ)
                                                         −       0
                                                                      v′        Wj            Wj
                                                                                                    d (χ)κ
                                                    =R χj  pj (χ)         κ
                                                                                d ln Wj
                                                      0
                                                         v    Wj
                                                                      d (χ)
                                                         
                                                  R χj ′ pj (χ) 
                                                 κ 0 v Wj pj (χ)χκ−1 dχ
                                                = R                            d ln Wj
                                                    χj ′ pj (χ)     ′      κ dχ
                                                   0
                                                      v    Wj
                                                                  p j (χ)χ
                                                                                        −1
                               Z                                                   pj (χ)
                                                                           pj (χ)χκ−1
                                                                          v′
                                           χj   p′j (χ)χ                            Wj
                           = κ                                                       dχ d ln Wj
                                       0            pj (χ) R χj v ′ pj (χ) p (χ)χκ−1 dχ
                                                            0        Wj      j

                                                                                       −1
                                   Z           χj                     x
                                                                               pj (χ)
                                                                            pj (χ)χκ−1
                                                                                Wj
                               = κ                 ǫcj (χ) R                         dχ d ln Wj
                                                              χj    pj (χ)          κ−1
                                           0
                                                             0
                                                                 x Wj pj (χ)χ dχ
                                                                                            −1
                                           Z        χj                     x
                                                                                    pj (χ)
                                                                                 pj (χ)χκ−1
                                                                                     Wj
                       = κ 1 −                          ǫE
                                                          j (χ) R χ                        dχ d ln Wj
                                                                         pj (χ)          κ−1
                                                0
                                                                 0
                                                                    j
                                                                      x Wj pj (χ)χ dχ
                                                                               −1
                                                         = κ 1 − ǭE
                                                                   j (Wj , Ej )     d ln Wj ,                                     (66)

where we define
                                                                           ∂ ln pj (χ)
                                                         ǫcj (χ) ≡                     ≡ 1 − ǫE
                                                                                              j (χ),
                                                                             ∂ ln χ
and                                                                                                          
                                                             Z       χj                      x
                                                                                                     pj (χ)
                                                                                                         pj (χ)χκ−1
                                                                                                      Wj
                               ǭE
                                 j   (Wj , Ej ) ≡                         ǫE
                                                                           j (χ) R χ                                   dχ.      (67)
                                                                                                 pj (χ)           κ−1 dχ
                                                                 0
                                                                                         0
                                                                                           j
                                                                                             x    Wj
                                                                                                          p j (χ)χ

      The local approximation in the text, valid for small EVj , can be obtained by letting Wj = Ej
and computing ǭE
                j as a weighted average (with relative sales as weights) of the elasticity of prices with
respect to income, ǫE
                    ij (c) = ∂ ln pij (c)/∂ ln Ej , which explains our notation.
      For the “addilog” functional form we obtain χj = a [(γ + 1) Wj − Ej ] /γ and


                           Z   χj
                                       aEj      {a [(γ + 1) Wj − Ej ] − γχ}γ (γχ + aEj ) χκ−1
      ǭE
        j   (Wj , Ej ) =                     R                                                    dχ                              (68)
                           0         γχ + aEj χj {a [(γ + 1) Wj − Ej ] − γχ}γ (γχ + aEj ) χκ−1 dχ
                                                             0




                                                                                        56
                                          Rχ n              γχ
                                                                       oγ
                                      aEj 0 j 1 − a[(γ+1)W     j −Ej ]
                                                                          χκ−1 dχ
                                =R n                       oγ                    
                                   χj            γχ                κ + aE κ−1 χ dχ
                                  0
                                       1 − a[(γ+1)Wj −Ej ]
                                                                γχ          j
                                                            R1
                                                      aEj      0
                                                                   {1 − t}γ tκ−1 dt
                                           = R1               γ                     
                                                0
                                                    {1 − t}        γχj tκ + aEj tκ−1 dt


                                                    aEj B(κ, γ + 1)
                                       =
                                         γχj B(κ + 1, γ + 1) + aEj B(κ, γ + 1)
                                           (κ + γ + 1) Ej
                                       =                     ,
                                         [κWj + Ej ] (γ + 1)

which gives (49) in the text.



D      Derivation of Value-added Advantage Moment
In this Appendix we demonstrate that the moment that represents the value-added advantage of
exporters is a function of data and parameters estimated in Steps 1 and 2 of the algorithm developed
in the main text. Focus first on the value added of non-exporters and substitute out the mark-up
equation to obtain:                                                                       
                                                               Ei                ĉii
                                                vanx
                                                  i (c)     =                 γ+               .
                                                              1+γ                 c
Taking logs yields:                                                                          
                                                                    Ei                     ĉii
                                    log(vanx
                                          i (c))     = log                       + log γ +        .
                                                                   1+γ                      c
Integrating over all non-exporters yields
                                                                        Z     ĉii                 
                                                Ei             1                               ĉii
                      V   Anx
                           i    = log                    + κ                           log γ +            κcκ−1 dc.
                                               1+γ        ĉii − c̃κij        c̃ij              c

                                                                 c
Apply the following change of variables: tij =                 ĉij
                                                                    .   Then V Anx
                                                                                i becomes:

                                                                        Z      1
                                                 Ei             κ                                   κ−1
                          V   Anx
                               i    = log                  +                           log γ + t−1
                                                                                                ii  tii dtii ,
                                                1+γ          1 − yijκ          yij


where yij is defined in the main text.
    Next, focus on the value added for an exporter. For any exporter from country i with cost draw
c define the following indicator function: δij (c) = 1 if c < ĉij and zero otherwise. Let ∆ij (c) be a
vector of size I with typical element δij (c). Substituting in the equations for firm sales and output,


                                                                    57
the value added for an exporter can then be rewritten as
                                                               PI                Lk (τik wi )1+γ (γc+ĉik )(ĉik −c)γ
                                                          ei         k=1 δik (c)         (1+γ)(wk ek )γ |µk |
                               vaxi (c) =                            PI              τik Lk (τik wi )γ (ĉik −c)γ
                                                                                                                           .
                                                                    c k=1 δik (c)           (wk ek )γ |µk |


Furthermore, substituting in for |µk |, and using the definition of λkk obtains:

                                                            1+γ                PI      
                                                           τik   (ĉik −c)γ λkk Lk ĉik
                                        Ei        δ
                                                k=1 ik (c)      (Ek )γ+κ Sk          c
                            vaxi (c) =       γ+ P              1+γ
                                                                                        .
                                       1+γ       I                          γ
                                                             τik (ĉik −c) λkk Lk
                                                 k=1 δik (c)       (Ek )γ+κ Sk


Taking logs and integrating over all exporters yields
                                                                                        PI                                           
                                                        Z                                              1+γ
                                                                                                        τik  (ĉik −c)γ λkk Lk ĉik
                             Ei                    1               c̃ij
                                                                                            k=1 δik (c)     (Ek )γ+κ Sk          c
        V Axi = log                       +                               log γ + P                                                   κcκ−1 dc.
                            1+γ                   c̃κij        0                    I
                                                                                                  δ   (c)
                                                                                                           1+γ
                                                                                                          τik  (ĉik −c)γ λkk Lk
                                                                                              k=1  ik         (Ek )γ+κ Sk

                                                                        c
Applying the change of variables, tij =                               ĉij
                                                                           ,   V Axi becomes:

                                                                               PI                                                 γ        
                                        Z       yij                                    δ (ĉ  t   )     λkk Lk
                                                                                                                      1 − t  Ei τik      1
                   Ei                                                                k=1 ik ii ii (Ek )κ−1 Sk              ii Ek       tii Ei
V Axi = log                 + κyij−κ                      log γ +                   PI                                              γ  tκ−1 ii dtii .
                  1+γ                                                                                      τik λkk Lk          Ei τik
                                                                                        k=1 δik (ĉii tii ) (Ek )κ Sk   1 − tii Ek
                                              0



Taking the difference between exporters and non-exporters yields the desired moment H2 :
                                                                         PI                                                    γ
                                Z                                                                λkk Lk
                                                                                                                  tii EEi τkik1
                                                                               k=1 δ̃ik (tii ) (Ek )κ−1 Sk 1−
                                        yij
                                                                                                                            tii Ei
       H2 (P, Λ) = κyij−κ                     log γ +                         PI                                         γ  tκ−1 ii dtii
                                                                                                τik λkk Lk          Ei τik
                                    0
                                                                                k=1 δ̃ik (tii )       κ
                                                                                                (Ek ) Sk
                                                                                                            1 − tii  Ek

                                                                           Z     1
                                                       κ                                          κ−1
                                                  −                                  log γ + t−1
                                                                                              ii  tii dtii ,                                        (69)
                                                    1 − yijκ                   yij

where the dependence on P and Λ is made explicit. In the above expression, δ̃ik is a transformation
                                                                           ˜ ik depend on P and Λ.
of δik that only depends on P and Λ. Thus, it remains to show that tii and ∆
This argument can be found in the description of the simulation algorithm.



E     Data Appendix
E.1     Gravity Equation
The description below follows closely the work of Simonovska and Waugh (2014a).



                                                                                       58
To construct trade shares, we used bilateral trade flows and production data as follows:

                                                    Importsij
                         λij =                                                  ,
                                   Gross Mfg. Productionj − Exportsj + Importsj
                                       I
                                       X
                         λjj = 1 −            λkj .
                                       k6=j


To construct λij , the numerator is the aggregate value of manufactured goods that country j imports
from country i. Bilateral trade-flow data are for year 2004 from the update to Feenstra et al. (2005),
who use UN Comtrade data. We obtain all bilateral trade flows for our sample of 123 countries at
the four-digit SITC level. We then used concordance tables between four-digit SITC and three-digit
ISIC codes provided by the UN and further modified by Muendler (2009).53 We restrict our analysis
to manufacturing bilateral trade flows only—namely, those that correspond with manufacturing as
defined in ISIC Rev.#2.
       The denominator is gross manufacturing production minus manufactured exports (for only the
sample) plus manufactured imports (for only the sample). Gross manufacturing production data are
the most serious data constraint we faced. We obtain manufacturing production data for 2004 from
UNIDO for a large sub-sample of countries. We then imputed gross manufacturing production for
countries for which data are unavailable as follows. We first obtain 2004 data on manufacturing
(MVA) and agriculture (AVA) value added, as well as population size (L) and GDP for all countries in
the sample. We then impute the gross output (GO) to manufacturing value added ratio for the missing
countries using coefficients resulting from the following regression:
                            
                      MV A
            log                  = β0 + β GDP CGDP + β L CL + β M V A CM V A + β AV A CAV A + ǫ,
                      GO

where βx is a 1 × 3 vector of coefficients corresponding to Cx , an N × 3 matrix which contains
[log(x), (log(x))2 , (log(x))3 ] for the sub-sample of N countries for which gross output data are avail-
able. Data on geographic barriers (distance, shared border, official common language, colonial rela-
tionship, common currency and RTA) are from Head et al. (2010). Data on population size for year
2004 is from the World Development Indicators. Data on per-capita income is from Feenstra et al.
(2013) (Penn World Tables 8.0).
  53
    The trade data often report bilateral trade flows from two sources. For example, the exports of country A
to country B can appear in the UN Comtrade data as exports reported by country A or as imports reported
by country B. In this case, we take the report of bilateral trade flows between countries A and B that yields a
higher total volume of trade across the sum of all SITC four-digit categories.




                                                        59
E.2        Prices
We use price data from the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) data. The EIU surveys the prices of
individual goods across various cities in two types of retail stores: mid-priced, or branded stores, and
supermarkets, or chain stores. The dataset contains the nominal prices of goods and services, reported
in local currency, as well as nominal exchange rates relative to the US dollar, which are recorded at
the time of the survey. The database spans a subset of 71 countries from our original data set, but
provides prices for 110 individual tradable goods. While in the majority of the countries, price surveys
are conducted in a single major city, in 17 of the 71 countries multiple cities are surveyed.54 For these
countries, we use the price data from the city which provided the maximum coverage of goods. In
most instances, the location that satisfied this requirement was the largest city in the country. We use
prices collected in mid-priced stores in the year 2004 and we combine them with the observations on
trade and output from the benchmark analysis.55
       Furthermore, we construct indicators for countries that are landlocked or islands using Google
Maps. Finally, to compute the average tariff for each importer, we obtain applied tariffs (minimum of
MFN and effective tariff) for year 2004 at the SITC-4-digit level for each country-pair in the dataset
from Feenstra and Romalis (2014). For each importer, we compute the average tariff as the mean tariff
across products and sources, weighted by source- and product-specific imports.



F        Aggregate moments and the margins of trade
F.1        Aggregate moments
In this section, we present the model’s fit to aggregate moments. The model generates per-
capita income levels that are at par with the data. In particular, the model falls somewhat
short of the mean per-capita income level among 123 countries, but it yields a higher variance.
Despite the dispersion, the model’s predictions line up with the data, as the correlation of
the predicted and actual per-capita income among 123 countries is 0.87 (in logs). Figure 3
gives a visual representation of the model’s fit along the income dimension. While countries
line up along the 45-degree line, which represents a perfect fit, the model underpredicts the
income levels of the poorest set of countries. Since per-capita incomes are chosen so as to
match observed trade flows in the market clearing equation, this result may be due to the fact
that these countries have relatively low import and export shares, even conditional on trade
barrier levels. This would suggest that these countries may simply be plagued by very low
  54
     These countries are Australia, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, United Kingdom, USA, and Vietnam.
  55
     The results are robust to using supermarket price data for the same year.



                                                     60
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                            corr(log Ê, logE) = 0.87∗∗∗                                  JPN




                         Model: Income per person (log), US=0
                                                                                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                                                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                                                                    KOR DEUSWE
                                                                                                                                                                           BEL
                                                                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                                                                                         ITADNK
                                                                                                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                                                                     SWZ         MYS SVNCAN   NOR
                                                                                                   0                                                               CZE    GBR
                                                                                                                                                                        NZL
                                                                                                                                                                  HUN ESP
                                                                                                                                                                           USA
                                                                                                                                                                             ISL
                                                                                                                                                                      ISR AUS
                                                                                                                                                                 SVK PRT
                                                                                                                                                         THA CHL
                                                                                                                                                               POLEST BRN
                                                                                                                                                     CHN BRA ZAF
                                                                                                                                                           ARG    HRV
                                                                                                                                                                MEX
                                                                                                                                                                LTU
                                                                                                                                                              TUR     GRC
                                                                                                                                                   IDN BLR     LVA
                                                                                           −2                                                             ROMMUS
                                                                                                                                                           RUS
                                                                                                                                                            URY
                                                                                                                                                          BGR
                                                                                                                                                          NAM
                                                                                                                                                          TUN      SAUCYP
                                                                                                                                                    UKRPER
                                                                                                                                                  PHL   MKD VEN
                                                                                                                                             LSO         KAZ
                                                                                                                                                           FJI
                                                                                                                                                         BIH
                                                                                                                                                       JOR
                                                                                                                                                      MAR         GNQ
                                                                                                                                            VNMCIVLKA
                                                                                                                                                  ARM COL GAB
                                                                                                                                             PAK                  OMN
                                                                                                                                          LAOMDACMR
                                                                                                                                              IND  PRY ECU BWALBN
                                                                                           −4                                            BGD
                                                                                                                                        TJK
                                                                                                                                       MOZ ZMB BTN
                                                                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                                                                 BOL
                                                                                                                                          KGZ           IRN
                                                                                                                                                    SYR
                                                                                                                                                  GEO
                                                                                                                                       NPL SEN STP COG
                                                                                                                                          KEN    AZE  CPV
                                                                                                                                             GHA
                                                                                           −6                                        MWI
                                                                                                                                            COM
                                                                                                                                             MRT
                                                                                                                                         BFA DJI
                                                                                                                                        TGO
                                                                                                                                         GMB
                                                                                                                                   BDIRWA
                                                                                                                                       CAF
                                                                                                                                       UGATCD
                                                                                                                                  ZAR    TZA
                                                                                                                                            SDN
                                                                                                                                             NGA
                                                                                           −8                                      ETH
                                                                                                                                           BEN
                                                                                                                                          GIN
                                                                                                                                           MLI AGO

                                                                                                                                            GNB
                                                                        −10
                                                                          −10       −8       −6       −4        −2         0          2
                                                                         Per capita GDP, current USD (2004), expenditure side (log), US=0


              Figure 3: Predicted VS. Actual Per-Capita Income, 123 Countries

                                                                                                       1
                                                                Predicted bilateral trade shares




                                                                                                   0.8             corr(λ̂, λ) = 0.913∗∗∗




                                                                                                   0.6


                                                                                                   0.4


                                                                                                   0.2


                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                        0               0.2             0.4         0.6                  0.8        1
                                                                                                                                    Bilateral trade shares


                  Figure 4: Predicted VS. Actual Trade Shares, 123 Country Pairs

productivities.
   Figure 4 plots (non-zero) predicted against actual bilateral trade shares for all country pairs.
A large cluster of bilateral trade shares can be seen around the origin representing the fact that,
for the majority of countries, each individual destination accounts for a tiny fraction of its total
sales. On the other hand, large numbers that are dispersed around the top right corner mostly
capture domestic expenditure shares. Despite the large variation in trade shares, the model
can match the cross-section of trade shares quite well due to the flexible specification for trade
costs in the structural gravity equation.



                                                                                                                                            61
F.2    The Margins of Trade
In this section, we quantify the model’s predictions about the extensive and intensive margin
of trade. Recall from (54) that the model predicts that the elasticity of the extensive margin
with respect to destination per-capita income equals κ, while the same elasticity with respect
to trade costs equals −κ. Since trade barriers are increasing in distance, our model’s predicted
elasticity with respect to distance is necessarily negative.

                                  Table 5: Predicted US Ex-
                                  tensive Margin of Trade
                                                          (1)
                                    Log(pcincome)     2.779***
                                                       (0.117)
                                    Log(L)              0.046
                                                       (0.073)
                                    Log(distance)     -1.890***
                                                       (0.294)
                                    R2                   0.93
                                    # Observations        61
                                  Notes: All variables relative to
                                  Mexico—the most popular US
                                  export destination in terms of
                                  number of exported products.
                                  *** indicate significance at 1%-
                                  level. Standard errors in paren-
                                  theses.

   In Table 5, we quantify the elasticity with respect to distance. Since the extensive margin
in the model is source-destination specific, we focus on the US as a source country. We regress
the predicted extensive margin on destination per-capita income, size, and distance from the
US, all in logs. The estimated elasticities with respect to the three variables are 2.8, 0.05, and
-1.9, respectively, and only the first and the last are statistically significant. The coefficients
on per-capita income and distance are consistent with the findings in Bernard et al. (2007) for
US data. In particular, the authors document that the elasticity of the number of exported
products by US exporters with respect to destination GDP is 0.52 and with respect to distance
is -1.06. While the authors do not decompose the elasticity with respect to GDP into the two
components: per-capita income and population size, our model suggests that the positive slope
in the data may be due to the per-capita income component.
    Along the intensive margin dimension, the model predicts that, controlling for aggregate
effects, (i) the elasticity of the intensive margin with respect to destination GDP is 1; (ii) the
elasticity of the intensive margin with respect to destination per-capita income is −κ, or −2.8
given our estimate. Accordingly, in our model the intensive margin of trade is increasing in

                                                62
a destination’s overall GDP and decreasing in the destination’s per-capita income, which can
reconcile findings in Eaton et al. (2011). Eaton et al. (2011) find that the intensive margin
(defined as average per-firm sales) is increasing in destination GDP and either increasing or
decreasing in destination per-capita GDP depending on the source country analyzed.


G     Additional Tables

                           Table 6: Gravity equation: Estimates

                      Barrier                     Parameter Estimates   S.E
                      Log distance                       -1.30          0.03
                      Border shared                      0.75           0.11
                      Official Common Language           1.06           0.06
                      Colonial Relationship              1.35           0.08
                      Common Currency                    -0.08          0.15
                      RTA                                0.48           0.06
                      Internal trade                     1.46           0.22
                      # Observations                    15,129
                      TSS                              160,320
                      SSR                               27,694
                      σν2                                2.67




                                                 63
     Table 7: Gravity equation:   Estimates
     Country                        Ŝi  S.E     exi    S.E.   Country                Ŝi   S.E     exi    S.E.   Country                  Ŝi   S.E     exi    S.E.
     Angola                       -1.03 0.2     -2.62   0.33   Fiji                 -0.47   0.19   -2.32    0.3   Nepal                   0.42   0.22   -2.83   0.31
     Argentina                     1.01 0.17     2.63   0.23   Finland               0.96   0.16    2.41   0.22   New Zealand            -0.38   0.16    3.45   0.23
     Armenia                       0.67 0.19    -3.58   0.28   France                0.33   0.15    5.19   0.21   Nigeria                -0.66   0.19   -1.44   0.28
     Australia                     0.15 0.16     3.78   0.22   Gabon                -0.94   0.18   -1.81   0.26   Norway                  0.14   0.16    2.24   0.22
     Austria                       0.23 0.15     3.01   0.22   Gambia, The          -2.07   0.21   -3.01   0.32   Oman                    -0.3   0.18   -0.49   0.25
     Azerbaijan                   -0.17 0.19    -2.52   0.27   Georgia               -3.1   0.18    1.37   0.26   Pakistan                0.77   0.15    1.61   0.22
     Bangladesh                   0.79 0.17      0.42   0.23   Germany               0.21   0.15    5.95   0.21   Paraguay                0.01   0.19   -0.68   0.27
     Belarus                       1.12 0.17    -0.66   0.24   Ghana                -1.07    0.2   -0.10   0.28   Peru                    0.38   0.17    1.32   0.24
     Belgium                      -2.08 0.15     7.55   0.21   Greece                0.45   0.16    1.23   0.22   Philippines            -0.33   0.17    2.60   0.23
     Benin                        -0.56 0.21    -3.93   0.34   Guinea               -1.53   0.21   -2.62   0.31   Poland                  0.61   0.15    2.20   0.22
     Bhutan                        0.19 0.28    -5.04   0.41   Guinea-Bissau        -0.47   0.27   -5.60   0.45   Portugal               -0.34   0.16    2.99   0.22
     Bolivia                       0.26 0.18    -1.60   0.27   Hungary               0.66   0.16    1.39   0.22   Romania                 0.33   0.16    1.26   0.22
     Bosnia and Herzegovina        0.72 0.22    -2.84   0.31   Iceland              -0.27   0.17   -0.53   0.25   Russian Federation        1    0.16    2.74   0.22
     Botswana                      1.27 0.24    -4.36   0.35   India                 1.19   0.15    3.02   0.24   Rwanda                  0.42   0.23   -5.68   0.35
     Brazil                        1.13 0.15     3.99   0.22   Indonesia             1.16   0.16    3.44   0.22   Sierra Leone            -0.8   0.27   -4.04   0.39
     Brunei Darussalam             1.76 0.24    -5.36   0.35   Iran, Islamic Rep.    0.68    0.2   -0.18   0.27   Saudi Arabia            0.52   0.19    1.05   0.26
     Bulgaria                      0.03 0.16     0.92   0.23   Ireland              -3.14   0.15    6.26   0.22   Senegal                -0.57   0.16   -1.20   0.24
     Burkina Faso                  0.46 0.19    -4.36   0.29   Israel                0.89   0.17    1.10   0.23   Slovak Republic         -0.5   0.16    1.70   0.22
64




     Burundi                       -1.5 0.19    -3.19   0.32   Italy                 0.26   0.15    5.18   0.22   Slovenia                0.77   0.17    0.30   0.23
     Cameroon                      1.79  0.2    -3.91   0.29   Japan                 1.22   0.15    5.47   0.22   South Africa            0.51   0.15    3.42   0.22
     Canada                       -0.01 0.15     4.06   0.22   Jordan               -0.17   0.17   -0.84   0.24   Spain                   0.18   0.15    4.30   0.21
     Cape Verde                   -0.44 0.2     -4.83   0.36   Kazakhstan            0.19   0.17    0.13   0.25   Sri Lanka               -0.1   0.17    0.57   0.24
     Central African Republic      0.6   0.24   -4.89   0.35   Kenya                 -0.2   0.16   -0.75   0.22   Sudan                  -0.09    0.2   -3.59   0.3
     Chad                          0.66 0.23    -6.61   0.39   Korea, Rep.           0.77   0.15    4.91   0.21   Swaziland               2.48   0.23   -4.00   0.31
     Chile                         0.29 0.18     1.98   0.25   Kyrgyz Republic       0.05   0.19   -2.96   0.28   Sweden                 0.63    0.15    3.58   0.22
     China                         0.89 0.15     6.23   0.22   Lao PDR               1.23   0.26   -3.56   0.34   Switzerland             0.09   0.18    3.70   0.26
     Colombia                      0.23 0.16     0.77   0.23   Latvia               -0.42   0.18   -0.12   0.25   Syrian Arab Republic   -0.35   0.18   -0.90   0.25
     Comoros                       -0.8 0.26    -4.74    0.4   Lebanon               0.58   0.19   -2.24   0.26   Tajikistan              1.09   0.24   -3.14   0.33
     Congo, Dem. Rep.             -0.66 0.23    -2.31   0.33   Lesotho               1.64   0.29   -6.35   0.42   Tanzania               -0.69   0.21   -2.07   0.3
     Congo, Rep.                  -0.82 0.2     -1.36   0.29   Lithuania              0.7    0.2   -0.95   0.28   Thailand                0.55   0.19    4.19   0.26
     Côte d’Ivoire                 0.96  0.2    -1.60   0.28   Macedonia, FYR        0.15   0.18   -2.22   0.26   Togo                   -1.22   0.17   -1.77   0.26
     Croatia                       0.76 0.16    -0.68   0.23   Malawi               -0.17   0.18   -3.50   0.27   Tunisia                 0.52   0.16   -0.65   0.23
     Cyprus                       -0.83 0.17     0.34   0.23   Malaysia             -1.04   0.15    6.19   0.22   Turkey                  0.63   0.16    2.95   0.22
     Czech Republic               0.24 0.15     2.38    0.22   Mali                 -0.95   0.22   -2.73    0.3   Uganda                  -0.4   0.17   -2.81   0.25
     Denmark                       -0.4 0.16     3.95   0.22   Mauritania           -1.97   0.22   -1.78   0.31   Ukraine                 1.11   0.19    1.47   0.27
     Djibouti                     -1.85 0.23    -2.72   0.37   Mauritius            -1.07   0.17    0.32   0.23   United Kingdom         -0.21   0.15    5.44   0.21
     Ecuador                      -0.31 0.17     0.23   0.25   Mexico                0.21   0.15    2.58   0.23   United States           0.13   0.15    6.73   0.21
     Egypt, Arab Rep.              0.28 0.16     0.94   0.22   Moldova              -0.65   0.18   -1.79   0.28   Uruguay                -0.56   0.19    1.52   0.25
     Equatorial Guinea             0.6   0.23   -4.50   0.38   Morocco              -0.06   0.16    0.67   0.22   Venezuela, RB           0.61   0.18   -0.39   0.25
     Estonia                      -1.72 0.16     1.58   0.23   Mozambique           -0.36   0.21   -1.69   0.31   Vietnam                -0.62    0.2    3.02   0.27
     Ethiopia                     -0.58 0.2     -2.34   0.29   Namibia               1.15   0.22   -3.83   0.31   Zambia                 -3.61   0.17    1.79   0.26
     Table 8: 2004 EIU Data, List        of 110 Tradable Goods
     Product Name                         Product Name                              Product Name
     White bread, 1 kg                    Ham: whole (1 kg)                         Business shirt, white
     Butter, 500 g                        Chicken: frozen (1 kg)                    Men’s shoes, business wear
     Margarine, 500g                      Chicken: fresh (1 kg)                     Bacon (1 kg)
     White rice, 1 kg                     Frozen fish fingers (1 kg)                Men’s raincoat, Burberry type
     Spaghetti (1 kg)                     Fresh fish (1 kg)                         Socks, wool mixture
     Flour, white (1 kg)                  Instant coffee (125 g)                    Dress, ready to wear, daytime
     Sugar, white (1 kg)                  Ground coffee (500 g)                     Women’s shoes, town
     Cheese, imported (500 g)             Tea bags (25 bags)                        Women’s cardigan sweater
     Cornflakes (375 g)                   Cocoa (250 g)                             Women’s raincoat, Burberry type
     Yoghurt, natural (150 g)             Drinking chocolate (500 g)                Tights, panty hose
     Milk, pasteurized (1 l)              Coca-Cola (1 l)                           Child’s jeans
     Olive oil (1 l)                      Tonic water (200 ml)                      Child’s shoes, dresswear
     Peanut or corn oil (1 l)             Mineral water (1 l)                       Child’ s shoes, sportswear
     Potatoes (2 kg)                      Orange juice (1 l)                        Girl’s dress
     Onions (1 kg)                        Wine, common table (1 l)                  Boy’s jacket, smart
     Mushrooms (1 kg)                     Wine, superior quality (700 ml)           Compact disc album
     Tomatoes (1 kg)                      Wine, fine quality (700 ml)               Television, colour (66 cm)
     Carrots (1 kg)                       Beer, top quality (330 ml)                Kodak colour film (36 exposures)
     Oranges (1 kg)                       Scotch whisky, six years old (700 ml)     International foreign daily newspaper
65




     Apples (1 kg)                        Gin, Gilbey’s or equivalent (700 ml)      International weekly news magazine (Time)
     Lemons (1 kg)                        Vermouth, Martini & Rossi (1 l)           Paperback novel (at bookstore)
     Bananas (1 kg)                       Cognac, French VSOP (700 ml)              Personal computer (64 MB)
     Lettuce (one)                        Liqueur, Cointreau (700 ml)               Low priced car (900-1299 cc)
     Eggs (12)                            Soap (100 g)                              Compact car (1300-1799 cc)
     Peas, canned (250 g)                 Laundry detergent (3 l)                   Family car (1800-2499 cc)
     Tomatoes, canned (250 g)             Toilet tissue (two rolls)                 Deluxe car (2500 cc upwards)
     Peaches, canned (500 g)              Dishwashing liquid (750 ml)               Regular unleaded petrol (1 l)
     Sliced pineapples, canned (500 g)    Insect-killer spray (330 g)               Cost of six tennis balls eg Dunlop, Wilson
     Beef: filet mignon (1 kg)            Light bulbs (two, 60 watts)
     Beef: steak, entrecote (1 kg)        Batteries (two, size D/LR20)
     Beef: stewing, shoulder (1 kg)       Frying pan (Teflon or good equivalent)
     Beef: roast (1 kg)                   Electric toaster (for two slices)
     Beef: ground or minced (1 kg)        Aspirins (100 tablets)
     Veal: chops (1 kg)                   Razor blades (five pieces)
     Veal: fillet (1 kg)                  Toothpaste with fluoride (120 g)
     Veal: roast (1 kg)                   Facial tissues (box of 100)
     Lamb: leg (1 kg)                     Hand lotion (125 ml)
     Lamb: chops (1 kg)                   Shampoo & conditioner in one (400 ml)
     Lamb: Stewing (1 kg)                 Lipstick (deluxe type)
     Pork: chops (1 kg)                   Cigarettes, Marlboro (pack of 20)
     Pork: loin (1 kg)                    Business suit, two piece, medium weight
