                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   WHY WAS THERE MANDATORY RETIREMENT?

                                    OR

                           THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF
                       EFFICIENT BONDING CONTRACTS



                                Kevin Lang




                          Working Paper No. 2199




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                March 1987




This research was supported by an Olin Fellowship at the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Many of the ideas in this paper were generated
in the èourse of conversations with Shulamit Kahn concerning a related
paper (Kahn and Lang, 1986). I am grateful fo Larry Katz for pointing
out a significant oversight in the previous draft and to Bob Gibbons,
Alan Krueger, Edward Lazear, and Larry Summers for helpful discussions.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2199
                                                  March 1987




                   Why Was There Mandatory Retirement?

            or the Impossiblity of Efficient Bonding Contracts



                                 ABSTRACT



    Lazear has argued that hours constraints, in general, and mandatory

retirement, in particular, form part of an efficient labor market contract

designed to increase output by inhibiting worker shirking. Since the

contract is efficient, legislative interference is welfare reducing.

However, in any case where bonding is costly, the hours constraints will not

be chosen optimally. Although it is theoretically possible that bonding is

costless, in this case the earnings profile is indeterminate and we should

never observe monitoring aimed at reducing shirking. It therefore appears

that bonding should be modelled as costly. If so, the role of policy

depends on the source of bonding costs, the set of feasible contracts and

the policy options which are available to government.



                                        Kevin Lang
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of California
                                        Irvine, CA 92717

                                        (714) 856-6205
     Lazear (1979, 1981) has argued that hours constraints, in general, and

mandatory retirement, in particular, form part of an efficient labor market

contract designed to increase output by inhibiting worker shirking. In

effect, workers post bonds (perhaps in the form of low initial wages)

against malfeasance which are returned to them in the form of higher wages

later in the work relation. Workers who are caught shirking are fired and

forfeit the bond. Since wages deviate from the value of marginal product,

the contract must specify hours as well as wages. If Lazear is correct,

since the contract is efficient, legislative interference is welfare

reducing. Yet, Congress has recently passed a law making mandatory

retirement illegal in most cases.

     The Lazear agency model has received considerable attention in the

literature for two reasons. First, there is some evidence that wages rise

faster than productivity (Medoff and Abraham, 1980), and the Lazear agency

model offers an explanation for this finding. Secondly, unlike the shirking

based efficiency wage model (Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984; Rulow and Summers,

1986), the contracts discussed by Lazear are first-best efficient.

Researchers who are sceptical about the efficiency wage literature

(Carmichael, 1985, 1986) have pointed to the efficiency of the Lazear

solution as evidence against the efficiency wage model. Proponents of the

efficiency wage model (Akerlof and Katz, 1986) have regarded the possibility

of such contracts as a serious challenge.

     The major point of this paper is that in any case where bonding is

costly, bonding contracts will not be first best efficient. In particular,

the hours constraints will not be chosen optimally. Although it is

theoretically possible that bonding is costless, the case of costless

bonding is not particularly interesting since the earnings profile is
                                                                            2

indeterminate, and it is no longer possible to make a strong case that wages

rise faster than productivity. As a consequence the bonding/efficiency

wage debate appears less significant than its participants appear to

believe.

     The basic argument is quite simple. If the labor market clears, as it

will in a bonding model, a firm which raises the work requirement by an hour

must increase compensation by the monetized marginal disutility of an hour's

employment. With reasonable restrictions on the relation between disutility

of effort on the job and probability of being caught on the one hand, and

hours of employment, on the other, it can be shown that it will also have to

increase the size of the "bond" that workers are required to post. Since,

as argued below, bonding is costly, the cost to the firm of increasing work

by an hour exceeds the marginal disutility of an hour's employment to the

worker. Consequently, firms will set hours at a level at which the value of

marginal product exceeds the marginal disutility to the worker, and

contracts will not be first-best efficient.

     To complete the sketch of the proof, we need merely establish that

bonding is costly. There are two reasons for believing that bonding is

costly. The first is theoretical: as Lazear, himself, notes, the wage

profile is indeterminate unless bonding is costly. Thus unless bonding is

costly, the bonding model has little or no predictive power. The second

reason is empirical: Dickens, Katz and Lang (1986) point out that unless

bonding is costly at the margin, firms will rot engage in any monitoring but

instead will deter shirking solely by setting large bonds. Since we observe

that firms do engage in monitoring, bonding must be costly at the margin.
                                                                              3

      It should be noted that the term "costly" is used quite generally.

Bonding may be costly for a number of reasons including but not limited to

the need to pay outside agents to monitor the contract, differences in

discount rates between workers and firms and the potential for firm default.

      I show below that, at least for some sources of costly bonding, hours

will be set below their optimal level and that mandatory retirement will

occur too early. This is consistent with work by Kahn and Lang (1986) and

Dickens and Lundberg (1985) which shows that workers wages frequently exceed

their marginal value of leisure. The role of policy depends on the source

of bonding costs, the set of feasible contracts and the policy options which

are available to government.



I. The Basic Model

      Let us begin by considering a simple two-period model. In the first

period, the worker is employed and receives a wage. Second period payment.

is conditional on not shirking in the first period. Since second period

compensation cannot be made conditional on not shirking, all workers will

shirk in the second period. Consequently, the second period takes the form

of a pension, P. Assume that the size of the pension (appropriately

discounted) which is returned to the worker if he does not shirk depends on

the size of the initial bond but that the increase is less than one for one.

Under these circumstances, the no shirk condition is given by



(1)       w -    e(h) + P(b)   w +   (l-q(h))P(b)
or

(2)       P(b)     e(h)/q(h)
                                                                             4



where w is the wage, e is the disutility of effort on the job (value of

shirking), h is the number of hours worked, b is. the bond and q is the

probability of shirking being detected,' and 0   P' < 1.   It seems

reasonable to assume that e'>O and that e' 'O, that is that the marginal

disutility of effort on the job is always positive and that it is

nondecreasing in hours worked. The probability of detection, q, is assumed

to follow a Poisson process with constant arrival probability over any

period of a given length. As a consequence, q''CO.2

      It is worth noting that under these assumptions, the no shirking

constraint can be inverted to give a maximum hours constraint



(3)        h h*(P(b))



which says simply that for any pension level, there is a maimum number of

hours the worker can be employed without shirking. The no shirking

constraint and the maximum hours constraint are identical so that if the no

shirking constraint is binding so is the maximum hours constraint. The

maximum hours form of the no shirking constraint is useful for the

multiperiod model.

      The firm maximizes profits, iv,




(4)       ,rtv(h) -w


where v is the value of the worker's output. It is assumed that v'>O and

that v''O. The firm maximizes (4) subject to the no shirking constraint
                                                                              5

and the constraint that the expected value of the job to the worker must

reach the competitive level. Denote the monetized value of not working at

the firm (i.e. the value of leisure or of alternative employment) as s(h).

The firm must offer at least the competitive value of employment so that



(5)       w -   e(h)   -
                           s(h)   -   b + P(b)   0


where s is the shadow value of time, which may be the value of leisure or

the value of alternative employment. The term P(b)-b, can be thought of as

the cost of the bond or pension. Presentation is somewhat simplified if

equation (5) is rewritten as



(6)       w -   e(h)   -
                           s(h)   -
                                      c(P)


where c(P) is the cost of the pension.

      A seemingly critical issue is whether the firm can steal the bond. If

the firm may, under certain circumstances choost to pocket the bond, then

profits will depend on the probability that the firm will steal the bond and

the size of the bond. In what follows, it is assumed that for a given size

of bond, the firm knows in advance whether it will be more profitable to

honor the commitment or simply steal the bond. If firms are heterogeneous

with respect to the level of the bond at which it becomes profitable for

them to steal rather than honor the commitment, workers will discount the

bond by the probability that it will be stolen. P(b) can be thought of as

the expected bond repayment. Thus this formulation is quite general. The

results are not fundamentally different although somewhat more complicated
                                                                                      6

if the firms does not know in advance whether it will cheat and thus must

take account of the possible value of cheating.

      Under these assumptions, the firm maximizes profits subject to the no

shirking constraint (2) and the minimum job value constraint (5).

Substituting the constraints into (4) yields



(7)          —   v(h)       -
                                 e(h)    -
                                             s(h)   -
                                                        c[e(h)/q(h)]


Maximizing (7) with respect to hours gives the first order condition



(8)       v' -    e'    -       s'      c'(e'/q -       eq'/q2).


The restrictions on e'' and q'' are sufficient to ensure that the right hand

side of (8) is positive so that hours are chosen so that vmp exceeds the

marginal disutility of employment.3 Whether this departure from the

"standar& efficiency condition has any significance for policy depends on

whether in some way government can effect thet marginal cost of bonding. If

not, the contract is constrained efficient.

      It will also be the case that workers will feel constrained to work

fewer hours than they desire. To see this note that the profit maximizing

firm will hire workers until the point that the wage equals vmp. Since

v' '<0, the hourly wage (w/h=v/h) is at least as great as v' and thus greater

than the marginal disutility of employment giver, by e'+s' .           As a result,

workers will desire more hours.

      Hours constraints are binding in this model despite the fact that the

wage equals the value of marginal product. Thus, contrary to the model of
                                                                                      7


first best efficient contracts developed by Lazear, divergence of VMP and

wages is not necessary for the existence ofhours constraints.

       It is important to note that market clearing is essential to this

result. To see this, consider an efficiency wage model designed to parallel

the bonding model just developed. The firm offers a pension, P, conditional

on the worker not being caught shirking and maximizes profits subject to the

no shirking constraint (2). Since (5) is not binding, it sets w equal to

zero so that profits are given by



(9)            — v(h)   -   P   -
                                    c(P)   — v(h) -   e(h)/q(h)   -
                                                                      c[e(h)/q(h)J.


Maximizing (9) with respect to (h) gives the first order condition



(10)       v' a (l+c)(e'/q -               eq'/q2.)


There is no determinate relation between the right hand side of (10) and the

marginal disutility of employment. Consequently, in an efficiency wage

model, the choice of hours may be greater than or less than the first best

efficient level. Similarly, if workers view their hourly wage as P/h. it is

indeterminate whether workers will want to work more or less than determined

by the firm.

       It is worth noting that this conclusion contrasts sharply with Bulow

and Summers (1986) who argue that in an efficiency wage model, firms will

prevent workers from being employed part-time. In essence, Bulow and

Summers assume that both e'' and q'' equal zero. If this assumption were

correct, the firm would set hours until either v' equalled zero or the
                                                                               B

worker's time endowment was exhausted. It seems likely that in either

event, the hours chosen would be quite high and that therefore s(h) would be

sufficiently high to make the labor market constraint binding. In effect,

it is probable that under the Bulow/Sununers assumption, firms would clear

the market by setting very high work hours. However, as noted above, q''—O

is not a natural assumption. Therefore, it appears that the efficiency wage

model does not make any strong predictions about the nature of hours

constraints.



II. The multi-Deriod model

       When the model is extended to many periods, we require more structure

so that it is necessary to assume a particular reason for bonding being

costly. In this section I assume that the cost arises from workers having

higher discount rates than firms. Bonding will be costly because if the

worker is to be equally well off, an increase it the bond will require a

repayment to the worker which exceeds the initial value of the bond to the

firm. While the precise results may vary depending on the reasons for

bonding being costly, the essential result that costly bonding implies the

impossibility of first best contracts should be evident from the specific

model.

       If firms' and workers' discount rates differ, the firm maximizes

profits which are given by



(11)       profits t/(l)t -         t/(l+r)tJ + b - P/(l+r)T.
                                                                                    9

       As noted in the previous section, the no shirking constraint can be

inverted to give a maximum hours constraint in each period. The firm

maximizes (11) subject to the hours constraint for each period




(12)        EAt[hth*t(E(wjej(hj)sj(hj))/(1+i)t +          P/(l+i)Tt+1)


It should be noted that since the constraint requires that           be less than

h*t, assuming A is nonpositive.

       Maximization of (11) is also subject to the constraint that over the

lifetime the worker receives at least the competitive level of utility



(13)        A0 f-b +   E(wtet(ht)st(h    ))/(l+i)t1 +   P/(l+i)T].

       The first order conditions with respect to        and w are given by



(14) v/(1+r)t EA.(-e        '-S I)h*h/(l+i)t3 + Ao(est1)/(1+i)tt +            A=0

and


                                 t
(15) (l+r)'t                         +
                     1JJ                 A0/(l+i)t4s0.

       To prove that the hours constraint is always binding, combine the first

order conditions for w and w41 and rearrange terms to get



               —
(16)
                   ri/[h*1(l+r)t1.
                                                                              10

Provided that i is greater than r so that bonding is costly, the hours

constraint will be binding.

       To prove that hours will be set below their optimal level, we combine

(14) and (15) to obtain



(17)        v -   e' s'
                      -
                              At(l+r)tl


Since       is negative (see also equation (15), equation (16) implies that

hours are set at a level at which the marginal product of labor exceeds the

marginal disutility of employment (the disutility of labor plus the marginal

value of time) so that hours are sub-optimal.

        The fact that hours are set according to the maximum hours constraint

does not necessarily imply that workers are constrained to work fewer hours

than they desire. If the wage were sufficiently lower than lIMP, workers

could be constrained to work more than they want even though the level of

hours was suboptimal. However, it will be shown in the next section that

over the period of the contract, discounted wages exceed VMP. It follows

that since, at least in some periods, the wage exceeds lIMP and VMP exceeds

the marginal disutility of employment, that workers will be constrained to

work fewer hours than they wish at least in some periods.



III. Mandatory Retirement

       It is also possible to show using this multiperiod model that, if it

occurs, mandatory retirement will be set at an age when vmp   exceeds   the

marginal disutility of employment. To do this it is helpful to begin by

solving for the hours and wage profiles.
                                                                           11

       Hours of work each period can be obtained by eliminating At from

equations (16) and (17) to obtain



(18)        (v -   e' st)ht* — (i-r)/(l+r)
                       -




which is a function only of h and exogenous variables since by the inverse

function rule h*' is just (q/e)'.

       Given h, it is possible to solve for the wage profile. Since the hours

constraint is binding, the no shirking constraint is also binding, and the

wage profile can be obtained by backwards induction as in Becker and Stigler

(1974) and Alcerlof and Katz (1986). In order to stop the worker from

shirking in the last period, the pension must be sufficiently large to

satisfy the no shirking condition



(19)        P/(l+i) -e —     (l-q)P/(l+i)

or



(20)       F —   (l+i)e/q.


In every period before the last, the no shirking condition can be solved to

give



(21)             w—e+s+ie/q.


In the first period, the wage is indeterminate, but it is possible to solve
                                                                               12

for the wage minus the bond. The algebraic manipulations in the remainder

of this section are somewhat simplified if the first period wage is treated

as being determined by (21) and the bond is allowed to adjust to set w1-b

equal to its equilibrium value. Using constraint (13), it can be seen that

the bond will be given by



(22)        b =   (1+i)e/q


so that, in effect, workers receive interest on their bond as long as they

are working and have the principal returned when they retire. It should be

noted that in this model, whether actual upfront bonds are required or

whether a lower first period wage is sufficient to clear the market depends

on the value of w1-b and not just on the value of b. This point is

discussed in greater detail in Akerlof and Katz (1986).

        To determine the mandatory retirement age, we need to consider the

effect of increasing the contract by an extra year. The change in profits

consists of two parts - -    firms   gain or lose the difference between the value

of marginal product and the wage but gain from cselaying repayment of the

bond:




(23)        Aprofits —
                         (vTwT)/(1+r)T   +   P/(l+r)T   -
                                                            P/(l+r)T+l


Substituting from (20) for the pension and from (23) for the wage and

rearranging terms gives



(24)        Aprofits =   (l+r)T   (v-e-s-ie/q +   e/q(l     -
                                                                1/(l+r)fl.
                                                                             13




Mandatory retirement occurs when the change in profits equals zero, that is

when



(25)        v -   e s—
                    -
                           (i-r)e/(q(1+r))

or, in other words when the Value of marginal product exceeds the disutility

of employment. Thus just as hours are chosen sub-optimally in the bonding

model, the mandatory retirement age is chosen sub-optimally.

       Moreover, "mandatory" retirement will have to be mandatory. From (23),

it is evident that mandatory retirement will only occur when the wage

exceeds VMP. Since the wage exceeds VMP and VMP exceeds the disutility of

employment, workers would prefer to maintain the employment relation.

       A particularly interesting case arises when the e, s and v profiles and

thus h* are all independent of age or experience. From (18) it is obvious

that, in this case, hours will be set at the same level in each period and

that except for the first period, wages will be constant. Thus the wage

profile takes the form of an initial low wage or bond, a constant wage over

the rest of the employment relation and a pension at retirement. This is in

many ways the prototypical bonding model and has all the properties of

models in which the value of shirking/disutility of effort is assumed to be

exogenous and independent of hours worked.

       It is straightforward to show that in this special case, firms need

never establish a mandatory retirement age. Firms are indifferent with

respect to the length of the contract. To see this note that firms will

employ workers up to the point that over the length of the contract the
                                                                             14

value of marginal product equals compensation or



(26)       E(vw)/(l+r)t + b    -
                                   P/(l+r)T   —   o.


Substituting for w, b and P gives the result that the profit maximization

condition (26) and the mandatory retirement condition (25) are identical in

this model. In other words, extending the contract by one year has no

effect on profits in this case, and the firm is indifferent with respect to

when the worker retires.

       In general, however, the v, e, and s schedules will not be constant

over the worker's lifetime. Provided that the disutility of employment

rises faster than VMP, the firm will set a mandatory retirement age. As

noted above, this retirement age will not be socially optimal. The precise

relation between VMP, the wage and the mandatory retirement age depends on

the particular reasons for bonding being costly.



IV. Public Policy and Sources of Costly Bonding

       Since hours are chosen to maximize profits subject to a constraint on

worker well-being, it is not possible to improve on the hours contract by

altering hours directly. Similarly, since bonds and pensions are chosen in

this manner, government cannot improve welfare by legislating the size of

bonds and pensions. However, it is possible that other government policies

may improve welfare. In essence, the inefficiency arises because bonds are

not sufficiently large. If the cost of bonding could be reduced or the size

of bonds increased costlessly by government, welfare would be increased.
                                                                            15

Whether such policies exist, depends on the reasons for bonding being
                                            -
costly.

     There appear to be three main reasons why bonding might be costly. The

first is differences in discount rates, as in sections II and III. The

second is possible malfeasance by the fin. The third is the possibility of

mistakes.

     If bonding costs are due to differences in discount rates, government

could improve welfare by taxing older workers and subsidizing younger

workers. Since the transfers would not be contingent on performance, they

would be consistent with the no shirking constraint. Of course, the

worker/firm contract could duplicate the after-tax profile. Instead of

having workers post a bond which is not repaid if workers cheat, fins and

workers might agree that workers, would pay a fine if they were caught

shirking. While such contracts might not be legal,. firms could instead lend

the equivaleot of the bond to workers, say "for the purchase of a house,"

and require repayment regardless of whether the worker remained with the

firm. The fact that we do not observe such contracts very often may imply

that differences in discount rates are not the source of costly bonding or

that these alternative contractual arrangements are equally costly.

     If differences in discount rates are important it may be possible to

use public policies to affect directly workers' discount rates. For

example, if profits are stochastic so that firms may go bankrupt and if

firms are risk neutral but workers are risk averse, the value to workers of

a one dollar increase in P is less than its cost to the firm so that

workers, in effect, have higher discount rates than fins and bonding is

costly. It is clear that in this situation some sort of ERISA like policy
                                                                            16

in which "pensions" are guaranteed can be welfare improving. It is less

obvious why the free market could not develop such insurance on its own.

Perhaps some combination of moral hazard and adverse selection would provide

an explanation.

     Similarly, if workers are sometimes misconstrued as shirking, and

workers are risk averse, bonding will be costly.4 In this model, welfare

might be increased by some kind of grievance procedure or quasi-judicial

review which reduced the probability of a worker being fired. However,

again if such improvements were possible. It is difficult to see why they

would not be instituted in the agreement between the worker and firm.

     The most plausible case for some sort of gcvernment intervention arises

if there is a possibility of firm malfeasance. If bonding is costly because

firms have an incentive to steal the bond, then government may be able to

increase welfare by inhibiting firms from malfeasance, in practice, this

entails interference with employment at will and may have negative side

effects since presumably government would make it more difficult not only to

fire workers without cause but also workers who have shirked. Again, it is

not impossible that the free market could develop institutions similar to

the governmental institutions, but government may have a significant

advantage in this area.

     Similarly, the desirability of restricting mandatory retirement depends

critically on the source of costly bonding. In the model presented in

section II and III, simply delaying the mandatory retirement age is not

welfare improving. The cost of bonding exceeds the difference between older

workers' VMP and their reservation wage. Thus the results of this paper
                                                                             17

serve to underscore the significance of understanding the reasons that

bonding is costly.

     The essential message of this paper has been presented using a variety

of different models. While the most extensive discussion concerned a model

in which workers and- firms have different discount rates, it should be clear

that the essential point does not depend on the precise formulation.

Provided that bonding is costly, it will make sense to use bonding as little

as possible so that the no shirking constraint will be binding.

     The sub-optimality of the hours and the mandatory retirement age

imposed by the contract casts light on the bonding/efficiency wage debate.

A major issue between proponents of the two models has been whether the

agency problem imposed by shirking results in involuntary unemployment

(Carmichael, 1985; Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984, 1985). Carmichael maintains

that the involuntary unemployment which arises in shirking versions of the

efficiency wage model depends critically on the assumption that workers

cannot post bonds. He argues that even with capital market imperfections,

the level of bonds will adjust so that the marginal worker is just

indifferent between working and not working.

     In the model presented in this paper, it seems reasonable to argue that

workers who cannot obtain a job because they have passed mandatory

retirement age are involuntarily unemployed although the issue may be more

one of semantics or ideology than of substance. They are voluntarily

unemployed in the sense that they are unwilling to work at the best offer

any employer is willing to make them. On the other hand. their reservation

wage is below their value of marginal product. The reason that they cannot

reach an agreement with a firm is, of course, ttat the wage they require
                                                                             18

plus the cost of bonding is less than their VMP.

     In addition, the results suggest that whether or not the agency model

leads to involuntary unemployment, it definitely leads to involuntary

underemployment. Involuntary underemployment may be as significant an

economic phenomenon as involuntary unemployment. Kahn and Lang (1986)

estimate that 40 to 45% of hourly workers are involuntarily underemployed.

This paper suggests that the agency problem may provide an explanation for

the prevalence of such underemployment.
                                                                              19

REFERENCES

Akerlof, George and Katz, Lawrence F. "Do Deferred Wages Dominate
Involuntary Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device?" NEER Working Paper
No. 2025, 1986.

Becker, Gary S. and Stigler, George "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and the
Compensation of Enforcers," Journal of Legal Studies, (January 1974).

Bulow, Jeremy I. and Lawrence H. Summers "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets
with Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian
Unemployment," Journal of Labor Economics, 4 (July 1986):376-414.

Carmichael, H. Lame "Can Efficiency Wage Unemployment be Involuntary?"
American Economic Review, 75 (December l985).:12l3-4.

       "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment: A Survey," Queen's
University, Canada, unpublished, 1986.

Dickens, William T., Katz, Lawrence F. and Lang, Kevin "Are Efficiency Wages
Efficient?" NBER Working Paper No. 1935, 1986.

Dickens, William T. and Lundberg, Shelley "Hours Restrictions and Labor
Supply," NBER Working Paper No. 1636.

Kahn, Shulamit and Lang, Kevin "Constraints on the Choice of Work Hours," UC
Irvine, unpublished, 1986.

Lazear, Edward "Why is There MandatoryRetirement?" Journal   of   Political
Economy, 87 (December l979):l261-84.                                  -




         "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity and Hours Restrictions,"
American Economic Review, 71 (September 198l):606-20.

Medoff, James L. and Abraham, Katherine C. "Experience, Promotion and
Earnings," Ouarteyly Journal of Economics, 95 (December l980):703-36.

Shapiro, Carl and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker
Discipline Device," American Economic Review, 74 (June 1984).

________ "Can Unemployment be Involuntary? Reply," American Economic Review,
75 (December 1985):l215-12l7.
                                                                         20

FOOTNOTES

1. For simplicity it is assumed that the worker either shirks for the entire
period or not at all. Formally, this assumption requires that e'' not be
too large.

2. Intuitively, while the probability of being caught in any particular hour
remains constant, the probability of having already been caught rises as
hours worked increases. Consequently, the marginal contribution of the last
hours worked to the probability of being caught decreases with hours worked.

3. To see this multiply by q and divide by e to get e'/e - q'/q. The first
term is at least as great as 1/h while the second term is strictly less than
1/h.

4. This argument is developed formally for the legal system in Polinsky and
Shavell (1979).
