                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



WHAT HAS BEEN HAPPENING TO UK INCOME INEQUALITY SINCE THE MID-1990S?
  ANSWERS FROM RECONCILED AND COMBINED HOUSEHOLD SURVEY AND
                         TAX RETURN DATA

                                        Richard V. Burkhauser
                                           Nicolas Hérault
                                          Stephen P. Jenkins
                                            Roger Wilkins

                                         Working Paper 21991
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21991


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2016


This research is supported by an Australian Research Council Discovery Grant (award DP150102409).
In addition, Burkhauser over the past three years has received funding in excess of $5,000 from the
American Enterprise Institute; the Employment Policies Institute; the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation
Graduate and Post-Graduate Fellowship Program; the Michigan Retirement Research Consortium
(from the Social Security Administration), and the Russell Sage Foundation. Hérault over the past
three years has received funding in excess of $5,000 from an Australian Research Council Discovery
Grant. Jenkins over the past three years has received funding in excess of $5,000 from the Research
Centre on Micro-Social Change at the Institute for Social and Economic Research by the University
of Essex and the UK Economic and Social Research Council (award ES/L009153/1). Wilkins over
the past three years has received funding in excess of $5,000 from the Australian Government Department
of Social Services, the Australian Fair Work Commission, and the Australian Workforce and Productivity
Agency. The findings and views reported in this paper are those of the authors and should not be attributed
to any of the above-mentioned organizations. For helpful discussions about the World Top Incomes
Database and about the HBAI data and SPI adjustments, we thank Tony Atkinson and Facundo Alvaredo,
and Peter Matejic (DWP), respectively. For comments on an early draft, we thank Tony Atkinson,
Peter Matejic, Brian Nolan, Holly Sutherland, and the LSE Quantitative Social Policy reading group.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Richard V. Burkhauser, Nicolas Hérault, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Roger Wilkins. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What has Been Happening to UK Income Inequality Since the Mid-1990s? Answers from
Reconciled and Combined Household Survey and Tax Return Data
Richard V. Burkhauser, Nicolas Hérault, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Roger Wilkins
NBER Working Paper No. 21991
February 2016
JEL No. C81,D31

                                                ABSTRACT

Estimates of UK income inequality trends differ substantially according to whether estimates are based
on household survey data (used for official statistics) or tax return data (used in the top incomes literature).
We reconcile differences in variable definitions and combine survey and tax return data in order to
take advantage of the much better coverage of top incomes in the latter, and provide improved estimates
of UK inequality trends since the mid-1990s. We show there was a marked increase in income inequality
in the early 2000s that survey-based estimates do not reveal, and our conclusions are robust to changes
in the definitions of income, income-sharing unit, and summary inequality measure. In addition, our
reconciled and combined data provide more comparable estimates of UK-US inequality trends than
the top incomes literature to date.


Richard V. Burkhauser                                  Stephen P. Jenkins
Cornell University                                     Department of Social Policy
Department of Policy Analysis                          London School of Economics
  & Management                                          and Political Science
259 MVR Hall                                           Houghton Street
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401                                  London WC2A 2AE
and University of Melbourne                            United Kingdom
and also NBER                                          s.jenkins@lse.ac.uk
rvb1@cornell.edu
                                                       Roger Wilkins
Nicolas Hérault                                        Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic
Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic                and Social Research
and Social Research                                    University of Melbourne
Level 5, 111 Barry St                                  Faculty of Business and Economics Building
Carlton, VIC 3053                                      5th floor
nherault@unimelb.edu.au                                Victoria 3010, Australia
                                                       r.wilkins@unimelb.edu.au
1. Introduction


Income inequality levels and trends are increasingly a subject of public discussion and the
subject of much analysis by economists and other social scientists. Major books about
inequality receive public attention (e.g. Atkinson 2015, Piketty 2014). Productive debate
about what is happening to inequality requires reliable estimates and yet the two main sources
of information – household surveys and tax return data – can provide very different estimates
of inequality trends. We address this problem, demonstrating that it is possible to reconcile
and combine tax return and survey data in a manner that exploits the strengths of each source,
and thereby provide better answers to questions such as: what has been happening to income
inequality since the mid-1990s?
       Household survey data are the most commonly used source for monitoring income
inequality levels and trends in most rich countries. Survey data are used to derive official
statistics in countries such as the UK and the USA and elsewhere; they are the basis of cross-
national comparative studies such as those undertaken by the OECD (2008, 2011, 2015); and
they are the source for most of the distributional analysis by other researchers. The income-
sharing unit in virtually all these studies is the household and the income definition is
disposable (post-tax post-transfer) income, adjusted for differences in household size and
composition using an equivalence scale. Inequality is typically summarised using indices
such as the Gini coefficient that are based on the entire income distribution.
       A long-standing challenge to survey-based estimates is that they do not provide the
full picture about inequality and its trends because they capture top incomes inadequately or
not at all. In contrast, the personal tax return data used by the top income shares literature do
a much better job of capturing top incomes. This benefit is gained at the cost of being
constrained to use the definitions of income and income-sharing unit used by each country’s
tax administration (definitions that differ from the survey-based ones), and being restricted to
summary inequality measures that do not incorporate differences across the full income range
(i.e. top income shares). Survey-based studies do not face these problems.
       The need to reconcile and combine data is demonstrated by Figure 1. The figure
shows income inequality trends in the UK over the last five decades using commonly-used
measures derived from tax return data (the share of total income received by the richest 1%)
and from household survey data (the Gini coefficient and p90/p10, the ratio of the 90th
percentile to the 10th percentile). We express each measure relative to its value in 1962 so that
proportionate changes in the measures can be readily compared. The survey data estimates
                                                1
are the same as those provided by UK’s official income distribution statistics (the annual
‘Households Below Average Income’ reports), and the tax return data are derived from the
World Top Incomes Database which in turn derives estimates from the Survey of Personal
Incomes (the UK tax return data). As we explain later, the definitions of income and the
income-sharing unit differ in each source.
        It is immediately apparent that UK income inequality trends differ substantially
depending on which source (and hence which inequality measure) is used.1 Between 1962
and 1978, the top 1% share fell by almost a third, but the Gini coefficient and p90/p10 by
only around 5%. The increase in inequality between 1978 and 1991 according to the top 1%
share measure is twice the increase in the Gini (80% compared to 42%). The striking
contrasts between the series persist in more recent years. Between 1991 and 2007, the top 1%
share rose by 50%, but the Gini coefficient rose by only 5% and the p90/p10 actually fell by
5%.
        By referring to official estimates based on the survey data (essentially those shown in
Figure 1), Young (2015) can state that ‘there’s not much evidence that the United Kingdom
became more unequal in the last parliament’. Referring to the top income share estimates
derived from tax return data, Atkinson writes that ‘the last quarter of the twentieth century
saw an almost complete reversal of the decline in observed inequality at the top that had
taken place in the preceding 25 years’ (2007: 98). Figure 1 shows that this U-shaped trend is
not apparent for survey-based estimates. Roser (2015) comments that ‘[i]f anything, income
inequality has actually fallen in the UK over the past 25 years’, though he also goes on to
remark that ‘the incomes of the poor in the UK are growing as fast as the incomes of the rich,
apart from the top 1%, whose incomes are racing away’. Roser bases his conclusion on
estimates from both survey and tax data (as in Figure 1), but he does not point out that the
definitions employed by the two data sources differ.2
        In this paper, we provide improved estimates of trends in UK income inequality since
the mid-1990s, reconciling survey and tax return data definitions and combining data to
derive new series. Reconciliation of definitions is essential because, otherwise, like is not
being compared with like. Data combination takes account of under-coverage in the survey

1
  Estimates of US income inequality trends also differ substantially depending on whether survey and tax return
data are used: see Appendix Figure A1.
2
  The closest to a systematic comparison to date of survey and tax data estimates for the UK is provided by
Brewer, Sibieta, and Wren-Lewis (2007) who, for example, compare the growth in average annual income
between 1996/97 and 2004/05 for each percentile within the richest tenth (Table 14). However they do not
compare like with like because they use the standard source-specific definitions of income and income-sharing
unit.

                                                       2
data.
        The UK tax return data files contain relatively few variables and it is not possible to
link individuals belonging to the same family or household. As a consequence, we cannot use
the tax data to construct measures based on the definitions of income and income-sharing unit
(family and household) used by the UK official income distribution statistics, based on
household survey data, and which are essentially the same as those used by Eurostat and the
OECD. However, because of the wealth of detail available in the surveys and access to the
unit record data, we are able to do an innovative cross-walk from the survey-based definitions
of income and income-sharing unit to the tax return data definitions. With this reconciliation,
we are able to combine data on a like-to-like basis and derive new income inequality series.
And we can explore the consequences of using different definitions and different summary
inequality measures.
        In Section 2, we provide key details about the tax return and household data that we
use and explain how we reconcile and combine the two sources, with further information
provided in Appendices. As we explain, the UK Department for Work and Pensions who
produce the official survey-based inequality estimates already employ a limited form of data
combination in the form of an ‘SPI-adjustment’. Our data combination procedure uses similar
ideas but it is more extensive and we benchmark it against top income share estimates from
the World Top Incomes Database.
        Our results are presented in Sections 3–5. First, we show how poorly existing survey
data estimates of top income shares track their tax return data counterparts. Second, and by
contrast, we show how with our combined data, we can derive estimates of top income shares
that are almost identical to those reported by the World Top Incomes Database. Then we
exploit the flexibility of the survey data and employ our combined data to analyse the
implications of changing definitions of income and income-sharing unit, and to compare top
income share estimates in the UK and the USA using more harmonised definitions. We show
that conclusions about transatlantic differences in top income shares depend on which income
group one considers; but the UK trends are similar whichever distributional definitions we
employ.
        Finally, we use our combined data to examine inequality trends using summary
inequality measures that take into account income differences over the full income range
(Gini coefficients and generalized entropy indices) rather than top income shares. Because
the combined data take greater account of changes in top incomes than do the survey data
reference point, our estimate of the increase in the Gini coefficient between fiscal years
                                                3
2003/04 and 2007/08 is greater according to the former than the latter. Using more top-
sensitive inequality measures shows an even sharper inequality rise. These trends differ from
those implied by the survey-based data underlying the UK official income distribution
statistics (cf. Figure 1).




2. Data sources and variables: reconciliation and combination


2.1 Tax return data: the Survey of Personal Incomes and the World Top Incomes Database


In the UK, unit record income tax return data have been made available in the Survey of
Personal Incomes (SPI) since the mid-1990s. It is these data, as well as published tabulations
from the SPI and from supertax and surtax returns for earlier years, that Atkinson (2005) used
in his pioneering analysis of trends in UK top income shares since 1908. Atkinson’s methods
are similar to those of Piketty (2003), who estimated top income shares in France. See also
Piketty and Saez (2003) on top income shares in the USA. Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011)
survey the methodology, main findings, and perspectives emerging from the research projects
using personal income tax record data. Output from the 28 country studies to date is now
available in the World Top Incomes Database (WTID), updated each year, with top income
share estimates and associated metadata such as control totals freely downloadable
(Alvaredo, Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez 2015).
        The SPI does not contain the universe of all income tax returns. Each year’s SPI
observations are a stratified sample of administrative records for individuals who could be
liable to UK tax, with the sample drawn from three databases. The first, ‘COP’, currently
contributes over half the SPI records, and covers employees and occupational pension
recipients with a Pay-As-You-Earn record who do not also have a self-assessment record.
The second database, ‘CESA’, covers individuals with self-employment, rental or untaxed
investment income (and company directors, those subject to higher rate tax and other people
with complex tax affairs), and currently contributes around 40% of SPI cases. The third
database, contributing relatively few cases, covers individuals without COP or CESA records
who have had too much tax deducted at source and who claim repayment. Sampling fractions
vary substantially within and between databases (and hence so too do the SPI grossing-up
weights). The total number of individuals in the SPI has increased steadily over time, from
around 57,000 individuals in 1995/96 to nearly 677,500 in 2010/11, corresponding to around
                                                4
32 million taxpayers. For further details, see the documents accompanying HM Revenue and
Customs KAI Data, Policy and Co-ordination (2014) and corresponding documentation for
previous years’ data.
        The principal variables available refer to gross income (total taxable income from the
market plus taxable government transfers, and before the deduction of income tax), and net
income (gross income after the deduction of tax). We focus on the pre-tax gross income
variable because the WTID and the top income shares literature use this measure.
        We cannot derive top income share estimates directly from the SPI unit record data
because the SPI does not cover all individuals in the UK population or all of their income. To
derive estimates of top income shares that refer to shares in total income among all
individuals aged 15 years or more, the WTID uses external population and income control
totals for each year, i.e. estimates of the total number of individuals aged 15 or more, and of
the total income held by them. For 2009 and later years, the WTID derives its control totals
for income from the national accounts (Atkinson 2012). For earlier years, total income is
derived from income tax statistics and estimates of the income of those tax units not covered
(Atkinson 2007, Atkinson and Ooms 2015). WTID control totals for the population aged 15
and over come from the Office for National Statistics mid-year population estimates
(Atkinson 2012). We use the WTID control totals throughout this paper.


2.2 Household survey data: the Family Resources Survey, and Households Below Average
        Income subfiles


For analysis of the UK income distribution, the most-commonly-used data source is the
Family Resources Survey (FRS), a large cross-sectional household survey, and the
accompanying subfiles of derived income variables called the Households Below Average
Income (HBAI) dataset.3 The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) administers the
FRS, and DWP staff produce the HBAI subfile that they use to derive the UK’s official


3
  The first editions of HBAI data were derived from the Family Expenditure Survey (now called the Living
Costs and Food Survey, LCFS), a smaller survey less focused on collection of income data than the FRS. The
FRS-based HBAI series refer to fiscal (tax) years 1994/95 onwards. (The fiscal year runs from April through to
the following March.) The UK income distribution statistics incorporated in the EU’s cross-national database
EU-SILC are derived by the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) using what was formerly known as the
General Household Survey (now the General Lifestyle Survey) but have recently switched to using the FRS.
ONS uses the LCFS for its annual article on the effects of taxes and benefits on household incomes (see e.g.
ONS 2015). In neither case does the ONS make any adjusts to better account for under-coverage of top incomes
whereas the HBAI does (we explain the HBAI’s ‘SPI-adjustment’ later). The UK Gini coefficient estimates in
EU-SILC differ markedly from those in the HBAI: see Jenkins (2015).

                                                      5
income distribution statistics published annually.4 Despite its label, the HBAI provides
information about the income distribution as a whole.
        A major shortcoming of household surveys in general, and the UK FRS in particular,
is their inability to fully capture income in the top ranges of the income distribution because
of non-coverage of top income earners or under-reporting by those who respond. Atkinson,
Piketty, and Saez (2011) provide the most striking example of this issue to date. Referring to
the USA, they state that ‘the top percentile plays a major role in the increase in the Gini over
the last three decades and [Current Population Survey] data that do not measure top incomes
fail to capture about half of this increase in overall inequality’ (2011: 32).
        Under-coverage at the top is an issue that has long exercised the producers of the
UK’s HBAI statistics and, each year since 1992, the derived variables in the HBAI subfile
accompanying the basic survey dataset have contained an ‘SPI-adjustment’ to ‘improve the
quality of data on very high incomes and combat spurious volatility’ (Department of Social
Security 1996: 23). The SPI-adjustment substitutes survey income values for a small number
of very rich individuals with values derived from unit record tax return data contained in the
Survey of Personal Incomes (SPI) and also recalibrates the survey grossing-up weights (as we
discuss in more detail later). We use the term HBAI-SPI data to refer to these DWP-produced
variables and to distinguish them from the HBAI-SPI2 data which are those that we derive
using an alternative SPI adjustment procedure. Later, we compare estimates of top income
shares and other inequality measures and their trends using the FRS, the HBAI-SPI, and
HBAI-SPI2 series.
        This paper addresses the problem that the HBAI-SPI and the SPI-based WTID series
use different definitions of income and of the income-sharing unit. The principal measures in
the HBAI-SPI refer to household net (or ‘disposable’) income, i.e. the sum over all
individuals within a household of all income from the market plus government cash transfers
and after the deduction of personal income taxes and social security contributions. The
definitions in the SPI reflect the administration of the UK personal income tax system, which
has been individual-based since 1990: the data used by WTID refer to the gross incomes of
adult individuals, where gross income is market income plus most government cash transfers.
        The public-release FRS files contain a large number of income variables, but the
additional variables provided in the separately-released HBAI subfiles are the primary data


4
 The most recent edition is Department for Work and Pensions (2015) covering fiscal years 1994/95 through
2013/14. The Institute for Fiscal Studies, who are contracted by the DWP to check its HBAI calculations,
produce their own annual report based on the data. The most recent edition is Belfield et al. (2015).

                                                     6
source of analysis of the UK income distribution and its trends. There are income variables in
the HBAI subfiles that incorporate a number of adjustments by DWP staff to improve the
validity of the measures (for brevity, we refer to these as the HBAI variables). In addition, the
HBAI subfiles contain another set of variables incorporating a further modification – the SPI
adjustment. It is these ‘HBAI-SPI’ variables that are used to produce the official income
distribution statistics and the ones most commonly-used by other researchers (cf. Figure 1).
         The income statistics that the DWP publishes (such as Department for Work and
Pensions 2015) are based on a specific income distribution definition: net (i.e. disposable)
household income adjusted for size and composition using the modified-OECD scale, with
each individual attributed the equivalised net income of the household to which s/he belongs.5
However, access to unit record data allows researchers like us to change the definitions of
income and the income-sharing unit, though the scope to do so is constrained by which of the
DWP’s derived variables are released in the files (and this has changed over time).
         The income variables that we use are listed in Table 1. There are three income
definitions (market, gross and net income) and three income-sharing units (the individual, the
family, and the household).6 We distinguish between the variables made available to
researchers – those that come from the survey directly or the DWP’s calculations – and the
additional variables that we have been able to construct. We discuss the available variables in
the next subsection and our constructed ones in section 2.4.
                                              [Table 1 near here]


2.3 Households Below Average Income data and the SPI adjustment


The SPI adjustment to each year’s HBAI data consists of two elements. One, in order to
include more top income, the DWP replaces the individual incomes of a small number of
very rich individuals in the FRS with individual incomes they derive from the SPI. Two, to
improve representation of top income individuals per se, the survey weights are modified
slightly. The new weights use the SPI-derived numbers of very rich individuals as control
totals alongside the other control totals used to create the weights for FRS and non-SPI-
adjusted HBAI data (Department for Work and Pensions 2010, Appendix 2).
5
  The headline household net income ‘before the deduction of housing costs’ measure is essentially the same as
that used by Eurostat and the OECD for cross-national comparisons and accords with the recommendations of
international bodies such as the Canberra Group (2011).
6
  For brevity, we refer throughout to the ‘family’, i.e. the nuclear family. More specifically, our family definition
is the ‘benefit unit’, which is the definition of the family used in the UK when assessing benefit eligibility and
by household surveys. See Department for Work and Pensions (2015: Annex 5) for details.

                                                         7
        To implement the first element, DWP staff derive annual income variables for each
adult to match the SPI annual income definition.7 They use four different high-income
thresholds to determine an FRS individual’s eligibility, depending on whether the individual
is a pensioner or not, and whether resident in Great Britain or Northern Ireland. (This implies
that individuals subject to the SPI adjustments are not necessarily the individuals with the
highest incomes.) For example, in 2012/13, ‘non-pensioners in Great Britain are subject to
the SPI adjustment if their gross income exceeded £236,694 per year (£131,166 per year in
Northern Ireland) and pensioners in Great Britain are subject to the SPI adjustment if their
gross income exceeded £73,631 per year (£60,088 per year in Northern Ireland)’ (Department
for Work and Pensions 2014: 11).
        The DWP adjusts the thresholds each year (see Appendix Table B1 for a list of all
thresholds) and they have changed the adjustment rule slightly over time. Most notably, a
change was introduced in 2009/10 to base ‘the SPI adjustment methodology […] on adjusting
a fixed fraction of the population rather than on adjusting the incomes of all those individuals
with incomes above a fixed cash terms level. This should prevent an increasing fraction of the
dataset being adjusted’ (Department for Work and Pensions 2010: 242). The DWP introduced
further change in 2009/10, basing the threshold for non-pensioners on net of tax income
rather than gross income. SPI adjustment rules were also modified when the FRS expanded
its coverage to also include respondents from Northern Ireland from 2002/03. (Previously, the
data covered Great Britain only, i.e. England, Wales, and Scotland.)
        The SPI adjustment method and its changes over time have resulted in the number of
individuals in the HBAI subject to adjustment varying from year to year. Focusing on
individuals aged 15 years or more (the population included in WTID analyses), between 45
and 175 individuals were subject to the SPI adjustment each year between 1994/95 and
2012/13, representing between 0.12% and 0.52% of the weighted adult population. See
Appendix Table B2 for details.
        Once an FRS individual eligible for the SPI adjustment is identified, his or her
individual income is replaced by the average SPI income above the high-income threshold




7
  Most FRS income questions ask about the amount last received (around the time of the interview) or the
‘usual’ amount, and also the period to which the payment refers. These variables are used to create consistent
‘weekly’ amounts pro rata – it is these that are in the HBAI subfiles. Because FRS interviews occur throughout
the year, HBAI income values are also adjusted to a common date using a within-year price index to account for
inflation. For the SPI adjustment (and for our derivations), these adjusted weekly amounts are multiplied by
365/7 to derive annual amounts (366/7 in leap years).

                                                      8
among SPI respondents with the same pensioner-location status as the FRS individual.8
Because SPI data take longer to become available than the survey data, the SPI income values
used for the adjustment for a given year are based on projections made by HMRC staff using
SPI data from two years earlier. (The projection method is undocumented.)
         After the individual-level income imputations, DWP statisticians recalculate incomes
at the family (benefit unit) and household levels. The official income distribution statistics
use these SPI-adjusted household income variables.


2.4 Constructing the missing individual-level HBAI and HBAI-SPI variables


Individual-level income variables are, for the most part, not available in the HBAI and HBAI-
SPI public-use datasets: see Table 1. The exception is individual-level gross income, which is
available but only from 2005/06. Here we explain how we constructed a full set of individual-
level market and gross income variables for the whole period.
         The FRS documentation lists all income components that enter into the computation
of each FRS income variable. By contrast, the HBAI subfile documentation is limited and
does not explain the construction of all its new income variables.9 However, some income
components are provided in the files and we are able to reconstruct some of the HBAI and
HBAI-SPI income variables by adding up the relevant components. For example, government
transfers are provided for each income series so that it is possible to construct market income
variables at all three income-sharing unit levels.
         To obtain HBAI individual-level income variables, we proceed in two steps. From the
FRS, we extract the share of family income accruing to each unit’s adult member.10 We do
this separately for gross and market incomes. We then apply these shares to the HBAI family
gross and market incomes to obtain our new HBAI individual gross and market income
variables. Assuming that individuals’ income shares within each family are left unchanged by
the HBAI adjustments, this process ensures that the derived HBAI individual income series

8
  Because of subsequent re-incorporation of individual-specific survey information after the SPI adjustment,
SPI-adjusted individuals in the same group may not have exactly the same post-adjustment individual income in
the HBAI-SPI data. For example, according to internal DWP documentation, ‘we also add back in other
deductions … but exclude personal pension payments … as these are not included in the SPI definition of net
income. We also take out any housing benefit as this is arbitrarily allocated to the head of the benefit unit (BU)
and does not necessarily constitute part of their individual income’ (Gray 2007: 3).
9
  For FRS details, see the documents accompanying Department for Work and Pensions, National Centre for
Social Research and Office for National Statistics Social and Vital Statistics Division (2014). For HBAI subfiles
details, see the documents accompanying Department for Work and Pensions (2013).
10
   We do not make any change to children’s incomes as careful examination revealed that children’s incomes are
identical in the FRS and HBAI data.

                                                        9
are fully consistent with the HBAI family and household income data.11
         Once we have obtained our HBAI individual-income series, the HBAI-SPI individual
income series is derived from it. For all individuals in families not subject to the SPI
adjustments we set individual gross and market incomes equal to the corresponding HBAI
values for years before 2005/06.
         For individuals in a family subject to the SPI adjustment, we start from the raw FRS
individual gross and market income series rather than the HBAI series. This is because the
HBAI-SPI individual income series available from 2005/06 onwards reveal that members of
couples who are not subject to the SPI adjustment themselves but who belong to an SPI-
adjusted family, are assigned their FRS income rather than their HBAI income. We calculate
the income change associated with the SPI adjustment as the difference between HBAI-SPI
and FRS incomes at the family level for gross and market incomes respectively. We then
identify individuals subject to the SPI adjustments and add the income change to their
individual income. Before 1997/98 this is straightforward because individuals subject to the
SPI adjustment within each family are explicitly identified in the HBAI subfiles. For 1997/98
onwards, we know only the number of individuals within each family subject to the SPI
adjustment, and whether these individuals are pensioners or non-pensioners. If this is
insufficient information to uniquely identify the individual subject to the SPI adjustment, we
assume it is the individual with the largest FRS individual gross income who is subject to the
SPI adjustment. In the few cases where both members of a couple are subject to the SPI
adjustment, we assume equal sharing of the SPI adjustment. We ignore the post-SPI
adjustment modifications made to individual incomes by DWP statisticians.
         When we compare our derived variables and the actual SPI-adjusted variables, an
exercise possible for 2005/06 and later years, we find that our approach allows us to
accurately identify the individuals subject to the SPI adjustment with very few exceptions,
and our methods yield a very close approximation to the actual SPI-adjusted variables. For
the 1,105 individuals subject to SPI adjustments between 2005/06 and 2012/13, and the 939
partners of these individuals, the average difference between our derived gross income
variables and their HBAI-SPI counterpart is £0.01 per week. The difference is greater than £4
in 66 cases only. In addition, we obtain almost exactly the same mean and median for gross


11
  Although our assumption that income-shares of individuals within families are unaffected by HBAI
adjustments is often violated, the deviations from this assumption only have minor effects in the sense that, for
years when they can be compared, our SPI-adjusted income variables are very close to those created by the
DWP (see below).

                                                        10
and market incomes (Appendix Figure C1).12
         The DWP does not make individual-level net income variables available in the public-
use files and we are unable to derive them. There is no publicly-accessible tax-benefit
microsimulation model like the DWP’s that could do the requisite calculations for each year
over the period we consider.


2.5 Our HBAI-SPI2 adjustment


Estimates of top income shares derived from HBAI-SPI data do not match the corresponding
top income shares estimated by WTID from tax data, as we show below. This motivates our
‘SPI2’ adjustment to improve the top income coverage of the HBAI data.
         In terms of the DWP’s goals for the SPI adjustment of improving the quality of data
on top incomes and combatting spurious volatility (see the Introduction), our strategy focuses
on the first aim though with a different reference point (WTID estimates of top income shares
rather than SPI ones). However, as we show below, our approach also reduces year-to-year
volatility in estimates.
         We derive our HBAI-SPI2 income variables for each fiscal year as follows. First, we
rank individuals in the SPI unit record data by their pre-tax income. Second, we allocate
individuals to income groups, with the size of each group equal to 1/1000th of the total adult
population shown by the WTID control total for the relevant year. Third, we calculate the
average income for each income group. Next, we repeat the first and second steps with the
HBAI data for the same year using our derived measure of (pre-SPI adjustment) HBAI
individual gross income and the FRS grossing-up weights.13 Finally, for each of the 100 top
HBAI income groups (i.e. the top 10 per cent), we replace the individual-level HBAI incomes
with the mean income of the corresponding group in the SPI.
         This method ensures that total pre-tax (gross) income for the top 10 per cent – and for
the 100 centile groups of the top 10% – is the same in the HBAI and in the SPI/WTID data.
We also apply the same approach to derive SPI2-adjusted market income variables using
group mean incomes from the SPI.14

12
   Our consistently estimated individual HBAI-SPI variables are available upon request.
13
   In additional work (available from the authors), we re-estimated our inequality estimates using the HBAI-SPI
grossing-up weights instead of the FRS ones. It has virtually no effect on our results, because the differences in
the weights are small.
14
   This may not lead to a perfect match in the top 10 per cent total market income in the HBAI and in the SPI to
the extent that SPI members of the top 10 per cent may differ depending on whether the ranking is based on
gross or market income. In practice, however, the difference is likely to be minimal.

                                                        11
         Our use of 1,000 income groups and 100 SPI cell-means for imputation is a choice
that reflects the balance of multiple considerations. For example, 1,000 is the minimum
number of income groups required to replicate total SPI income for each 0.1% of the
population. The more income groups we use, the better will the adjusted survey data be able
to account for income differences within the richest groups in the SPI. However, there are far
fewer individuals in the HBAI than in the SPI data. This means that HBAI individual
grossing-up weights are relatively large (typically between 500 and 1,500), which imposes a
limit to the number of income groups we can construct. There is also a limit to how far down
the income distribution it is desirable to go for the implementation of this alternative SPI
adjustment. The lower the individual income, the more important that non-taxable income is
and this is likely to be better captured by the survey than by the tax data. There is a further
practical reason why we stop at the top 10%: this is the largest top income group considered
by the top incomes literature (and the WTID).15
         Because the same SPI unit record data underlie both our HBAI-based data
imputations and the WTID estimates, we ensure consistency in the total income of
individuals in the top 10% of the distribution. Hence we will obtain the same top income
shares from the two sources provided we use the same income and population control totals.
For gross income, we can use either the income control total from the WTID or the internal
HBAI control total (i.e. the weighted sum of individual incomes) and assess the difference it
makes. However, when considering different income definitions – for instance, market
income – we cannot use the WTID, which does not contain suitable income control totals for
the UK. We therefore use internal HBAI control totals for these other income definitions.
         By using the WTID estimates of the total adult population, we ensure that the number
of individuals in the top 1 per cent is the same in the HBAI and in the WTID. However,
WTID population controls are not available for alternative definitions of the income-
receiving unit such as the family or the household. Instead, we rely on the internal HBAI
population control totals (the sum of the relevant grossing-up weights in each year). This
approach slightly underestimates the size of the top income groups, and thus the top income
shares, since between 1% (in recent years) and 6% (in early years) of the full UK adult
population is not represented in the HBAI. This is because the FRS excludes homeless and
institutionalized people as well as households containing a married adult whose spouse is

15
  In additional work (available from the authors), we have imputed SPI cell-means to only the top ½% of
survey incomes rather than the top 10%. (The former fraction roughly corresponds to the proportion of
individuals with SPI-adjusted incomes.) Our qualitative results about inequality trends in this case are much the
same as those reported below.

                                                       12
temporarily absent and, before 2002/03, individuals living in Northern Ireland.




3. How well do survey-based estimates of top income shares match those from the
        WTID?


By means of our cross-walk of income and income-sharing unit definitions, from standard
HBAI ones to those corresponding to the ones used in the WTID (individual-level gross
income for individuals aged 15 years or more), we are now able to compare like with like. In
this section, we analyse how well the various survey data estimates of top income shares
match those provided by the WTID.
        The first comparison is summarized in Figure 2, which shows estimates for the
income shares of the top 1% for 1995/96 through 2010/11 derived using multiple data sources
and definitions.16 The notes to the figure provide a key to the series acronyms used here and
in later figures and tables.
        The benchmark reference point in Figure 2 is the WTID series, the uppermost one.
According to this, the top 1%’s share increases from around 11% in 1995/96 to 13.5% in
2000/01, is slightly smaller over the next four years, before increasing to around 15.5% in
2007/08.
        There is a sharp fall in the top 1% share between 2009/10 and 2010/11. The Great
Recession and its aftermath provide one obvious explanation but this conclusion must be
treated with caution. A 50% top marginal rate of income tax was introduced in April 2010
(up from 40%), and the announcement and introduction of this tax rate provided incentives
for high income tax payers to bring forward income to 2009/10 that would otherwise have
been reported in 2010/11 income tax returns or possibly later years. This is the process of
‘forestalling’, discussed in more detail by HM Revenue and Customs (2012) and Cribb et al.
(2012, 2013). This, and the unavailability of SPI data for 2008/09, make assessments of
recent trends in the UK income distribution problematic for any measure calculated using
data on top incomes, especially top income share statistics. We therefore focus our discussion
on the estimates through to 2007/08.
                                            [Figure 2 near here]

16
  Our discussion here and later discusses point estimates of statistics; the focus is assessing differences
associated with changing definitions and sources (non-sampling variation) rather than assessing the impact of
sampling variability. However, for reference, we provide estimates of standard errors for all our inequality
measures in Appendices F and G.

                                                      13
        The series shown in grey in Figure 2 refer to estimates based on the FRS and HBAI
data, i.e. without SPI adjustments. These provide broadly similar estimates of levels and
trends to each other, but compared to WTID series, the estimates are not only substantially
lower in corresponding years but also fluctuate substantially from year to year. This is the
‘spurious volatility’ that the HBAI’s producers aimed to offset by introducing the SPI
adjustment.
        The SPI adjustment is indeed successful in this respect: the HBAI-SPI series is much
smoother than the two non- adjusted series and, in addition, the HBAI-SPI estimates are
generally larger in each year as well. However, these estimates are distinctly smaller than the
corresponding WTID ones. The differences range between around 1½ and 3 percentage
points, with the larger differences more apparent in the mid- to late-2000s. For example, the
WTID estimate of the top 1% share for 2007/08 is 15½% compared to the HBAI-SPI
estimate of 12½ percent, i.e. around one-fifth smaller, which is a relatively large difference.
Put differently, we provide UK evidence to support Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez’s (2011)
finding for the USA that household survey estimates do not fully capture the rise in inequality
shown by tax data (see the Introduction).
        Do our HBAI-SPI2 estimates of the share of the top 1% do better? Look at Figure 3
which shows the WTID and HBAI-SPI series (as in Figure 2) plus two HBAI-SPI2 series.
The first uses the WTID population and income controls, and SPI-derived values for the top
10% of individuals in the HBAI as discussed in Section 2. This is the series labelled ‘HBAI-
SPI2 individual gross income (WTID controls)’. The second series uses the same SPI values
for the top 10% of individuals in the HBAI (the same numerator), but uses HBAI-estimated
population-weighted total gross income in the denominator. The HBAI-SPI2 series with
WTID controls is virtually identical to the WTID series (by construction). The HBAI-SPI2
series using HBAI population weights does less well but does much better than the HBAI-SPI
series: it is much closer in levels and trends to the WTID series. Put differently, the use of the
internal HBAI control totals rather than the WTID ones leads to an under-estimation of the
income share of the top 1% by around one percentage point, but the trends are similar.17
                                           [Figure 3 near here]

17
  For more information about differences between WTID and internal HBAI control totals, see Appendix D.
Figure D1 summarizes differences in denominators, and shows that the increasing gap between WTID and
HBAI-SPI2 total income between 2001/02 and 2004/05 largely explains the increasing gap over this period
between top 1% income shares based on WTID and HBAI control totals. In contrast, differences in population
control totals in the WTID and HBAI adult populations do not appear to play an important role in explaining
differences in top income shares (Figure D2).


                                                     14
        The close match between estimates based on HBAI-SPI2 data with WTID controls
and the WTID estimates is also found if we examine different top income share statistics. See
Appendix Figures E1 and E2 for comparisons of series for the top 0.1%, top 10% to top 5%,
and top 5% to top 1% income groups.
        We have demonstrated that our HBAI-SPI2 data are able to almost exactly capture
WTID levels and trends based on the SPI unit record data when we use WTID population
controls and it does a reasonable job of doing so even when we use internal HBAI population
totals. It is the latter that we use in the next two sections for the reasons given earlier.




4. Using our combined (HBAI-SPI2) data for better cross-national comparisons of top
        incomes in the UK and USA


The top incomes literature employs only tax record data and is therefore limited to looking at
distributions of taxable income among tax units. Because the definitions of the tax unit and
taxable income differ across countries, there are potential comparability problems for cross-
national comparisons of top income shares. By exploiting the flexibility of household survey
data and using cross-walked definitions, we can address this issue.
        We illustrate this lesson with the UK-US comparison summarized in Figure 4. The
first top 1% income share series is taken from the WTID estimates for the USA, based on the
estimates of Piketty and Saez (2003, 2008) and subsequent updates. Reflecting US personal
tax administration, the WTID estimates refer to taxable market income and the income-
sharing unit is the family. We focus on the US top income series that exclude taxable realized
capital gains, since realized capital gains are not included in the UK series.18
        Figure 4 shows that the share of market income held by the top 1% of US families –
the series labelled ‘US family market income’ – increased from around 13.5% in 1995 to
around 16.5% in 2000 before falling over the recession years of the early-2000s. The share
then reached a peak of just over 18% in 2007, just before the Great Recession hit the USA.
Shares then declined over the next two years but started to recover in 2010/11.
                                            [Figure 4 near here]
        In the top incomes literature, these US estimates of levels and trends are often
compared with the WTID estimates for the UK discussed earlier: see the substantial review

18
   See Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore (2013, 2014) for discussions of the relative merits of including or
excluding taxable realized capital gains in measures of income.

                                                      15
articles by Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2011) as well as Roine and Waldenström (2015), for
example. This UK series refers to gross income and the sharing unit is the individual adult.
According to the WTID series, top 1% income shares are substantially lower in the UK than
in the USA, but follow approximately the same trend though 2007.
         When we cross-walk our UK survey data from a gross income definition to a market
income definition (moving from the series labelled ‘individual gross income’ to the one
labelled ‘individual market income’), the estimated top 1% share increases by around 2
percentage points each year, a relatively large change.19 On the other hand, if we shift to the
family but retain the gross income definition, estimated top 1% shares fall by about 1
percentage point or slightly more: look at the ‘family gross income’ series.
         The UK definition that is most comparable with the US one is the distribution of
market income among families (the ‘family market income’ series). Figure 4 shows that the
net result of using this series rather than the ‘individual gross income’ one is only a relatively
small increase in the share of income held by the top 1%. The reason is that the two
definitional changes not only go in opposite directions but almost completely offset each
other.
         This robustness in the cross-national comparison is not necessarily the general rule.
See the series for the top 0.1%, top 5% to 1%, and top 10% to 5% shares presented in Figures
5 to 7 in the same format as Figure 4. The further up the distribution the shares refer to, the
more important is the shift from an individual to a family definition of the tax unit and the
less important is the shift from gross to market income (at the very highest top income ranges
almost all income is market income). When we focus on the top 0.1%, our ‘UK family gross
income’ estimates are smaller than the ‘UK individual gross income’ estimates (Figure 5). At
the lower top income ranges not only are the estimates from the ‘UK family market income’
series greater than the ‘UK individual gross income’ estimates, they are greater than the
corresponding estimates for the USA (Figures 6 and 7).
                                           [Figures 5–7 near here]
         The other series shown in Figures 4 to 7 allow us to examine what happens to top
income shares if definitions are employed that are the norm in income distribution analysis
based on household survey data. It has long been argued that the appropriate income-sharing
unit is the household, that nominal incomes should be adjusted to account for differences in
household size and composition using an equivalence scale, and that distributional statistics

19
   The UK estimate is slightly larger than its US counterpart in 2009/10 but we give little weight to this finding
because of the forestalling problem discussed earlier.

                                                        16
relate to all individuals in the population. Burtless (2015) criticizes the definitions used in the
top incomes literature on these grounds. More generally, see the case for the conventional
survey definitions made by, inter alia, Gottschalk and Smeeding (1997), d’Ercole and Förster
(2012), and the influential Canberra Group (2011).
        Our ‘UK household gross income’ and ‘UK equivalised household gross income’
series show that once these factors are taken into consideration the share of income held by
the top 1% of individuals is substantially reduced relative to the ‘UK individual gross
income’ series which employs the definitions used in the top incomes literature. This finding
is unsurprising since households are institutions that enable individuals to pool and share
income, and larger households benefit from economies of scale relative to smaller-sized ones.
        Although estimates of top income share levels are sensitive to the choice of definition
of income and income sharing-unit, Figures 4 to 7 shows that estimates of trends are similar.
All of the UK series move closely in parallel with each other. This finding echoes that of
Lakner (2014) who showed that US top income share trends were similar when various
adjustments were made for tax unit size.




5. Using our combined (HBAI-SPI2) data to summarize inequality differently


The very nature of tax return data means that inequality is summarized using top income
share estimates, and the shares refer to incomes above the 90th percentile. By contrast, most
of the survey-based income distribution literature summarizes inequality using indices such
as the Gini coefficient that take account of income differences throughout the full income
range. A further advantage of our survey-based approach is that we can calculate these
measures in addition to top income shares, and see the extent to which they move in tandem
with top income shares.20
        In Figure 8 we compare Gini coefficient estimates based on HBAI-SPI and HBAI-
SPI2 data, and for both gross and market income definitions. The sharing unit is the
household throughout, and estimates refer to all individuals (including those aged less than
15). The figure shows unsurprisingly that market income is more unequally distributed than

20
  This is relatively unexplored territory. Leigh (2007) examined the association between movements in top
income shares and Gini coefficients using a country panel data set for 13 rich countries, finding a positive but
far from perfect correlation between the two measures. Our country case study approach allows us to examine in
more detail (for the UK) when and how trends differ for the two measures and, moreover, the sources of any
divergence in trends.

                                                      17
gross income (the latter includes redistributive government transfers), regardless of which
series is employed. Also unsurprising is that the Gini coefficients are larger for the HBAI-
SPI2 series than for the HBAI-SPI in corresponding years, since the HBAI-SPI2 data capture
top incomes better.
           What is also of particular interest is the more marked increase in the Gini coefficient
between 2004/05 and 2007/08 – reflecting better capture of the rise in top income shares over
this period. The bottom series, in grey, is the HBAI-SPI series for household net income. This
corresponds to the series reported in the official HBAI statistics (see also Figure 1).21 These
Gini estimates are some 4 to 5 percentage points lower than their gross income counterparts
but the trends are similar.
                                               [Figure 8 near here]
           Table 2 extends our comparisons of the HBAI-SPI2 and HBAI-SPI data by comparing
the growth in equivalised household gross income at different points in the income
distribution, from the bottom to the top. Unsurprisingly, there is very little difference between
datasets in estimated income growth for the bottom 90% of the distribution since the
adjustments incorporated to both series focus on the richest individuals. However, the HBAI-
SPI2 data show higher income growth than the HBAI-SPI for individuals between the 91st
and 95th percentiles and those between the 96th and 99th percentiles, and substantially greater
income growth for the top 1% (102% versus 76%). Interestingly, there is virtually no
difference in estimates of the change in the median across the datasets. Differences are
slightly more pronounced for the mean (35% versus 31%) and they appear to be driven by a
divergence in income growth in the final subperiod (4% versus 6% between 2004/05 and
2007/08).
                                                   [Table 2 here]
           We now expand the comparisons between data sets by looking at additional inequality
indices. In addition to the Gini coefficient, we consider the mean logarithmic deviation
(MLD), the Theil index, and half the squared coefficient of variation. These are members of
the generalized entropy family of indices, with sensitivity parameters 0, 1, and 2 respectively.
The larger the parameter, the more sensitive is the index to income differences at the top of
the distribution relative to those in the middle or at the bottom (the Gini coefficient and MLD
are middle-sensitive indices). Table 3 shows inequality levels for four years between 1995/96
and 2007/08 and changes over periods between those years. Again, the distributions refer to


21
     Recall that we cannot derive individual net income variables: see section 2.4.

                                                          18
equivalised household income among all individuals, with gross income series for HBAI-
SPI2 and HBAI-SPI, and a net income series for the latter only. Period-specific changes are
quite similar for HBAI-SPI gross and net definitions; the main contrast is between the
differently-adjusted gross income series. The exception is the period 1995/96 to 2001/02
when, for each index, all income definitions show similar inequality increases.
       The Gini coefficient for the HBAI-SPI2 data is greater than the HBAI-SPI data for
both 1995/96 and 2007/08, as is the percentage change between those two years (10% versus
7%). Moving to the other three indices, we see again that the level of inequality is greater in
the HBAI-SPI2 data. However, the more top-sensitive is the index (as we move down the
panels in the table), the larger is the measured increase in inequality. For example, the
increase between 1995/96 and 2007/08 in half the coefficient of variation squared according
to the HBAI-SPI2 data is much larger than the increase according to the HBAI-SPI data
(140% versus 50%). We know from the WTID estimates that the concentration of incomes at
the very top increased substantially over the period as a whole according to the top income
shares (cf. Figure 1 and 3), and the more comprehensive top-sensitive indices are also picking
this up. (The subperiod changes – inequality rise, fall, and rise again – are also similar.) In
short, the more that the survey data are adjusted to better capture top incomes, the greater is
the effect on inequality that is observed.
                                       [Table 3 near here]




6. Summary and Conclusions


Exploiting the flexibility provided by access to unit record household survey data, notably the
ability to cross-walk between different sets of definitions so that like is compared with like,
we have provided the most extensive comparison of UK inequality estimates derived from
survey and income tax data. In addition, we have shown how, with reconciled definitions, the
two data sources can be combined to yield better estimates of UK inequality levels and
trends. We have also examined the consequences of using inequality indices that account for
income differences throughout the income range, unlike top income share measures.
       Our results, based on the reconciled and combined data, highlight that the magnitude
of the estimated increase in inequality, especially between 2004/05 and 2007/08, depends on
whether the index is middle- or top-sensitive. Nonetheless, all inequality indices show a
greater increase in inequality over the period than do the estimates reported in the official
                                                19
income distribution statistics.
        The flexibility of unit record survey data also allows us to employ different
definitions of income and the income-sharing unit. We have shown how we can improve the
comparability of cross-national comparisons. With UK definitions cross-walked to the
definitions underlying the US top income share series, we have shown that conclusions about
transatlantic differences in top income shares depend on which top income group one looks
at.
        More generally, we have shown that it is possible to adjust household survey data to
take better account of their non-coverage of top incomes, as long as one has access to tax
return data for top income groups.22 The official income distribution statistics in the UK have
long exploited this possibility using their SPI adjustment, and we have shown with our SPI2
adjustment that it is possible to take even greater account of top incomes.
        One advantage of our data combination approach relative to the DWP’s is that we
exploit the well-known WTID estimates based on tax return data to provide a benchmark.
The accuracy of this benchmark is conditional on the reliability of the estimates of the
population and income control totals that the WTID employs. Assessment of these would be
a valuable topic for further research, with pay-offs for the top incomes literature as well as for
survey-based approaches like ours.
        A second advantage of our approach is that it is simpler than the DWP’s. It does not
use group-specific cell-means to do the ‘SPI adjustment’, no stratification groups need be
defined, and there is no need for any SPI-based projections as currently employed. Given our
interest in improving inequality estimates, we seek better coverage of high incomes –
regardless of who has them. Individuals with the top incomes in some stratification groups
are not in the top income group for the population as a whole.
        Arguably the DWP’s current SPI adjustment is fit for purpose, because the principal
focus of its official HBAI reports is the prevalence of low income with assessments based on
low income cut-offs equal to fractions of median income (not fractions of mean income).
Estimates of median-based cut-offs and of low income prevalence are likely to be insensitive
to variations in the nature of SPI adjustment employed, ours included.
        The problem with this argument is that it fails to recognise that the DWP’s HBAI

22
  An alternative approach is to calculate summary inequality measures separately for the very rich using tax
data and for the rest of the population using survey data and then combine the summary measures (rather than,
as here, combining the data and calculating the inequality measure from these). See e.g. Atkinson (2007),
Alvaredo (2011), and Jenkins (2015). Of course, this approach also requires like for like definitions in both
sources.

                                                      20
survey-based data are also the most commonly-used source for assessing inequality in the
UK. Survey data are also employed in most other countries for the same purpose, and for
cross-national comparisons. But household surveys in all countries are subject to under-
coverage of top incomes. We therefore hope that our reconciled and combined data approach
will stimulate further research on how to take better account of top incomes in inequality
assessments.




References


Alvaredo, F. (2011). A note on the relationship between top income shares and the Gini
      coefficient. Economic Letters, 110 (3), 274–277.
Alvaredo, F., Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., and Saez, E. (2013). The top 1 percent in
      international and historical perspective. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27 (3), 3–
      20.
Alvaredo, F., Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., Saez, E. (2015). The World Top Incomes
      Database. http://g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/topincomes/. Accessed Day Month
      Year.
Armour, P., Burkhauser, R. V. and Larrimore, J. (2013). Deconstructing income and income
    inequality measures: a crosswalk from market income to comprehensive income.
    American Economic Review, 101 (3), 173–177.
Armour, P., Burkhauser, R. V., and Larrimore, J. (2014). Levels and trends in United States
    income and its distribution: a crosswalk from market income towards a comprehensive
    Haig-Simons income measure. Southern Economic Journal, 14 (2), 271–293.
Atkinson, A. B. (2005). Top incomes in the UK over the twentieth century. Journal of the
    Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 168 (2), 325–343.
Atkinson, A. B. (2007). Measuring top incomes: methodological issues. In: A. B. Atkinson
    and T. Piketty, (eds), Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century: A Contrast Between
    Continental European and English-Speaking Countries. Oxford: Oxford University
    Press.
Atkinson, A. B. (2012). UK estimates of top income shares 2009-2010: Revised note on
    methods, World Top Incomes Database Methodological Notes, 12 April 2012.
Atkinson, A. B. (2015). Inequality. What Can Be Done? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
    Press.
                                              21
Atkinson, A. B. and Brandolini, A. (2001). Promises and pitfalls in the use of secondary data
    sets: income inequality in OECD countries as a case study. Journal of Economic
    Literature 39 (3), 771–799.
Atkinson, A. B. and Ooms, T. (2015). UK estimates of top income shares 2012/2013: Note
    on methods, World Top Incomes Database Methodological Notes, 25 March 2015.
Atkinson, A. B., and Piketty, T. (eds). (2007). Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century: A
    Contrast Between Continental European and English-Speaking Countries. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.
Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., and Saez, E. (2011). Top incomes in the long run of history.
    Journal of Economic Literature, 49 (1), 3–71.
Belfield, C., Cribb, J., Hood, A., and Joyce, R. (2015). Living Standards, Poverty and
    Inequality in the UK: 2015. Report 107. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
    http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7878
Brewer, M., Sibieta, L., and Wren-Lewis. S. (2007). Racing Away? Income Inequality and
    the Evolution of High Incomes. Briefing Note 76. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
    http://www.ifs.org.uk/bns/bn76.pdf
Burtless, G. (2015). Review of Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty-First Century.
    Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 34 (3), 719–727.
Canberra Group (2011). Handbook on Household Income Statistics, second edition. Geneva:
    United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
Cribb, J., Joyce, R., and Phillips, D. (2012). Living Standards, Poverty and Inequality in the
       UK: 2012. Commentary C214. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
       http://www.ifs.org.uk/comms/comm124.pdf
Cribb, J., Hood, A., Joyce, R., and Phillips, D. (2013). Living Standards, Poverty and
    Inequality in the UK: 2013. Report R81. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
    http://www.ifs.org.uk/comms/r81.pdf
d’Ercole, M. M., and Förster, M. (2012). The OECD approach to measuring income
    distribution and poverty: strengths, limits and statistical issues. In: D. J. Besharov and K.
    A. Couch (eds.), European Measures of Income and Poverty: Lessons for the U.S. New
    York: Oxford University Press, 27–58.
Department of Social Security (1996). Households Below Average Income. Methodological
    Review. Report of a Working Group. London: Department of Social Security.




                                              22
Department for Work and Pensions (2010). Households Below Average Income An Analysis
    of the Income Distribution 1994/95 – 2008/09. London: Department for Work and
    Pensions.
Department for Work and Pensions (2013), Households Below Average Income, 1994/95-
    2012/13 [computer file]. 7th Edition. Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive [distributor],
    October 2013. SN: 5828.
Department for Work and Pensions (2014). Households Below Average Income An Analysis
    of the Income Distribution 1994/95 – 2012/13. London: Department for Work and
    Pensions.
Department for Work and Pensions, National Centre for Social Research and Office for
    National Statistics Social and Vital Statistics Division (2014), Family Resources Survey,
    2010-2011 [computer file]. 2nd Edition. Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive
    [distributor], October 2014. SN: 7085, http://dx.doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-7085-2
Department for Work and Pensions (2015). Households Below Average Income An Analysis
    of the Income Distribution 1994/95 – 2013/14. London: Department for Work and
    Pensions.
Gottschalk, P. and Smeeding, T. M. (1997). Cross-national comparisons of earnings and
    income inequality. Journal of Economic Literature 35 (2), 633–687.
Gray, C. (2007). SPI documentation – how to decide on thresholds. Unpublished paper.
    London: Department for Work and Pensions.
HM Revenue and Customs (2012). The Exchequer effect of the 50 per cent additional rate of
    income tax. London: HMRC.
HM Revenue and Customs KAI Data, Policy and Co-ordination (2014), Survey of Personal
    Incomes, 2010-2011: Public Use Tape [computer file]. Colchester, Essex: UK Data
    Archive [distributor], November 2014. SN: 7569, http://dx.doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-
    7569-1.
Jenkins, S. P. (2015). To what extent is inequality increasing? Some data issues. LIS Lecture
    presented at the 6th ECINEQ conference, Luxembourg, 13 July 2015.
    http://www.lisdatacenter.org/news-and-events/2015-summer-lecture/
Lakner, C. (2014). Top incomes in the USA, 1960–2005: family size and factor income
    composition. Chapter 2 of The Determinants of Incomes and Inequality: Evidence from
    Poor and Rich Countries, DPhil thesis. Oxford: University of Oxford.
Leigh, A. (2007). How closely do top income shares track other measures of inequality?
    Economic Journal, 117 (524), F619–F633.
                                              23
OECD (2008). Growing Unequal? Income Distribution and Poverty in OECD Countries.
    Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2011). Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2015). In It Together: Why Less Inequality Benefits All. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Office for National Statistics (2015). The effects of taxes and benefits on household income,
    financial year ending 2014. London: Office for National Statistics.
    http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/household-income/the-effects-of-taxes-and-benefits-on-
    household-income/2013-2014/index.html
Piketty, T. (2003). Income inequality in France, 1901–1998. Journal of Political Economy
    111 (5), 1004–1042.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twentieth-First Century. Cambridge, MA, and London: The
    Belknap Press.
Piketty, T. and Saez, E. (2003). Income inequality in the United States, 1913–1998. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 118 (1), 1–39.
Piketty, T. and Saez, E. (2008). Income inequality in the United States, 1913–1998 (tables
    and figures updated to 2006). http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~saez/TabFig2006.xls
Roine, J. and Waldenström, D. (2015). Long run trends in the distribution of income and
    wealth. In: A. B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon (eds), Handbook of Income Distribution,
    vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland.
Roser, M. (2015). ‘Income inequality: poverty falling faster than ever but the 1% are racing
    ahead’, The Guardian, 27 March 2015.
    http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/mar/27/income-inequality-rising-
    falling-worlds-richest-poorest
Young, T. (2015). Lefty myths about inequality, The Spectator, 4 April 2015.
    http://new.spectator.co.uk/2015/04/lefty-myths-about-inequality/




                                              24
Figure 1. Trends in UK income inequality since 1961



                                     180            Gini                 p90/p10
                                                    Share top 1%

                                     160
   Inequality (indexed 1962 = 100)




                                     140


                                     120


                                     100


                                     80


                                     60
                                           1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


Notes: The Gini and p90/p10 measures are based on household survey data using the same
definitions as employed by the UK’s official income distribution statistics (source: authors’
derivations from the spreadsheet accompanying Belfield et al. 2015). The top 1% share
measure is based on tax return data (source: authors’ derivations from Alvaredo et al. 2015).
The data sources and income definitions that each series employs are discussed further in
Section 2.




                                                                        25
Figure 2. Top 1% income shares: estimates from survey and tax return data

                            18
                                          SPI - Total income (pre-tax) (WTID controls)
                                          HBAI-SPI individual gross income
                            17            HBAI individual gross income
                                          FRS individual gross income
                            16

                            15
         Income share (%)




                            14

                            13

                            12

                            11

                            10

                            9

                            8

                             1995/96   1997/98    1999/00      2001/02     2003/04       2005/06   2007/08   2009/10




Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the survey-based series only from 2002/03 onwards. The acronyms refer
to the following data sources and series:
          SPI: the Survey of Personal Incomes (income tax return data)
          FRS: Family Resources Survey, basic income variables
          HBAI: the DWP’s cleaned-up FRS income variables
          HBAI-SPI: the HBAI series incorporating the SPI adjustment
          WTID: World Top Incomes Database (Alvaredo et al. 2015).
The different series are explained further in Section 2.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRS, HBAI, SPI and WTID data.

(Stata graph top1b1)




                                                                      26
Figure 3. Top 1% income shares: estimates from SPI/WTID data and combined survey
       data

                            18
                                          SPI - Total income (pre-tax) (WTID controls)
                                          HBAI-SPI individual gross income
                            17            HBAI-SPI2 individual gross income
                                          HBAI-SPI2 individual gross income (WTID controls)
                            16

                            15
         Income share (%)




                            14

                            13

                            12

                            11

                            10

                            9

                            8

                             1995/96   1997/98    1999/00     2001/02    2003/04     2005/06   2007/08   2009/10



Notes and sources: As for Figure 2.

(Stata graph top1n1)




                                                                    27
Figure 4. Top 1% income shares in the UK (HBAI-SPI2 series), with alternative units of
       analysis and income definitions and comparison with the USA


                             20
                             19
                             18
                             17
                             16
                             15
          Income share (%)




                             14
                             13
                             12
                             11
                             10
                             9
                             8
                                                    US family market income                           UK individual market income
                             7                      UK individual gross income                        UK family market income
                             6                      UK family gross income                            UK household gross income
                                                    UK equivalised household gross income
                             5

                              1995/96   1997/98   1999/00       2001/02          2003/04    2005/06   2007/08        2009/10



Notes and sources: as for Figure 2.

(Stata graph top1g)




                                                                         28
Figure 5. Top 0.1% income shares in the UK (HBAI-SPI2 series), with alternative units
       of analysis and income definitions and comparison with the USA


                       9


                       8


                       7


                       6
    Income share (%)




                       5


                       4


                       3


                       2
                                              US family market income                           UK individual market income
                       1                      UK individual gross income                        UK family market income
                                              UK family gross income                            UK household gross income
                                              UK equivalised household gross income
                       0

                       1995/96   1997/98   1999/00       2001/02           2003/04    2005/06   2007/08        2009/10




Notes and sources: as for Figure 2.

(Stata graph top01c)




                                                                            29
Figure 6. Top 5% to 1% income shares in the UK (HBAI-SPI2 series), with alternative
       units of analysis and income definitions and comparison with the USA


                             20
                             19
                             18
                             17
                             16
                             15
          Income share (%)




                             14
                             13
                             12
                             11
                             10
                             9
                             8                                                       US family market income
                                                                                     UK individual market income
                             7                                                       UK individual gross income
                             6                                                       UK family market income
                                                                                     UK family gross income
                             5

                              1995/96   1997/98   1999/00   2001/02    2003/04   2005/06   2007/08     2009/10



Notes and sources: as for Figure 2.

(Stata graph top5-1b)




                                                                  30
Figure 7. Top 10% to 5% income shares in the UK (HBAI-SPI2 series), with alternative
       units of analysis and income definitions and comparison with the USA


                             20
                             19
                             18
                             17
                             16
                             15
          Income share (%)




                             14
                             13
                             12
                             11
                             10
                             9
                             8                                                       US family market income
                                                                                     UK individual market income
                             7                                                       UK individual gross income
                             6                                                       UK family market income
                                                                                     UK family gross income
                             5

                              1995/96   1997/98   1999/00   2001/02    2003/04   2005/06   2007/08     2009/10




Notes and sources: as for Figure 2.

(Stata graph top10-5b)




                                                                  31
Figure 8. Gini coefficients using different household income definitions: HBAI-SP2
      versus HBAI-SPI estimates


          0.55


          0.53


          0.51


          0.49


          0.47
                           HBAI-SPI2 gross income
          0.45             HBAI-SPI2 market income
                           HBAI-SPI gross income
          0.43             HBAI-SPI market income
                           HBAI-SPI net income
          0.41


          0.39


          0.37


          0.35


          0.33

             1995/96    1997/98      1999/00         2001/02        2003/04   2005/06   2007/08   2009/10




Notes: In each series, household income is equivalised using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the
unit of analysis. Estimates are based on the full population (aged less than 15 as well as aged 15+).
Sources: as for Figure 2.
(Stata graph Gini1)




                                                               32
Table 1. Availability of income variables in the FRS and HBAI subfile unit record data,
       by definition of income and income-sharing unit

Income-sharing          Income
                                                                         Dataset
unit                    definition
                                        FRS                 HBAI                 HBAI-SPI
                                                            (without SPI
                                                                                 (including SPI adjustments)
                                                            adjustments)
Individual              Market          Derived by the      Derived by the       Derived by the authors
                                        authors             authors
                        Gross           Available           Unavailable          Only available for 2005/06
                                                                                 and later years, but derived
                                                                                 by the authors for earlier
                                                                                 years
                        Net             Available           Unavailable          Unavailable

Family                  Market          Derived by the      Derived by the       Derived by the authors
                                        authors             authors
                        Gross           Available           Available            Available
                        Net             Unavailable         Available            Available

Household               Market          Derived by the      Derived by the       Derived by the authors
                                        authors             authors
                        Gross           Available           Available            Available
                        Net             Unavailable         Available            Available

Notes: ‘Available’ refers to variables either available in the FRS files or variables derived by the DWP and
released in the public-use files for each year from 1994/95 through 2012/13. Market income is pre-tax pre-
transfer income; gross income is pre-tax post-transfer income; net income is post-tax post-transfer income.
Variables derived by the authors are explained in the main text.




                                                       33
 Table 2. Percentage growth in equivalised gross household income between 1995/96 and
        2007/08: HBAI-SPI versus HBAI-SPI2 estimates, by income group

                           1995/96 to  1995/96 to                       2001/02 to              2004/05 to
                            2007/08     2001/02                          2004/05                 2007/08
                         HBAI- HBAI- HBAI- HBAI-                      HBAI- HBAI-             HBAI- HBAI-
Income group
                          SPI    SPI2 SPI     SPI2                     SPI    SPI2             SPI     SPI2
Poorest fifth              22.7      22.6        17.3        17.2       6.2          6.3        -1.5       -1.6
2nd poorest fifth          30.1      29.9        22.4        22.3       5.2          5.3         1.0        0.9
Middle fifth               25.5      25.6        19.3        19.2       3.7          3.8         1.5        1.5
2nd richest fifth          24.3      24.9        17.8        17.8       3.4          3.3         2.0        2.7
Richest fifth              38.2      45.7        28.6        28.8       0.7          0.6         6.7       12.4
Percentiles 81 to 90       25.3      27.4        19.3        19.7       1.8          1.2         3.2        5.2
Percentiles 91 to 95       27.3      31.3        21.7        22.6       1.5          0.7         3.1        6.3
Percentiles 96 to 99       41.3      46.1        28.1        29.4       2.6          0.9         7.5       11.9
Top 1 percent              76.1      102.3       59.3        55.0       -4.4        -0.3        15.7       31.0
Median                     25.4      25.3        19.3        20.2       3.4          3.6         1.6        1.5
Mean                       31.1      34.7        23.4        22.1       2.6          2.5         3.7        6.5

 Notes and sources: As for Figure 2. Household income is equivalised using the modified-OECD scale. The
 individual is the unit of analysis. Estimates are based on the full population (aged less than 15 as well as aged
 15+). The price index used is the all items RPI excluding Council tax (agg4111), a bespoke index created for the
 Department for Work and Pensions by the Office for National Statistics.




                                                        34
Table 3. Increase in inequality of equivalised gross household income between 1995/96 and 2010/11 according to four inequality indices:
       HBAI-SPI2 versus HBAI-SPI data

                                                                     Level                                Percentage change
                                     Income                                                    1995/96    2001/02 2004/05      1995/96
 Inequality index        Data set
                                     definition   1995/96   2001/02        2004/05   2007/08     to          to         to        to
                                                                                               2001/02    2004/05 2007/08      2007/08
 Gini coefficient        HBAI-SPI2   Gross         0.380     0.400           0.390    0.419      5.1         –2.5       7.3      10.1
                         HBAI-SPI    Gross         0.375     0.394           0.384    0.399      5.2         –2.5       4.0       6.6
                         HBAI-SPI    Net           0.333     0.349           0.339    0.357      4.7         –2.6       5.1       7.1

 Mean logarithmic        HBAI-SPI2   Gross         0.245     0.275           0.261    0.305      12.2        –5.2     16.9       24.3
 deviation (MLD)         HBAI-SPI    Gross         0.239     0.268           0.254    0.277      12.4        –5.3      9.1       16.1
                         HBAI-SPI    Net           0.186     0.208           0.195    0.217      11.6        –6.1     11.0       16.4

 Theil index             HBAI-SPI2   Gross         0.275     0.333           0.317    0.396      21.3        –5.0     24.9       44.0
                         HBAI-SPI    Gross         0.266     0.325           0.299    0.332      22.5        –8.0     10.7       24.8
                         HBAI-SPI    Net           0.205     0.250           0.229    0.258      22.0        –8.3     12.7       26.0

 Half squared            HBAI-SPI2   Gross         0.486     0.777           0.721    1.162      59.7       –7.2      61.1      138.9
 coefficient of          HBAI-SPI    Gross         0.470     0.765           0.619    0.705      62.5      –19.0      13.8       49.8
 variation               HBAI-SPI    Net           0.330     0.527           0.430    0.501      59.8      –18.4      16.5       52.0

Notes and sources: As for Table 2.




                                                                      35
                          APPENDICES

                              accompanying



   What has Been Happening to UK Income Inequality Since the Mid-1990s?
Answers from Reconciled and Combined Household Survey and Tax Return Data


                                    by



                 Burkhauser, Hérault, Jenkins, and Wilkins


                             3 February 2016




                           APPENDICES –        i
Appendix A

Figure A1. Trends in US inequality since 1967

                                     260
                                                       Gini                    p90/p10
                                     240               Share top 1%            Share top 1% (with capital gains)
   Inequality (indexed 1967 = 100)




                                     220

                                     200

                                     180

                                     160

                                     140

                                     120

                                     100

                                     80
                                           1965 1970    1975   1980   1985   1990 1995    2000   2005   2010       2015


Notes: The Gini and p90/p10 measures are based on Current Population Survey data (source:
authors’ derivations from De-Nevas Walt and Proctor, 2015, Table A-2). The two top 1%
share measures are based on IRS tax return data (source: authors’ derivations from the World
Top Incomes Database). There were substantial changes in CPS survey design in 1993 and
2013, and the IRS tax return estimates are affected by the 1986 Tax Reform Act: see
Atkinson et al. (2011) and Burkhauser et al. (2012) for detailed discussions. However,
between the mid-1990s and 2012, there were no such changes hindering comparability of
trends across the two sources. Over this period, the increase in inequality as measured by the
change in the top 1% share was substantially greater than the increased measured by the Gini
coefficient or p90/p10.

Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., and Saez, E. (2011). Top incomes in the long run of history.
    Journal of Economic Literature, 49 (1), 3–71.
Burkhauser, R.V., Feng, S., Jenkins, S. P., and Larrimore, J. (2012). Recent trends in top
    income shares in the USA: reconciling estimates from March CPS and IRS tax return data,
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 94 (2), 371–388.
De-Nevas Walt, C. and Proctor, B. D. (2015). Income and Poverty in the United States: 2014.
    Washington, DC: US Bureau of the Census.
    https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/data/incpovhlth/2014/index.html




                                                                      APPENDICES – 1
Appendix B. The SPI adjustment: income thresholds and numbers of eligible
     individuals (cf. section 2.3)


Table B1. Gross income thresholds for eligibility to the SPI adjustments (pounds per
      year, nominal)

 Fiscal year             Great Britain              Northern Ireland
                 Non-pensioners     Pensioners Non-pensioners Pensioners
 1994/95             100,000            50,000       –               –
 1995/96             100,000           100,000       –               –
 1996/97             100,000           100,000       –               –
 1997/98             100,000            50,000       –               –
 1998/99             150,000            75,000       –               –
 1999/00             150,000            60,000       –               –
 2000/01             150,000            60,000       –               –
 2001/02             150,000            60,000       –               –
 2002/03             150,000            60,000    150,000         60,000
 2003/04             150,000            60,000    150,000         60,000
 2004/05             150,000            60,000    150,000         60,000
 2005/06             150,000            60,000    150,000         60,000
 2006/07             150,000            60,000    150,000         60,000
 2007/08             150,000            60,000    150,000         60,000
 2008/09             150,000            60,000    100,000         60,000
 2009/10             256,136            60,347    167,133         55,253
 2010/11             202,952            65,321    141,044         57,091
 2011/12             237,136            68,601    131,732         59,731
 2012/13             236,694            73,631    131,166         60,088
Notes. In years prior to 2009/10, the thresholds are based on net rather gross income for non-
pensioners. For all other years and groups, the thresholds are based on gross income. The
Family Resources Survey did not include Northern Ireland before 2002/03.
Source: Department for Work and Pensions (2014, Appendix 2) for 2012/13 and previous
HBAI reports for earlier years.




                                            APPENDICES – 2
Table B2. Weighted and unweighted numbers of individuals in HBAI data, by SPI-
      adjustment eligibility (all individuals aged 15 years or more)


                  Non SPI-adjusted                  SPI-adjusted         Share
 Fiscal                                                                (weighted,      Total
  year        Weighted   Unweighted            Weighted   Unweighted      %)        population
 1994/95      44,384,604   48,848               77,999        77         0.18       44,462,603
 1995/96      44,508,236   48,524               52,004        45         0.12       44,560,241
 1996/97      44,698,884   47,271               60,002        61         0.13       44,758,887
 1997/98      44,795,192   43,767              116,447        98         0.26       44,911,638
 1998/99      45,010,976   42,414               64,001        46         0.14       45,074,975
 1999/00      45,130,540   46,138               89,001        56         0.20       45,219,542
 2000/01      45,374,004   43,803              109,000        84         0.24       45,483,004
 2001/02      45,546,944   46,723              125,008        99         0.27       45,671,954
 2002/03      47,291,028   52,950              127,311        93         0.27       47,418,339
 2003/04      47,502,560   52,971              133,610       115         0.28       47,636,171
 2004/05      47,813,188   51,390              152,601       127         0.32       47,965,790
 2005/06      48,366,940   51,569              166,603       126         0.34       48,533,542
 2006/07      48,776,460   47,263              203,401       131         0.42       48,979,862
 2007/08      49,282,236   45,537              254,401       136         0.52       49,536,637
 2008/09      49,730,852   45,611              252,002       162         0.51       49,982,854
 2009/10      50,033,588   45,767              249,386       149         0.50       50,282,974
 2010/11      50,516,168   46,309              252,496       175         0.50       50,768,665
 2011/12      51,351,512   38,118              253,701       114         0.49       51,605,215
 2012/13      51,635,808   36,917              256,294       112         0.50       51,892,104
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI data.




                                         APPENDICES – 3
Appendix C. Construction of individual-level HBAI and HBAI-SPI variables (cf.
        Section 2.4)


Figure C1. Median and mean gross and market incomes for HBAI-SPI individual
       income series (actual post-2005/06 series and imputed 1994/95–2012/13 series), in
       pounds per week (2012/13 prices)


                                   460


                                   410


                                   360
          £ p.w., 2012/13 prices




                                   310


                                   260


                                   210


                                   160

                                                    Median HBAI-SPI gross income     Median HBAI-SPI gross income (imputed)
                                   110              Mean HBAI-SPI gross income       Mean HBAI-SPI gross income (imputed)
                                                    Median HBAI-SPI market income    Median HBAI-SPI market income (imputed)
                                                    Mean HBAI-SPI market income      Mean HBAI-SPI market income (imputed)
                                   60

                                     1994/95 1996/97 1998/99 2000/01 2002/03 2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13




Note: The price index used is the all items RPI excluding Council tax (agg4111), a bespoke
index created for the Department for Work and Pensions by the Office for National Statistics.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI and FRS data.

(Stata graph mean&median1)




                                                                APPENDICES – 4
Appendix D. WTID and HBAI control totals (cf. section 2.5)



Figure D1. Income control totals: total income (in billions of pounds per year, current
prices)


                              1200
                                              WTID Total income
                                              HBAI-SPI2 total gross income
                                              HBAI-SPI total gross income
                              1000            FRS total gross income
   £bn p.y., current prices




                              800



                              600



                              400



                              200



                                0

                                 1995/96   1997/98   1999/00    2001/02      2003/04   2005/06   2007/08   2009/10




Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS, HBAI-SPI and HBAI-SPI2 data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data.




                                                                APPENDICES – 5
Figure D2. Population control totals: number of individuals aged 15+ (millions), HBAI
       and WTID data


                              54
                                            HBAI total population
                                            WTID total population

                              52



                              50
         Millions of adults




                              48



                              46



                              44



                              42



                              40

                               1995/96   1997/98    1999/00     2001/02   2003/04   2005/06   2007/08   2009/10




Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: WTID data and authors’ calculations based on HBAI data (weighted sum of the population aged 15 and
above).




                                                           APPENDICES – 6
Appendix E. Additional top income share estimates (cf. sections 3–5)


Figure E1. Top 0.1% individual income shares: HBAI-SPI, HBAI-SPI2 and SPI/WTID
       series

                      9
                                   SPI - Total income (pre-tax) (WTID controls)
                                   HBAI-SPI individual gross income
                      8            HBAI-SPI2 individual gross income
                                   HBAI-SPI2 individual gross income (WTID controls)
                      7


                      6
   Income share (%)




                      5


                      4


                      3


                      2


                      1


                      0

                      1995/96   1997/98    1999/00     2001/02     2003/04     2005/06   2007/08   2009/10



Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS, HBAI-SPI and HBAI-SPI2 series only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data.

(Stata graph top01a)




                                                         APPENDICES – 7
Figure E2. Top 10% to 5% and top 5% to 1% individual income shares: HBAI-SPI2
       and SPI/WTID series

                      18

                      17

                      16

                      15
   Income share (%)




                      14

                      13

                      12

                      11
                                   Top 10 to 5% SPI - Total income (pre-tax) (WTID controls)
                      10           Top 10 to 5% HBAI-SPI2 individual gross income (WTID controls)
                                   Top 10 to 5% HBAI-SPI2 individual gross income
                      9            Top 5 to 1% SPI - Total income (pre-tax) (WTID controls)
                                   Top 5 to 1% HBAI-SPI2 individual gross income (WTID controls)
                      8            Top 5 to 1% HBAI-SPI2 individual gross income

                       1995/96   1997/98   1999/00     2001/02     2003/04     2005/06     2007/08   2009/10



Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI-SPI2 data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data.

(Stata graph 10-5-1a)




                                                         APPENDICES – 8
Appendix F. Top income shares and standard errors

Table F.1 Top 1% income shares and standard errors within parentheses
                                                                  HBAI-        HBAI-        HBAI-       HBAI-    HBAI-
Data set
                SPI       HBAI-SPI       HBAI         FRS          SPI2         SPI2         SPI2        SPI2     SPI2    HBAI-SPI2   HBAI-SPI2
                                                                                                                                      Equivalised
Income         Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross       Market       Gross   Market     Gross
                                                                                                                                         gross
definition    income       income       income       income       income       income       income      income   income    income
                                                                                                                                        income
Unit         Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Family   Family   Household   Household
Population
              WTID          HBAI         HBAI         HBAI         HBAI        WTID          HBAI       HBAI     HBAI       HBAI        HBAI
control
Income                                                            HBAI-                     HBAI-       HBAI-    HBAI-
              WTID        HBAI-SPI       HBAI         FRS                      WTID                                       HBAI-SPI2   HBAI-SPI2
control                                                            SPI2                      SPI2        SPI2     SPI2
                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)      (9)      (10)         (11)
 1994/95                     9.05         8.50         8.50
                            (0.30)       (0.34)       (0.31)
 1995/96       10.75         9.28         8.01         8.00         9.77        10.71        11.63       8.66    10.27       7.85        7.41
               (1.66)       (0.37)       (0.24)       (0.24)       (0.34)       (0.51)       (0.40)     (0.34)   (0.40)     (0.34)      (0.30)
 1996/97       11.90         9.12         8.26         8.30        10.72        11.87        12.67       9.63    11.35       8.79        8.32
               (1.60)       (0.34)       (0.41)       (0.41)       (0.44)       (0.55)       (0.51)     (0.43)   (0.50)     (0.42)      (0.39)
 1997/98       12.07        10.44         8.71         8.71        11.12        12.03        13.03       9.83    11.50       8.99        8.77
               (1.35)       (0.41)       (0.28)       (0.28)       (0.49)       (0.58)       (0.56)     (0.47)   (0.54)     (0.46)      (0.49)
 1998/99       12.56        10.51         9.22         9.18        11.56        12.50        13.49      10.29    11.98       9.44        9.24
               (1.25)       (0.56)       (0.47)       (0.47)       (0.51)       (0.60)       (0.58)     (0.52)   (0.59)     (0.51)      (0.53)
 1999/00       13.26        10.81         8.79         8.79        11.83        13.20        13.79      10.66    12.40       9.82        9.68
               (1.33)       (0.58)       (0.37)       (0.37)       (0.52)       (0.65)       (0.60)     (0.52)   (0.59)     (0.50)      (0.56)
 2000/01       13.51        11.66        11.60        11.44        12.31        13.43        14.27      11.02    12.74      10.25       10.07
               (1.23)       (0.54)       (0.86)       (0.86)       (0.58)       (0.69)       (0.66)     (0.56)   (0.64)     (0.56)      (0.61)
 2001/02       13.40        11.65        11.04        11.08        12.00        13.32        13.91      10.72    12.40       9.81        9.72
               (1.19)       (0.60)       (1.39)       (1.39)       (0.50)       (0.65)       (0.57)     (0.50)   (0.57)     (0.49)      (0.53)
 2002/03       13.02        11.49         8.78         8.83        11.65        13.00        13.58      10.36    12.05       9.46        8.99
               (1.14)       (0.61)       (0.31)       (0.32)       (0.49)       (0.56)       (0.56)     (0.47)   (0.54)     (0.47)      (0.46)
 2003/04       13.29        10.80         8.90         8.91        11.57        13.25        13.57      10.26    12.01       9.35        9.04

                                                                        APPENDICES – 9
                (1.25)          (0.52)        (0.37)         (0.37)         (0.47)          (0.55)        (0.54)       (0.47)       (0.54)   (0.46)     (0.48)
 2004/05        13.34           11.20          8.88           9.25          11.89           13.27         13.91        10.54        12.30     9.59       9.53
                (1.21)          (0.52)        (0.31)         (0.38)         (0.50)          (0.57)        (0.57)       (0.48)       (0.55)   (0.47)     (0.51)
 2005/06        14.26           11.17         10.93           9.05          13.09           14.22         15.29        11.81        13.76    10.70      10.39
                (1.22)          (0.50)        (1.54)         (0.31)         (0.53)          (0.59)        (0.61)       (0.52)       (0.60)   (0.51)     (0.55)
 2006/07        14.92           11.60          9.53           9.56          13.75           14.83         15.93        12.33        14.26    11.20      10.87
                (1.24)          (0.54)        (0.38)         (0.38)         (0.66)          (0.71)        (0.74)       (0.71)       (0.81)   (0.71)     (0.65)
 2007/08        15.51           12.44          9.34           8.64          14.38           15.46         16.66        12.91        14.92    11.86      11.37
                (1.20)          (0.62)        (0.36)         (0.25)         (0.76)          (0.82)        (0.86)       (0.81)       (0.92)   (0.80)     (0.80)
 2008/09                        12.46         11.46          10.94
                                (0.65)        (2.23)         (2.24)
 2009/10         15.47          13.12         10.04           9.66          14.47           15.36         17.10        13.17        15.53    12.14      11.15
                 (0.76)         (0.78)        (0.48)         (0.43)         (0.85)          (0.90)        (0.97)       (0.85)       (0.98)   (0.85)     (0.80)
 2010/11         12.61          11.63         10.06           8.98          12.28           12.57         14.63        11.04        13.12    10.07       9.62
                 (0.56)         (0.47)        (0.45)         (0.28)         (0.56)          (0.58)        (0.65)       (0.59)       (0.68)   (0.58)     (0.54)
 2011/12                        12.35          8.89           9.66
                                (0.72)        (0.37)         (0.41)
 2012/13                        11.81          9.09           9.52
                                (0.69)        (0.47)         (0.29)
Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data. Household income is equivalised using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the unit of analysis.
Estimates are based on the full population. The definition of the ‘family’ is the ‘benefit unit’ (see Department for Work and Pensions 2015)




                                                                           APPENDICES – 10
Table F.2 Top 0.1% income shares and standard errors within parentheses
                                                                  HBAI-        HBAI-        HBAI-       HBAI-    HBAI-
Data set
                SPI       HBAI-SPI       HBAI         FRS          SPI2         SPI2         SPI2        SPI2     SPI2     HBAI-SPI2   HBAI-SPI2

Income                                                                                                                                 Equivalised
definition     Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross       Market       Gross   Market      Gross        gross
              income       income       income       income       income       income       income      income   income     income       income
                                                                                                                 Benefit
Unit         Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Family             Household   Household
                                                                                                                   Unit
Population
              WTID          HBAI         HBAI         HBAI         HBAI        WTID          HBAI       HBAI     HBAI        HBAI        HBAI
control
Income                                                            HBAI-                     HBAI-       HBAI-    HBAI-
              WTID        HBAI-SPI       HBAI         FRS                      WTID                                        HBAI-SPI2   HBAI-SPI2
control                                                            SPI2                      SPI2        SPI2     SPI2
                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)      (9)       (10)         (11)
 1994/95                     2.74         2.17         2.07
                            (0.19)       (0.27)       (0.23)
 1995/96        3.24         2.91         1.89         1.90         2.87         3.22         3.42       2.12     2.52        1.77        1.71
               (0.81)       (0.15)       (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.02)       (0.26)       (0.03)     (0.09)   (0.10)      (0.09)      (0.08)
 1996/97        4.13         2.71         2.19         2.20         3.64         4.10         4.31       2.54     3.00        2.11        2.13
               (0.89)       (0.02)       (0.37)       (0.36)       (0.03)       (0.36)       (0.04)     (0.07)   (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.17)
 1997/98        4.15         3.00         2.18         2.19         3.75         4.12         4.40       2.55     2.99        2.13        2.42
               (0.64)       (0.02)       (0.14)       (0.14)       (0.03)       (0.39)       (0.04)     (0.05)   (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.18)
 1998/99        4.45         3.76         2.80         2.80         4.02         4.42         4.70       2.90     3.39        2.44        2.63
               (0.64)       (0.40)       (0.41)       (0.41)       (0.03)       (0.41)       (0.05)     (0.14)   (0.16)      (0.13)      (0.19)
 1999/00        4.81         3.94         2.49         2.49         4.21         4.75         4.92       2.92     3.41        2.44        2.81
               (0.64)       (0.38)       (0.29)       (0.29)       (0.03)       (0.45)       (0.04)     (0.05)   (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.14)
 2000/01        4.94         3.93         4.87         4.76         4.42         4.87         5.13       2.97     3.44        2.48        3.04
               (0.58)       (0.03)       (0.78)       (0.78)       (0.05)       (0.48)       (0.06)     (0.04)   (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.28)
 2001/02        4.75         3.73         4.58         4.59         4.17         4.68         4.84       2.90     3.37        2.40        2.82
               (0.54)       (0.03)       (1.45)       (1.44)       (0.03)       (0.42)       (0.05)     (0.10)   (0.11)      (0.10)      (0.21)
 2002/03        4.47         3.72         2.35         2.36         3.97         4.46         4.63       2.64     3.07        2.19        2.40
               (0.50)       (0.03)       (0.21)       (0.21)       (0.04)       (0.40)       (0.04)     (0.02)   (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.19)
 2003/04        4.64         3.33         2.63         2.63         4.00         4.62         4.70       2.84     3.33        2.36        2.58
               (0.55)       (0.03)       (0.29)       (0.29)       (0.13)       (0.40)       (0.15)     (0.11)   (0.13)      (0.11)      (0.18)

                                                                       APPENDICES – 11
 2004/05         4.73            3.20          2.39           2.75           4.19            4.68          4.91         2.85         3.34     2.34       2.77
                (0.58)          (0.03)        (0.21)         (0.30)         (0.32)          (0.42)        (0.37)       (0.04)       (0.05)   (0.04)     (0.22)
 2005/06         5.20            3.15          4.61           2.59           4.73            5.16          5.54         3.29         3.84     2.68       3.13
                (0.62)          (0.03)        (1.61)         (0.20)         (0.22)          (0.44)        (0.26)       (0.08)       (0.10)   (0.08)     (0.20)
 2006/07         5.61            3.01          2.70           2.72           5.14            5.53          5.96         3.80         4.40     3.15       3.30
                (0.64)          (0.03)        (0.24)         (0.25)         (0.51)          (0.54)        (0.58)       (0.25)       (0.29)   (0.25)     (0.27)
 2007/08         6.08            2.97          2.48           1.78           5.60            6.04          6.50         4.00         4.64     3.32       3.67
                (0.64)          (0.03)        (0.21)         (0.13)         (0.44)          (0.65)        (0.50)       (0.25)       (0.29)   (0.25)     (0.34)
 2008/09                         3.01          5.00           4.40
                                (0.03)        (2.35)         (2.37)
 2009/10          6.50           3.27          3.18           2.69           6.06            6.42          7.17         4.23         5.00     3.52       3.62
                 (0.58)         (0.04)        (0.34)         (0.34)         (0.69)          (0.73)        (0.81)       (0.13)       (0.15)   (0.13)     (0.29)
 2010/11          4.72           2.70          3.29           1.92           4.56            4.69          5.44         3.26         3.88     2.69       2.75
                 (0.26)         (0.02)        (0.34)         (0.17)         (0.22)          (0.44)        (0.25)       (0.16)       (0.19)   (0.16)     (0.15)
 2011/12                         3.05          2.35           1.73
                                (0.04)        (0.24)         (0.17)
 2012/13                         2.66          2.44           1.73
                                (0.03)        (0.36)         (0.14)
Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data. Household income is equivalised using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the unit of analysis.
Estimates are based on the full population. The definition of the ‘family’ is the ‘benefit unit’ (see Department for Work and Pensions 2015)




                                                                           APPENDICES – 12
Table F.3 Top 5 to 1% income shares and standard errors within parentheses
                                                                  HBAI-        HBAI-        HBAI-       HBAI-    HBAI-
Data set
                SPI       HBAI-SPI       HBAI         FRS          SPI2         SPI2         SPI2        SPI2     SPI2    HBAI-SPI2   HBAI-SPI2

Income                                                                                                                                Equivalised
definition     Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Market      Gross   Market     Gross        gross
              income       income       income       income       income       income        income     income   income    income       income
Unit         Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Family   Family   Household   Household
Population
              WTID          HBAI         HBAI         HBAI         HBAI        WTID          HBAI       HBAI     HBAI       HBAI        HBAI
control
Income                                                            HBAI-                     HBAI-       HBAI-    HBAI-
              WTID        HBAI-SPI       HBAI         FRS                      WTID                                       HBAI-SPI2   HBAI-SPI2
control                                                            SPI2                      SPI2        SPI2     SPI2
                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)      (9)      (10)         (11)
 1994/95                    13.65        13.73        13.76
                            (0.10)       (0.10)       (0.10)
 1995/96       15.05        13.41        13.56        13.54        13.68        15.04        16.19      13.35    15.70      12.27       11.77
               (2.29)       (0.10)       (0.10)       (0.10)       (0.11)       (0.57)       (0.13)     (0.11)   (0.13)     (0.11)      (0.11)
 1996/97       14.95        13.38        13.51        13.54        13.43        14.94        15.79      13.18    15.38      12.26       11.69
               (2.15)       (0.09)       (0.10)       (0.10)       (0.11)       (0.45)       (0.13)     (0.12)   (0.14)     (0.12)      (0.12)
 1997/98       14.71        13.45        13.66        13.66        13.55        14.70        15.79      13.26    15.37      12.32       11.67
               (1.83)       (0.11)       (0.11)       (0.11)       (0.13)       (0.41)       (0.15)     (0.13)   (0.16)     (0.14)      (0.13)
 1998/99       14.90        13.74        13.88        13.88        13.72        14.89        15.93      13.49    15.59      12.66       11.99
               (1.64)       (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.13)       (0.41)       (0.16)     (0.14)   (0.17)     (0.15)      (0.13)
 1999/00       15.55        13.40        13.57        13.54        13.89        15.54        16.10      13.61    15.69      12.74       12.00
               (1.72)       (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.11)       (0.13)       (0.47)       (0.15)     (0.14)   (0.16)     (0.14)      (0.13)
 2000/01       15.32        13.66        13.57        13.63        13.99        15.31        16.16      13.60    15.60      12.79       12.16
               (1.57)       (0.13)       (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.14)       (0.45)       (0.16)     (0.15)   (0.17)     (0.14)      (0.15)
 2001/02       15.62        13.59        13.53        13.36        14.01        15.61        16.17      13.72    15.76      12.88       12.20
               (1.53)       (0.12)       (0.23)       (0.33)       (0.13)       (0.49)       (0.15)     (0.14)   (0.16)     (0.14)      (0.14)
 2002/03       15.58        13.53        13.76        13.78        13.93        15.56        16.17      13.70    15.81      12.66       11.99
               (1.48)       (0.12)       (0.10)       (0.11)       (0.13)       (0.23)       (0.15)     (0.13)   (0.15)     (0.13)      (0.13)
 2003/04       15.65        13.42        13.56        13.51        13.63        15.64        15.91      13.45    15.61      12.47       12.03
               (1.61)       (0.11)       (0.10)       (0.11)       (0.13)       (0.26)       (0.15)     (0.13)   (0.16)     (0.13)      (0.14)


                                                                       APPENDICES – 13
 2004/05        15.27           13.54         13.67          13.61          13.65           15.26         15.88        13.53        15.65    12.54      11.99
                (1.50)          (0.12)        (0.11)         (0.12)         (0.13)          (0.25)        (0.16)       (0.14)       (0.17)   (0.15)     (0.15)
 2005/06        15.33           13.61         13.37          13.66          14.09           15.32         16.35        14.09        16.26    13.07      12.42
                (1.40)          (0.12)        (0.24)         (0.11)         (0.14)          (0.22)        (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.18)   (0.15)     (0.15)
 2006/07        15.27           13.59         13.54                         14.14           15.26         16.28        14.07        16.12    13.03      12.53
                (1.36)          (0.14)        (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.16)          (0.23)        (0.19)       (0.18)       (0.21)   (0.17)     (0.18)
 2007/08        15.33           13.88         13.83          13.94          14.24           15.32         16.39        14.12        16.18    13.19      12.42
                (1.28)          (0.16)        (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.17)          (0.22)        (0.20)       (0.19)       (0.22)   (0.19)     (0.18)
 2008/09                        13.82         13.51          13.60
                                (0.15)        (0.35)         (0.36)
 2009/10         14.59          13.96         13.91          14.06          13.71           14.57         16.09        13.72        16.02    12.75      12.06
                 (0.68)         (0.16)        (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.17)          (0.21)        (0.21)       (0.18)       (0.22)   (0.17)     (0.16)
 2010/11         14.16          13.97         13.82          14.08          13.80           14.15         16.33        13.82        16.27    12.68      11.88
                 (0.74)         (0.14)        (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.14)          (0.21)        (0.17)       (0.15)       (0.19)   (0.15)     (0.14)
 2011/12                        13.98         14.05          14.38
                                (0.18)        (0.16)         (0.17)
 2012/13                        13.86         13.75          14.09
                                (0.18)        (0.14)         (0.16)
Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data. Household income is equivalised using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the unit of analysis.
Estimates are based on the full population. The definition of the ‘family’ is the ‘benefit unit’ (see Department for Work and Pensions 2015)




                                                                           APPENDICES – 14
Table F.4 Top 10 to 5% income shares and standard errors within parentheses
                                                                  HBAI-        HBAI-        HBAI-       HBAI-    HBAI-
Data set
                SPI       HBAI-SPI       HBAI         FRS          SPI2         SPI2         SPI2        SPI2     SPI2    HBAI-SPI2   HBAI-SPI2

Income                                                                                                                                Equivalised
definition     Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Gross        Market      Gross   Market     Gross        gross
              income       income       income       income       income       income        income     income   income    income       income
Unit         Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Individual   Family   Family   Household   Household
Population
              WTID          HBAI         HBAI         HBAI         HBAI        WTID          HBAI       HBAI     HBAI       HBAI        HBAI
control
Income                                                            HBAI-                     HBAI-       HBAI-    HBAI-
              WTID        HBAI-SPI       HBAI         FRS                      WTID                                       HBAI-SPI2   HBAI-SPI2
control                                                            SPI2                      SPI2        SPI2     SPI2
                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)      (9)      (10)         (11)
 1994/95                    11.80        11.88        11.84
                            (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)
 1995/96       12.72        11.62        11.78        11.75        11.53        12.71        13.60      11.49    13.43      10.94       10.31
               (2.06)       (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.06)       (0.50)       (0.08)     (0.07)   (0.09)     (0.06)      (0.06)
 1996/97       12.44        11.63        11.74        11.76        11.17        12.45        13.11      11.23    13.03      10.63       10.01
               (1.86)       (0.06)       (0.07)       (0.07)       (0.07)       (0.40)       (0.09)     (0.07)   (0.10)     (0.07)      (0.06)
 1997/98       12.15        11.43        11.65        11.65        11.17        12.15        12.97      11.17    12.86      10.61       10.00
               (1.68)       (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.08)       (0.37)       (0.10)     (0.08)   (0.11)     (0.08)      (0.07)
 1998/99       12.06        11.40        11.56        11.56        11.09        12.06        12.83      11.22    12.88      10.74       10.10
               (1.44)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.36)       (0.10)     (0.09)   (0.11)     (0.08)      (0.08)
 1999/00       12.49        11.26        11.52        11.52        11.12        12.48        12.85      11.17    12.79      10.78       10.18
               (1.52)       (0.08)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.08)       (0.40)       (0.11)     (0.08)   (0.11)     (0.08)      (0.08)
 2000/01       12.15        11.07        11.09        11.11        11.06        12.14        12.72      11.21    12.77      10.73       10.02
               (1.36)       (0.08)       (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.09)       (0.37)       (0.11)     (0.09)   (0.12)     (0.09)      (0.09)
 2001/02       12.44        11.19        11.27        11.26        11.13        12.43        12.80      11.22    12.78      10.77       10.16
               (1.33)       (0.09)       (0.18)       (0.18)       (0.08)       (0.41)       (0.10)     (0.08)   (0.11)     (0.08)      (0.08)
 2002/03       12.44        11.21        11.55        11.52        11.12        12.43        12.85      11.24    12.88      10.76       10.14
               (1.28)       (0.09)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.08)       (0.18)       (0.10)     (0.08)   (0.10)     (0.08)      (0.07)
 2003/04       12.44        11.25        11.49        11.47        10.84        12.45        12.61      11.20    12.89      10.55        9.95
               (1.42)       (0.08)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.07)       (0.21)       (0.10)     (0.08)   (0.10)     (0.08)      (0.07)


                                                                       APPENDICES – 15
 2004/05        12.29           11.12         11.41          11.36          10.97           12.28         12.72        11.13        12.77    10.62       9.95
                (1.36)          (0.08)        (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.08)          (0.20)        (0.10)       (0.08)       (0.11)   (0.08)     (0.08)
 2005/06        12.05           11.17         11.21          11.43          11.06           12.04         12.80        11.15        12.76    10.61       9.96
                (1.28)          (0.08)        (0.20)         (0.06)         (0.08)          (0.17)        (0.11)       (0.09)       (0.11)   (0.08)     (0.08)
 2006/07        11.89           11.15         11.43          11.41          10.99           11.88         12.61        11.14        12.67    10.63      10.01
                (1.24)          (0.08)        (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.10)          (0.17)        (0.13)       (0.11)       (0.14)   (0.11)     (0.09)
 2007/08        11.83           10.98         11.39          11.45          10.97           11.82         12.58        11.04        12.55    10.52       9.92
                (1.16)          (0.09)        (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.11)          (0.16)        (0.15)       (0.12)       (0.16)   (0.12)     (0.10)
 2008/09                        11.06         11.21          11.27
                                (0.10)        (0.29)         (0.29)
 2009/10         11.52          10.89         11.29          11.35          10.82           11.52         12.64        10.90        12.62    10.37       9.82
                 (0.62)         (0.11)        (0.08)         (0.07)         (0.12)          (0.17)        (0.16)       (0.12)       (0.17)   (0.12)     (0.11)
 2010/11         11.36          11.07         11.28          11.42          11.05           11.35         13.02        11.22        13.08    10.60       9.92
                 (0.67)         (0.08)        (0.07)         (0.06)         (0.08)          (0.16)        (0.12)       (0.10)       (0.13)   (0.09)     (0.08)
 2011/12                        11.04         11.48          11.39
                                (0.11)        (0.07)         (0.08)
 2012/13                        10.92         11.27          11.22
                                (0.10)        (0.08)         (0.07)
Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data. Household income is equivalised using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the unit of analysis.
Estimates are based on the full population. The definition of the ‘family’ is the ‘benefit unit’ (see Department for Work and Pensions 2015)




                                                                           APPENDICES – 16
Appendix G. Inequality indices and standard errors

Table G.1 Gini coefficient and standard errors within parentheses
              HBAI-         HBAI-         HBAI-        HBAI-         HBAI-
Data set
                SPI           SPI           SPI         SPI2          SPI2
Income         Gross        Market          Net         Gross        Market
definition    income        income        income       income        income
                 (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)
 1994/95       0.372         0.512         0.332
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)
 1995/96       0.375         0.516         0.333        0.380         0.521
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 1996/97       0.373         0.510         0.333        0.386         0.522
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 1997/98       0.383         0.512         0.340        0.388         0.517
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 1998/99       0.389         0.517         0.348        0.396         0.523
               (0.01)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 1999/00       0.389         0.517         0.346        0.400         0.527
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 2000/01       0.395         0.519         0.353        0.403         0.526
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 2001/02       0.394         0.518         0.349        0.400         0.523
               (0.01)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 2002/03       0.388         0.514         0.343        0.391         0.517
               (0.01)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 2003/04       0.382         0.512         0.339        0.388         0.517
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 2004/05       0.384         0.513         0.339        0.390         0.518
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 2005/06       0.387         0.516         0.345        0.407         0.534
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 2006/07       0.392         0.516         0.350        0.414         0.536
               (0.01)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2007/08       0.399         0.523         0.357        0.419         0.540
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2008/09       0.398         0.524         0.355
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.00)
 2009/10       0.404         0.538         0.356        0.413         0.547
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2010/11       0.386         0.525         0.337        0.392         0.531
               (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2011/12       0.392         0.528         0.340
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
 2012/13       0.389         0.527         0.335
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data. Household income is equivalised
using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the unit of analysis. Estimates are based on the full
population.


                                         APPENDICES – 17
Table G.2 Mean logarithmic deviation (MLD) and standard errors within parentheses
              HBAI-         HBAI-         HBAI-        HBAI-         HBAI-
Data set
                SPI           SPI           SPI         SPI2          SPI2
Income         Gross        Market          Net         Gross        Market
definition    income        income        income       income        income
                 (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)
 1994/95       0.235         0.660         0.186
               (0.00)        (0.01)        (0.00)
 1995/96       0.239         0.639         0.186        0.245         0.647
               (0.00)        (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.01)
 1996/97       0.238         0.652         0.187        0.255         0.669
               (0.00)        (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 1997/98       0.252         0.641         0.196        0.259         0.645
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 1998/99       0.260         0.653         0.205        0.269         0.661
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 1999/00       0.260         0.653         0.203        0.275         0.669
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2000/01       0.270         0.685         0.211        0.280         0.697
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2001/02       0.268         0.671         0.208        0.275         0.680
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2002/03       0.261         0.665         0.201        0.264         0.668
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2003/04       0.253         0.656         0.196        0.260         0.663
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2004/05       0.254         0.649         0.195        0.261         0.658
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2005/06       0.259         0.653         0.203        0.286         0.683
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2006/07       0.268         0.639         0.211        0.299         0.675
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2007/08       0.277         0.651         0.217        0.305         0.684
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2008/09       0.276         0.646         0.217
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
 2009/10       0.283         0.675         0.217        0.297         0.691
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2010/11       0.256         0.640         0.194        0.265         0.654
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 2011/12       0.263         0.629         0.196
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
 2012/13       0.261         0.622         0.193
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data. Household income is equivalised
using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the unit of analysis. Estimates are based on the full
population.




                                         APPENDICES – 18
Table G.3 Theil index and standard errors within parentheses
              HBAI-         HBAI-         HBAI-        HBAI-         HBAI-
Data set
                SPI           SPI           SPI         SPI2          SPI2
Income         Gross        Market          Net         Gross        Market
definition    income        income        income       income        income
                 (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)
               0.257         0.417         0.202
 1994/95
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.00)
               0.266         0.418         0.205        0.275         0.427
 1995/96
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.261         0.414         0.205        0.297         0.453
 1996/97
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.289         0.435         0.222        0.303         0.449
 1997/98
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.303         0.450         0.238        0.321         0.469
 1998/99
               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.306         0.454         0.237        0.331         0.480
 1999/00
               (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.322         0.475         0.251        0.341         0.494
 2000/01
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.02)
               0.325         0.479         0.250        0.333         0.486
 2001/02
               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.312         0.469         0.239        0.312         0.467
 2002/03
               (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.296         0.455         0.228        0.311         0.471
 2003/04
               (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.299         0.457         0.229        0.317         0.476
 2004/05
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
               0.305         0.464         0.238        0.356         0.519
 2005/06
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.02)
               0.316         0.467         0.247        0.384         0.540
 2006/07
               (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.02)
               0.332         0.484         0.258        0.396         0.553
 2007/08
               (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.03)
               0.335         0.494         0.258
 2008/09
               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.01)
               0.347         0.517         0.260        0.395         0.571
 2009/10
               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.03)
               0.307         0.475         0.221        0.334         0.506
 2010/11
               (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.02)
               0.327         0.494         0.230
 2011/12
               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.01)
               0.306         0.467         0.216
 2012/13
               (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.01)
Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data. Household income is equivalised
using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the unit of analysis. Estimates are based on the full
population.




                                         APPENDICES – 19
Table G.4 Half-squared coefficient of variation and standard errors within parentheses
              HBAI-         HBAI-         HBAI-        HBAI-         HBAI-
Data set
                SPI           SPI           SPI         SPI2          SPI2
Income         Gross        Market          Net         Gross        Market
definition    income        income        income       income        income
                 (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)
 1994/95       0.431         0.610         0.314
               (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.01)
 1995/96       0.470         0.645         0.330        0.486         0.661
               (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.04)
 1996/97       0.444         0.614         0.321        0.594         0.795
               (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.02)       (0.04)        (0.05)
 1997/98       0.565         0.751         0.390        0.637         0.835
               (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.03)       (0.05)        (0.06)
 1998/99       0.642         0.843         0.461        0.717         0.929
               (0.07)        (0.09)        (0.05)       (0.06)        (0.08)
 1999/00       0.667         0.876         0.463        0.763         0.985
               (0.06)        (0.08)        (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.07)
 2000/01       0.712         0.935         0.505        0.805         1.043
               (0.05)        (0.07)        (0.04)       (0.07)        (0.08)
 2001/02       0.765         1.003         0.527        0.777         1.011
               (0.08)        (0.09)        (0.05)       (0.07)        (0.08)
 2002/03       0.679         0.908         0.466        0.659         0.877
               (0.06)        (0.07)        (0.04)       (0.05)        (0.06)
 2003/04       0.620         0.850         0.441        0.697         0.941
               (0.06)        (0.08)        (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.07)
 2004/05       0.619         0.844         0.430        0.721         0.967
               (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.03)       (0.06)        (0.07)
 2005/06       0.635         0.865         0.458        0.894         1.177
               (0.05)        (0.06)        (0.04)       (0.07)        (0.09)
 2006/07       0.661         0.882         0.471        1.074         1.381
               (0.06)        (0.08)        (0.04)       (0.14)        (0.16)
 2007/08       0.705         0.934         0.501        1.162         1.485
               (0.06)        (0.07)        (0.04)       (0.15)        (0.18)
 2008/09       0.746         1.002         0.514
               (0.07)        (0.08)        (0.04)
 2009/10       0.757         1.031         0.501        1.214         1.607
               (0.06)        (0.08)        (0.04)       (0.14)        (0.17)
 2010/11       0.620         0.869         0.378        0.842         1.150
               (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.02)       (0.09)        (0.12)
 2011/12       0.715         0.984         0.412
               (0.07)        (0.09)        (0.04)
 2012/13       0.578         0.802         0.350
               (0.05)        (0.06)        (0.03)
Notes: Northern Ireland is included in the FRS and hence HBAI data only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI, FRS, SPI and WTID data. Household income is equivalised
using the modified-OECD scale. The individual is the unit of analysis. Estimates are based on the full
population.




                                         APPENDICES – 20
