NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOLUTION METHODS FOR MODELS WITH RARE DISASTERS
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Oren Levintal
Working Paper 21997
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21997

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

Fernandez-Villaverde gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation
under Grant SES 1223271. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jesús Fernández-Villaverde and Oren Levintal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Solution Methods for Models with Rare Disasters
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde and Oren Levintal
NBER Working Paper No. 21997
February 2016
JEL No. C63,C68,E32,E37,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
This paper compares different solution methods for computing the equilibrium of dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) models with rare disasters along the line of those proposed by Rietz (1988),
Barro (2006}, Gabaix (2012), and Gourio (2012). DSGE models with rare disasters require solution
methods that can handle the large non-linearities triggered by low-probability, high-impact events
with sufficient accuracy and speed. We solve a standard New Keynesian model with Epstein-Zin preferences
and time-varying disaster risk with perturbation, Taylor projection, and Smolyak collocation. Our
main finding is that Taylor projection delivers the best accuracy/speed tradeoff among the tested solutions.
We also document that even third-order perturbations may generate solutions that suffer from accuracy
problems and that Smolyak collocation can be costly in terms of run time and memory requirements.

Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu
Oren Levintal
Interdisciplinary Center (IDC) Herzliya
P.O.Box 167. Herzliya, 4610101
Israel
oren.levintal@idc.ac.il

1

Introduction
Rietz (1988), Barro (2006), and Gabaix (2012) have popularized the idea that low-

probability events with a large negative impact on consumption (“rare disasters”) can account
for many asset pricing puzzles, such as the equity premium puzzle of Mehra and Prescott
(1985).1 Barro (2006), in particular, argues that a rare disaster model calibrated to match
data from 35 countries can reproduce the observed high equity premium, the low risk-free
rate, and the stock market volatility. Barro assumed disaster probabilities of 1.7 percent a
year and declines in output/consumption in a range of 15 to 64 percent.
Many other researchers have followed Barro’s lead and formulated, calibrated/estimated,
and solved models with disaster probabilities and declines in consumption that are roughly
in agreement with Barro’s original proposal.2 Furthermore, the approach has been extended
to analyze business cycles (Gourio, 2012), credit risk (Gourio, 2013), and foreign exchange
markets (Farhi and Gabaix, 2008 and Gourio, Siemer, and Verdelhan, 2013). These calibrations/estimations share a common feature: they induce large non-linearities in the solution.
This is not a surprise. The mechanism that makes rare disasters work is the large precautionary behavior responses induced in normal times by the probability of tail events.
Dealing with these non-linearities is not too challenging when we work with endowment
economies. A judicious choice of functional forms and parameterization allow a researcher to
either derive closed-form solutions or formulae that can be easily evaluated.
The situation changes, however, when we move to production models, such as those of
Gourio (2012, 2013), Andreasen (2012), Isoré and Szczerbowicz (2013, 2015), and PetroskyNadeau, Zhang, and Kuehn (2015). Suddenly, having an accurate solution is of foremost
importance. For example, rare disaster models have the promise of helping to design policies
to prevent disasters (with measures such as financial stability policy) and to mitigate them
once they have occurred (with measures such as bailouts and unconventional monetary policy). The considerable welfare losses associated with rare disasters reported by Barro (2009)
suggest that any progress along the lines of having accurate quantitative models to design
counter-disaster policies is a highly rewarding endeavor.
But we do not care only about accuracy. We also care about speed. Models that can
be useful for policy analysis usually require estimation of parameter values, which involves
the repeated solution of the model, and that the models be as rich in terms of detail as the
1

See also Barro (2009), who, with the help of Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences, can fix some counterfactual implications of models with power utility and high-risk aversion regarding the responses of the
price/dividend ratio to increases in uncertainty.
2
Among many others, Barro and Ursúa (2012), Barro and Jin (2011), Nakamura, Steinsson, Barro, and
Ursúa (2013), Wachter (2013), and Tsai and Wachter (2015).

2

most recent generation of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models, which are
characterized by many state variables.
Gourio (2012, 2013) and Petrosky-Nadeau, Zhang, and Kuehn (2015) solve their models
with standard projection methods (Judd, 1992). Projection methods are highly accurate
(Aruoba, Fernández-Villaverde, and Rubio-Ramı́rez, 2006), but they suffer from an acute
curse of dimensionality. Thus, the previous papers concentrate in analyzing relatively small
models. Andreasen (2012) and Isoré and Szczerbowicz (2013, 2015) solve more fully-fledged
models with perturbation solutions. Perturbation solutions are fast to compute and can
handle many state variables. However, Isoré and Szczerbowicz (2013) only undertake firstand second-order perturbations and Andreasen (2012) and Isoré and Szczerbowicz (2015) a
third-order perturbation. We will argue below that there are reasons to be cautious about
the properties of these perturbation solutions (see also Levintal, 2015). Perturbations are
inherently local solution methods and rare disasters often trigger equilibrium dynamics that
travel far away from the approximation point of the perturbation. Moreover, perturbations
may fail to approximate accurately asset prices and risk premia due to the strong volatility
embedded in these models.
To get around the limitations of existing algorithms, we apply a new solution method,
Taylor projection, to compute DSGE models with rare disasters. This method, recently
proposed by Levintal (2016), is a hybrid of Taylor-based perturbations and projections (and
hence its name). Like standard projection methods, Taylor projection starts from a residual
function created by plugging the unknown decision rules of the agents into the equilibrium
conditions of the model and searching for coefficients that make that residual function as
close to zero as possible. The novelty of the approach is that, instead of “projecting” the
residual function according to an inner product, we approximate the residual function around
the steady state of the model using a Taylor series, and find the solution that zeros the Taylor
series. We show that Taylor projection is sufficiently accurate and fast so as to open the door
to the solution and estimation of rich models with rare disasters, including New Keynesian
models such as those in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters
(2007).
To do so, we first propose in section 2 a standard New Keynesian model augmented with
Epstein-Zin preferences and time-varying rare disaster risk. We also present seven simpler
versions of the model. In what we will call version 1, we start with a benchmark real business
cycle model, also with Epstein-Zin preferences and time-varying rare disaster risk. This model
only has four state variables (capital, the classical technology shock, and two additional state
variables associated with the time-varying rare disaster risk). Then, we start adding more
shocks and price rigidities, until we get to version 8, our complete New Keynesian model with
3

twelve state variables. Our layer-by-layer analysis allows us to gauge how accuracy and run
time change as new mechanisms are added to the model and as the dimensionality of the
state space grows.
In section 3, we calibrate the model with a baseline parameterization, which captures rare
disasters, and with a non-disaster parameterization, where we shut down rare disasters. The
latter calibration will help us in measuring the effect of disasters on the accuracy and speed
of our solution methods.
In section 4, we describe how we solve each of the eight versions of the model, with
the two calibrations, using perturbation, Taylor projection, and Smolyak collocation. We
implement different levels of each of the three solution methods: perturbations from order
1 to 5, Taylor projections from order 1 to 3, and Smolyak collocation from level 1 to 3.
Therefore, we generate eleven solutions per each of the eight versions of the model and each
of the two calibrations, for a total of 176 possible solutions (although we did not find a few
of the Smolyak solutions because of convergence/memory constraints).
In section 5, we present our main results. Our first finding is that first-, second-, and
third-order perturbations fail to provide a satisfactory accuracy. This is particularly true
for the risk-free interest rate and several impulse response functions. Our second finding
is that fifth-order perturbations are much more accurate, but they become cumbersome to
compute and require a non-trivial runtime and some skill at memory management. Our third
finding is that second- and third-order Taylor projections offer an outstanding compromise
between accuracy and speed. Second-order Taylor projections can be as accurate as Smolyak
collocations and, yet, be solved in a fraction of the time. Third-order Taylor projection takes
longer to run, but their accuracy can be quite high, even in testbed as challenging as the New
Keynesian model with rare disasters.3
We postulate, therefore, that a new generation of solution methods, such as Taylor projection (but also, potentially, others such as those in Maliar and Maliar, 2014) can be an
important tool in fulfilling the promises of production models with rare disasters. We are
ready now to start our analysis by moving into the description of the model.

2

A DSGE Model with Rare Disasters
We build a standard New Keynesian model along the lines of Christiano, Eichenbaum,

and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). In the model, there is a representative
3

We provide MATLAB codes that implement the Taylor projection method for a general class of DSGE
models. Given these codes, the implementation of our method in larger, more complex models should be
relatively easy and straightforward.

4

household that consumes and saves, a final good producer, a continuum of intermediate
good producers subject to Calvo pricing, and a monetary authority that sets up the nominal
interest rate following a Taylor rule. Given the goals of this paper and to avoid excessive
complexity in the model, we avoid wage rigidities.
As we described in the introduction, we augment the standard New Keynesian model
along two dimensions. First, we introduce Epstein-Zin preferences. Beyond being extremely
popular in macroeconomics and asset pricing, these preferences have been studied in the
context of New Keynesian models by Andreasen (2012), Rudebusch and Swanson (2012), and
Andreasen, Fernández-Villaverde, and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2013), among several others. Second,
we add a time-varying rare disaster risk. Rare disasters impose two permanent shocks on
the real economy: a productivity shock and a capital depreciation shock. When a disaster
occurs, technology and capital fall immediately. This specification should be viewed as a
reduced form that captures severe disruptions in production, such as those caused by a war
or a large natural catastrophe, and failures of firms and financial institutions, such as those
caused by massive labor unrest or a financial panic.
We present first the full New Keynesian model and some of its asset pricing implications.
Then, in subsection 2.7, we briefly describe the simpler versions of the model mentioned in
the introduction.

2.1

The household

A representative household’s preferences are representable by an Epstein-Zin aggregator
between the period utility Ut and the continuation utility Vt+1 :
1−γ
Vt1−ψ = Ut1−ψ + βEt Vt+1

 1−ψ
1−γ

(1)

where the period utility over consumption ct and labor lt is given by Ut = eξt ct (1 − lt )ν and
Et is the conditional expectation operator. The parameter γ controls risk aversion (Swanson,
b where ψb =
2012) and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) is given by 1/ψ,
1 − (1 + ν) (1 − ψ) (Gourio, 2012). The intertemporal preference shock ξt follows:
ξt = ρξ ξt−1 + σξ ξ,t , ξ,t ∼ N (0, 1) .
The household’s budget constraint is given by:
ct + x t +

bt+1
bt
= wt lt + rt kt + Rt−1 + Ft + Tt ,
pt
pt

5

(2)

where xt is investment in physical capital, wt denotes the real wage, rt is the real rental price
of capital, Ft are the real profits of the firms in the economy, and Tt is a real lump-sum
transfer from the government. The household trades a nominal bond bt that pays a nominal
gross interest rate of Rt . We transform the nominal bond into real quantities by dividing by
the price pt of the final good. There is, as well, a full set of Arrow securities. With complete
markets and a zero net supply condition for those securities, we can omit them from the
budget constraint without further consequences.
Investment xt induces the law of motion for capital:
kt∗




xt
= (1 − δ) kt + µt 1 − S
xt
xt−1

(3)

where
∗
log kt = log kt−1
− dt θt

and

(4)



2
xt
κ
xt
S
=
− Λx .
xt−1
2 xt−1


∗
Here, kt−1
is the capital decision taken by the household in period t − 1. Actual capital kt ,

however, depends on the disaster shock. Define an indicator function dt that takes values 0
or 1. If a disaster occurs in t (i.e., dt = 1), kt falls by θt . Gourio (2012) interprets θt as the
permanent capital depreciation caused by the disaster.
We want, in addition, to capture the idea that the disaster risk can be time-varying. To
do so, we add an AR structure to the log of θt :
log θt = (1 − ρθ ) log θ̄ + ρθ log θt−1 + σθ θ,t , θ,t ∼ N (0, 1)
which resembles those in models with stochastic volatility (Fernández-Villaverde, GuerrónQuintana, and Rubio-Ramı́rez, 2015; see also a similar specification in Gabaix, 2012). Note,
nevertheless, that dt is non-Gaussian, a fact that will have a material effect on the dynamics
of the model. We specify the evolution of θt in logs to ensure positive values of this variable.
The second term on the right-hand side of equation (3):



xt
xt
µt 1 − S
xt−1
includes two parts: First, an investment-specific technological shock µt that follows:
log µt = log µt−1 + Λµ + σµ µ,t , µ,t ∼ N (0, 1) .

6

Second, a quadratic capital adjustment cost function that depends on investment growth
(Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005).
The household maximizes its preferences (1) subject to the budget constraint (2) and the
law of motion for capital (3). The optimality conditions for this problem are:
Et (Mt+1 exp (−dt+1 θt+1 ) [rt+1 + qt+1 (1 − δ)]) = qt






xt
xt
xt
0
1 = q t µt 1 − S
−S
xt−1
xt−1 xt−1
"


2 #!
xt+1
xt+1
+Et Mt+1 qt+1 µt+1 S 0
,
xt
xt
ct
ν
= wt ,
1 − lt

(5)

(6)
(7)

where λt is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget constraint, qt is the Lagrange
multiplier associated with the evolution law of capital (as a ratio of λt ), and Mt+1 is the
stochastic discount factor:
Mt+1 = β

λt+1
λt

ψ−γ
Vt+1
 ψ−γ .
1−γ 1−γ
Et Vt+1

A non-arbitrage condition also determines the nominal gross return on bonds:
1 = Et Mt+1

Rt
.
Πt+1

See the appendix for more details.

2.2

The final good producer

The final good yt is produced by a perfectly competitive firm that bundles a continuum
of intermediate goods yit using the production function:
1

Z

ε−1
ε

ε
 ε−1

yit di

yt =

(8)

0

where ε is the elasticity of substitution. The final good producer maximizes profits subject
to the production function (8) and taking as given the price of the final good, pt , and all
intermediate goods prices pit . Well-known results tell us that:
Z
pt =

1

p1−ε
it di

0

7

1
 1−ε

.

2.3

Intermediate good producers

There is a continuum of differentiated intermediate good producers that combine capital
and labor with the production function:

α 1−α
li,t − φzt , 0 .
yi.t = max At ki,t

(9)

The common neutral technological level At follows a random walk with a drift in logs:
log At = log At−1 + ΛA + σA A,t − (1 − α) dt θt , A,t ∼ N (0, 1) ,
subject to a Gaussian shock A,t and a rare disaster shock dt with a time-varying impact
θt . Following Gourio (2012), disasters reduce physical capital and total output by the same
factor. This can be easily generalized at the cost of heavier notation and, possibly, additional
state variables. Note the presence of a common fixed cost φzt , which we index by a measure
of technology,
1

α

zt = At1−α µt1−α
to ensure that such fixed cost remains relevant along the equilibrium dynamics of the model.
Intermediate good producers rent labor and capital in perfectly competitive markets with
flexible wages and rental rates of capital. However, intermediate good producers set prices à
la Calvo. In each period, a fraction 1 − θp of intermediate good producers reoptimize their
prices to p∗t = pit (the reset price is common across all firms that update their prices). All
other firms keep their old prices. This pricing structure yields the standard Calvo block (see
derivation in the appendix):
α wt
kt
=
lt
1 − α rt

(10)

−ε
Πχt
1
= mct yt + θp EMt+1
gt+1
Πt+1
 χ 1−ε  ∗ 
Πt
Πt
2
∗
2
gt = Πt yt + θp EMt+1
gt+1
Πt+1
Π∗t+1

gt1



εgt1 = (ε − 1) gt2

1−α  α 1−α α
1
1
w t rt
mct =
.
1−α
α
At
Here, Πt ≡

pt
pt−1

is the inflation rate in terms of the final good, Π∗t ≡

(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

p∗t
pt

is the ratio between the

reset price and the price of the final good, mct is the marginal cost of the intermediate good
producer, and gt1 and gt2 are auxiliary variables that allow us to write this block recursively.
8

2.4

The monetary authority

The monetary authority sets the nominal interest rate according to the Taylor rule:
Rt
=
R



Rt−1
R

γR



Πt
Π

yt
yt−1

γΠ

!γy !1−γR
eσm m,t

exp (Λy )

(15)

where m,t ∼ N (0, 1) is a monetary shock, the variable Π is the target level of inflation, and
R the implicit target for the nominal gross return of bonds (which depends on Π, β, and the
growth rate along the balanced growth path of the model). The proceedings from monetary
policy are distributed lump-sum to the representative household.

2.5

Aggregation

The aggregate resource constraint is given by:
ct + x t =


1
α 1−α
− φzt
p At kt lt
vt

where
vtp

Z

1



=
0

pit
pt

(16)

−ε
di

is a measure of price dispersion with law of motion:
vtp

2.6


= θp

Πχt−1
Πt

−ε

p
vt−1
+ (1 − θp ) (Π∗t )−ε .

Asset prices

Rare disasters have a large impact on asset prices. In fact, this is the reason they have
become so popular. Thus, it is worthwhile to spend some space reviewing the asset pricing
implications of the model. First, we have that the price of a one-period risk-free real bond,
qtf , is determined by the Euler condition:
qtf = Et (Mt+1 ) .
Second, the price of a claim to the stream of dividends divt = yt − wt lt − xt (all income
minus labor income and investment), which we can call equity, is equal to:
e
qte = Et Mt+1 divt+1 + qt+1

9



.

In our budget constraint, we specified that the household owns the physical capital and rents
it to the firm. Given our complete markets assumption, this is equivalent to the firm owning
the physical capital and the household owning these claims to dividends. Our specification
makes deriving optimality conditions slightly easier.
Third, we can define the price-earnings ratio:



e
qt+1
divt+1
qte
= Et Mt+1
1+
.
divt
divt
divt+1
All these prices can be solved indirectly, once we have obtained the solution of Mt+1
and other endogenous variables, or simultaneously. In this paper, we will solve for qtf and
qte simultaneously with the other endogenous variables. This will show the flexibility of
our approach. In general, it is not a good numerical strategy to solve simultaneously for
volatile asset prices. For example, the price of a consol fluctuates wildly, especially if the
expected return is low or even negative. This happens when disaster risk suddenly rises.
The perturbation solution for the price of this asset would display large Taylor coefficients
that converge very slowly. The Taylor projection method may even fail to give a solution,
because it builds on the assumption that variables fluctuate within the convergence domain
of their Taylor series. Note that in models with financial frictions, it is necessary to solve
simultaneously for real variables and asset prices, as the latter influences the values of the
former.

2.7

Stripping down the full model

In our analysis below, we will solve eight versions of the model in order to examine the
computational properties of the solution for models of different size and complexity.
Version 1 of the model is a benchmark real business cycle model with Epstein-Zin preferences and time-varying disaster risk. Prices are fully flexible, the intermediate good producers
do not have market power (i.e., ε goes to infinity), and there are no adjustment costs in investment. Hence, instead of the the Calvo block (10)-(14), factor prices are determined by
their marginal products:
rt = αAt ktα−1 lt1−α

(17)

wt = (1 − α) At ktα lt−α .

(18)

∗
The benchmark version consists of four state variables: planned capital kt−1
, disaster shock

dt , disaster risk θt , and technology innovations σA A,t . Also, since the model satisfies the
classical dichotomy, we can ignore the Taylor rule.
10

Version 2 of the model introduces investment adjustment costs to version 1, but not the
investment-specific technological shock. This adds past investment xt−1 as another state
variable. We still ignore the monetary part of the model.
Version 3 of the model reintroduces price rigidity. Since we start using the Calvo block
p
.
(10)-(14), we need two additional state variables: past inflation Πt−1 and price dispersion vt−1

However, in this version 3, we employ a simple Taylor rule that responds only to inflation.
Versions 4 and 5 extend the Taylor rule so it responds to output growth and the past interest
rate. These two versions introduce past output and interest rate as additional state variables.
But, in all three versions, there are no monetary shocks to the Taylor rule.
Finally, versions 6, 7, and 8 of the model introduce the investment-specific technological
shock, the monetary shocks, and the preference shocks. These shocks are added to the vector
of state variables one by one. Therefore, the full model that we described in detail in this
section (version 8) contains 12 state variables.

3

Calibration
Before we compute the model, we normalize all relevant variables to obtain stationarity.

We follow the normalization scheme in Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006).
The model is calibrated at a quarterly frequency. When needed, Gaussian shocks are
discretized by monomial rules with 2n nodes (for n shocks). Parameter values are listed
in Table 1. Most parameters are taken from Fernández-Villaverde, Guerrón-Quintana, and
Rubio-Ramı́rez (2015), who perform a structural estimation of a very similar DSGE model
(hereafter FQR). There are three exceptions. The first exception is Epstein-Zin parameters
and standard deviation of TFP shocks, which we take from Gourio (2012).
The second exception is the three parameters in the Taylor rule, which we calibrate
somewhat more conservatively than those in FQR. Specifically, we pick the inflation target
to be 2 percent annually, the inflation parameter γΠ to be 1.3, which satisfies the Taylor
principle, and the interest smoothing parameter γR to be 0.5. The estimated values of γR
and γΠ in FQR are less common in the literature. Furthermore, when combined with rare
disasters, they generate too strong, and empirically implausible, nonlinearities.
The third exception is the parameters related to disasters. In the baseline calibration,
we calibrate the mean disaster impact θ̄ such that output loss in a disaster is 40 percent.
This is broadly in line with the figures presented by Barro (2006), who indicates an average
contraction of 35 percent (compared to trend). We do not account for partial recoveries, so
the impact of disaster risk may be overstated. For our purposes, this type of bias makes the
model more difficult to solve because the nonlinearity is stronger. The persistence of disaster
11

risk is set at ρθ = 0.9, which is close to Gourio (2012) and Gabaix (2012), although these
researchers use specifications that are slightly different from ours. The standard deviation of
the disaster risk is calibrated at σθ = .025. The four disaster parameters - disaster probability,
mean impact, persistence, and standard deviation - have a strong effect on the precautionary
saving motive and, hence, on asset prices and equilibrium dynamics. Ideally, these parameters
should be jointly estimated, but, to keep our focus, we do not pursue this route in the present
paper. Instead, we choose parameter values that generate realistic risk premia and that are
broadly consistent with the previous literature.
We also consider an alternative no-disaster calibration. In this calibration, we set the
mean and standard deviation of the disaster impact very close to zero, while keeping all
the other parameter values as in the baseline calibration in Table 1. We do so in order to
benchmark our results without disasters and gauge the role of large risks in terms of accuracy
and computational time.

4

Solution Methods
Given that we will deal with models with up to 12 state variables, we can only investigate

solution methods that scale well in terms of the dimensionality of the state space. This
eliminates, for example, value function iteration or projection methods based on tensors. The
three methods left on the table are perturbation (a particular case of which is linearization),
Taylor projection, and Smolyak collocation.4 The methods are implemented for different
polynomial orders. More concretely, we will aim at computing 176 solutions, with 11 solutions
per each of the eight versions of the model -perturbations from order 1 to 5, Taylor projections
from order 1 to 3, and Smolyak collocation from level 1 to 3- and the two calibrations described
above, the baseline calibration and the no-disaster calibration. As we will describe below, we
could not find a few of the Smolyak collocation solutions.
Perturbation and Smolyak collocation are well-known methodologies. They are described
in detail in Fernández-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramı́rez, and Schorfheide (2016). In comparison,
Taylor projection is a new method recently proposed by Levintal (2016). We discuss the
three methods briefly in the next pages. But, before doing so, we need to introduce some
notation.
4

Judd, Maliar, and Maliar (2011) is a possible alternative solution, based on a simulation method. Maliar
and Maliar (2014) survey the recent developments in simulation methods. We abstract from simulation
methods, because the Smolyak collocation method is already satisfactory in terms of computational costs.
Possibly, for larger models simulation methods may be more efficient than Smolyak collocation, although we
will later introduce some comments on why we conjecture that, for this class of models, simulation methods
may be difficult to implement.

12

Following Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2004), we cast the model in the following form:
Et f (yt+1 , yt , xt+1 , xt ) = 0

(19)

yt = g (xt )

(20)

xt+1 = h (xt ) + ηt+1 ,

(21)

where xt is a vector of nx state variables, yt is a vector of ny control variables, f : R2nx +2ny →
Rnx +ny , g : Rnx → Rny , h : Rnx → Rnx , η is a known matrix of dimensions nx × n , and  is a
n × 1 vector of zero mean shocks. The first equation gathers all expectational conditions, the
second one maps states into controls, and the last one gives us the law of motion for states.
Equations (19)-(21) constitute a system of ny + nx functional equations in the unknown
policy functions g and h. In practical applications, some of the elements of h are known
(e.g. the evolution of the exogenous state variables), so the number of unknown functions
and equations is smaller.

4.1

Perturbation

Perturbation introduces a perturbation parameter σ that controls the volatility of the
model. Specifically, equation (21) is replaced with:
xt+1 = h (xt ) + σηt+1 .
At σ = 0, the model boils down to a deterministic model. The steady state of the
deterministic model, denoted x̄, is calculated (assuming it exists). Then, by applying the
implicit function theorem, we recover the derivatives of the policy functions g and h with
respect to x and σ. Having these derivatives, the policy functions are approximated by
a Taylor series around x̄. To capture risk effects, the Taylor series must include at least
second-order terms (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2004).
High-order perturbation solutions have been developed and explored by Judd (1998), Gaspar and Judd (1997), Jin and Judd (2002), Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2004), and Aruoba,
Fernández-Villaverde, and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006), among others. Obtaining perturbation
solutions is easy for low orders, but the problem becomes cumbersome at high orders, especially for large models. In this paper, we use the perturbation algorithm presented in Levintal
(2015), which allows to solve models with non-Gaussian shocks up to the fifth order.

13

4.2

Smolyak collocation

Collocation is one of the projection methods introduced by Judd (1992). The policy
functions g (x) and h (x) are approximated by polynomial functions gb (x, Θg ) and b
h (x, Θh ),
where Θg and Θh are the polynomial coefficients of gb and b
h, respectively. Let Θ = (Θg , Θh )
denote a vector of size nΘ of all polynomial coefficients. Substituting in equation (19) yields
a residual function R (xt , Θ):
 


b
R (xt , Θ) = Et f gb ĥ (xt , Θh ) + ηt+1 , Θg , gb (xt , Θg ) , h (xt , Θh ) + ηt+1 , xt .
Collocation methods evaluate the residual function R (x, Θ) at N points {x1 , . . . , xN }, and
find the vector Θ for which the residual function is zero at all points. This requires solving
a nonlinear system for Θ:
R (xi , Θ) = 0, ∀i = 1, . . . , N.

(22)

The number of grid points N is chosen such that the number of conditions is equal to the
number of coefficients to be solved (nΘ ).
Since DSGE models are multidimensional, the choice of the basis function is crucial for
computational costs. We follow Krüger and Kubler (2004) by using Smolyak polynomials as
the basis function. Smolyak polynomials are products of Chebyshev polynomials, but unlike
tensor products, which grow exponentially, the number of terms in Smolyak polynomials
grows polynomially with the number of state variables. We implement Smolyak polynomials
of levels 1, 2, and 3. These approximation levels vary in the size of the basis function. The
level 1 approximation contains 1 + 2nx terms, the level 2 contains 1 + 4nx + (4nx (nx − 1)) /2
terms, and the level 3 contains 1 + 8nx + 12nx (nx − 1) /2 + 8nx (nx − 1) (nx − 2) /6 terms (see
Krüger and Kubler, 2004, for details). The Smolyak approximation level is different from the
polynomial order, as it contains higher order terms. For instance, an approximation of level 1
contains quadratic terms. Hence, the number of terms in a Smolyak basis of level k is larger
than the number of terms in a k order complete polynomial.
The first step of this approach is to construct the grid {x1 , . . . , xN }. The bounds of the
grid affect the accuracy of the solution. For a given basis function, a wider grid reduces
accuracy, because the same approximating function has to fit a larger domain of the state
space. Generally, we would like to have a good fit at points that the model is more likely to
visit, at the expense of other less likely points.
Disaster models pose a special challenge for grid-based methods, because the disaster
periods are points of low likelihood, but with a large impact. Hence, methods that build a grid
over a high probability region are not appropriate for disaster models (see a recent summary

14

in Maliar and Maliar, 2014). For this reason, we choose a more conservative approach and
construct the grid by a hypercube. Specifically, we obtain a third-order perturbation solution,
which is computationally cheap, and use it to simulate the model. Then, we take the smallest
hypercube that contains all the simulation points (including the disaster periods) and build a
Smolyak grid over the hypercube. In the level-3 Smolyak approximations, we had to increase
the size of the hypercube by up to 60 percent; otherwise, the Jacobian would be severely
ill-conditioned (we use the Newton method; see below). Our grid method is extremely fast,
so we ignore its computational costs in our run time comparisons.5
The final, and most demanding, step is to solve the nonlinear system (22). Previous
studies have used time iteration, e.g., Krüger and Kubler (2004), Malin, Krüger, and Kubler
(2011), and Fernández-Villaverde, Gordon, Guerrón-Quintana, and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2015),
but this method can be slow. More recently, Maliar and Maliar (2014) have advocated
the use of fixed-point iteration as a faster algorithm. For the size of our models (up to 12
state variables), we find that a Newton method with analytic Jacobian performs surprisingly
well. The run time of the Newton method is faster than that of the fixed-point methods
reported in the literature for models of similar size, e.g. see Judd, Maliar, Maliar, and Valero
(2014). Moreover, the Newton method ensures convergence if the initial guess is sufficiently
good, whereas fixed-point iteration does not guarantee convergence even if it starts near
the solution. Our initial guess is a third-order perturbation solution, which proves to be
sufficiently accurate for the models we study. Thus, the Newton method converges in just a
few iterations. The main cost we encounter is the memory constraint, which becomes binding
at a level-3 approximation for the largest model (12 state variables).6
The algorithm employed in solving the nonlinear system dictates the type of basis function
and grid that should be used. Since we apply the Newton method, we must use a basis
function and a grid that yield a numerically stable system. Our implementation of Smolyak
collocation has this property. By comparison, methods that use derivative-free solvers (e.g.,
Maliar and Maliar, 2015) gain more flexibility in the choice of basis functions and grids, but
lose the convergence property of Newton-type solvers, which are particularly convenient in
our case because we have access to a good initial guess.
5

Judd, Maliar, Maliar, and Valero (2014) propose to replace the hypercube with a parallelotope that
encloses the ergodic set. This technique may increase accuracy if the state variables are highly correlated.
In our case, the correlation between the state variables is very low (piecewise correlation is 0.14 on average),
so the potential gain from this method is small, while computational costs are higher. More recently, Maliar
and Maliar (2014, 2015) have proposed new types of grids. We skip the implementation of these more
advanced techniques because our collocation method already performs well and the new ideas, which carry
computational costs of their own, may be more useful in other classes of models.
6
We work on a Dell computer with a Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-5600U Processor and 16GB RAM, and our
codes are written in MATLAB/MEX.

15

4.3

Taylor projection

Taylor projection is a new type of projection method proposed by Levintal (2016). As with
standard projection methods, the goal is to find Θ for which the residual function R (x, Θ),
defined by equation (22), is approximately zero over a certain domain of the state space that
is of interest. Taylor projection builds on the Taylor theorem, which states that R (x, Θ) can
be approximated in the neighborhood of x0 by a kth-order Taylor series about x0 . If the
kth-order Taylor series is exactly zero (i.e., all the Taylor coefficients up to the kth-order are
zero), then R (x, Θ) ≈ 0 in the neighborhood of x0 . Thus, Taylor projection finds Θ for which
the kth-order Taylor series of the residual function about x0 is exactly zero. This amounts
to finding Θ that solves:
R (x0 , Θ) = 0
∂R (x, Θ)
∂xi
∂ 2 R (x, Θ)
∂xi1 ∂xi2
..
.

= 0, ∀i = 1, . . . , nx
x0

= 0, ∀i1 , i2 = 1, . . . , nx
x0

∂ k R (x, Θ)
∂xi1 · · · ∂xik

= 0, ∀i1 , . . . , ik = 1, . . . , nx .

(23)

x0

Namely, the residual function and all its derivatives up to the kth-order should be zero at x0 .
When this holds, all the terms of the kth-order Taylor series of R (x, Θ) about x0 are zero.
System (23) is solved for Θ using the Newton method with the analytic Jacobian. For
comparability with Smolyak collocation, we use the same initial guess, which is a third-order
perturbation solution, and the same stopping rule for the Newton method.
Taylor projection offers several computational advantages over standard projection methods. First, a grid is not required. The polynomial coefficients are identified by information
that comes from the model derivatives, rather than a grid of points. Second, the basis
function is a complete polynomial. This gives additional flexibility over Smolyak polynomials. For instance, interaction terms can be captured by a second-order solution, which has
1 + nx + nx (nx + 1) /2 terms in the basis function. In Smolyak polynomials, interactions
show up only at the level-2 approximation with 1 + 4nx + (4nx (nx − 1)) /2 terms in the basis
function (asymptotically 4 times larger). More terms in the basis function translate into a
larger Jacobian, which is the main computational bottleneck of the Newton method. Finally,
the Jacobian of Taylor projection is much sparser than the one from collocation. Hence, the
computation of the Jacobian and the Newton step is cheaper.
16

The main cost of Taylor projection is the computation of all the derivatives. Note that the
Jacobian requires differentiation of the nonlinear system (23) with respect to Θ. These derivatives can be computed efficiently by the chain rule method developed by Levintal (2015). This
method expresses high-order chain rules in compact matrix notation that exploits symmetry,
permutations, and repeated partial derivatives. The chain rules can also take advantage of
sparse matrix (or tensor) operations. For more details, see Levintal (2016).

5

Results
We are finally ready to discuss our results. In three subsections, we will describe our

findings in terms of accuracy, simulations, and computational costs.

5.1

Accuracy

Following the literature, we assess the accuracy of the various solution methods in two
ways. As proposed by Judd (1992), we compare the mean and maximum unit-free Euler
errors across the ergodic set of the model. We approximate this ergodic set by simulating
the model with the solution that was found to be the most accurate (third-order Taylor
projection).
We first report accuracy measures for the no-disasters calibration model to benchmark our
results. Tables 2-3 report the mean and maximum error for this calibration. As expected, all
11 solutions are reasonably accurate for each of the 8 versions of the model. The mean Euler
errors (in log10 units) range from around -2.7 (for a first-order perturbation) to -10.2 (for a
level-3 Smolyak). The max Euler errors range from -1.3 (for a first-order perturbation) to -9.3
(for a level-3 Smolyak). These results replicate the well-understood notion that models with
weak volatility can be approximated well by linearization. See, for a similar result, Aruoba,
Fernández-Villaverde, and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006).7
Tables 4-5 report the accuracy measures for the baseline calibration.8 The accuracy
measures change significantly when disasters are introduced into the model. The mean and
maximum errors are now, across all solutions, 2-3 orders of magnitude larger than before.
7

All through this section, we approximate the same set of variables by all methods and use the model
equations to solve for the remaining variables. While applying perturbation methods, researchers usually
employ instead the perturbation solution for all variables. We avoid that practice because we want to be
consistent across all solution methods.
8
The results for the level-1 Smolyak collocation are partial, because the Newton solver did not converge
in all cases. The level-3 Smolyak could not be solved for version 8 of the model due to insufficient memory.
Also, for the level-3 Smolyak and to avoid ill-conditioned Jacobians, the size of the grid was increased by 30
percent for version 3 of the model and by 60 percent for versions 4-7.

17

First-order perturbation and Taylor projection solutions are severely inaccurate, with max
Euler errors as high as -0.4. Higher-order perturbation solutions are more accurate, but
errors are still relatively large. In particular, we find that a third-order perturbation solution
is unlikely to be accurate enough, with mean Euler errors between -1.8 and -2.4 and max Euler
errors between -1.7 and -1.9. Even a fifth-order perturbation can generate a disappointing
mean Euler error of between -1.9 and -3.5.
In comparison, second- and third-order Taylor projections deliver a much more solid
accuracy, with mean Euler errors between -3.6 and -6.9. Interestingly, the max Euler errors
are about two orders of magnitude larger, suggesting that in a few rare cases these solutions
are significantly less accurate. We will later explore whether the differences between mean
and max Euler errors are economically significant.
The Smolyak solution improves over the fifth-order perturbation solution, but it is less
accurate than a Taylor projection of comparable order. How can this happen given the
higher-order terms in the polynomials forming the Smolyak solution? Because of the strong
nonlinearity generated by rare disasters. The Smolyak method has to extrapolate outside the
grid. Since the grid already contains extreme points (rare disasters), extrapolating outside
these extreme points introduces even more extreme points (e.g., a disaster period that occurs
right after a disaster period). By comparison, Taylor projection evaluates the residual function and its derivatives at one point, which is a normal period. Thus, it has to extrapolate
only for next-period likely outcomes, which can be either normal or disaster periods. This
reduces the approximation errors that contaminate the solution.
To dig deeper, we plot in Figure 1 the model residuals across the ergodic set for the four
most accurate solutions (second- and third-order Taylor projection and Smolyak collocation).
We use version 7 of the model, for which we have all four solutions. These plots reveal the
different pattern of the errors of Taylor projection compared to Smolyak collocation. Taylor
projection exhibits very small errors throughout most of the sample, except for two peaks of
high errors, which occur around disaster periods. Since Taylor projection zeros the Taylor
series of the residual function, the residuals are small as long as the model stays around the
center of the Taylor series (the steady state in our case). Namely, Taylor projection yields a
locally accurate solution, which deteriorates at points distant from the center. Fortunately,
these points are relatively unlikely, even considering the effects of disaster risk.
In principle, it is possible to improve the accuracy of Taylor projection by solving the
model at multiple points, as done in Levintal (2016). For instance, we could solve the model
also at a disaster period and use this solution when the model visits that point. However, for
these solutions to be accurate an important condition must hold: the state variables must
not change dramatically (in probability) from the current period to the future period. This
18

condition holds when the model is in a normal state, because it is highly likely that it stays
at a normal state the next period as well. However, if the model is in a disaster state, it is
very likely that it will change to a normal state the next period. Hence, solving the model
in a disaster state is prone to higher approximation errors. Nevertheless, it is important to
understand this property of Taylor projection, because one can build the model in such a way
that the future state of the economy is likely to be similar to the current state (for instance,
by increasing the frequency of the calibration or the persistence of the exogenous shocks).
The Smolyak errors depicted in Figure 1 are more evenly distributed than the Taylor projection errors. This is not surprising, because the collocation algorithm minimizes residuals
across the collocation points, which represent the ergodic set. This also reflects the uniform
convergence of projection methods (Judd, 1998). The problem is that the disaster periods
tilt the solution towards these rare episodes at the expense of the more likely normal states.
As a result, the errors in normal states get larger, because the curvature of the basis function
is limited. The solution to the problem is to increase the Smolyak order, but as shown below,
the computational costs are too high.

5.2

Simulations

Our second step is to compare the equilibrium dynamics generated by the different solutions. In particular, we look at two standard outputs from DSGE models: moments from
simulations and impulse response functions.
Rare disasters generate a strong impact on asset prices and risk premia. The solution
methods should be able to approximate these effects. Hence, we examine how the different
solutions approximate the prices of the two assets in our model: equity and risk-free bonds.
Tables 6-7 present the mean risk-free rate and the mean return on equity across simulations
generated by the different methods. We focus on version 7 of the model, for which we have
all the solutions. By the previous accuracy measures, the most accurate solutions are Taylor
projection of orders 2 and 3, and Smolyak collocation of orders 2 and 3. The mean risk-free
rate in these four solutions is 1.7-1.8 percent. Note that despite the differences in mean and
maximum Euler errors, from an economic viewpoint, these four solutions yield roughly the
same result. The differences across the four solutions are smaller than 0.06.
By comparison, perturbation solutions, which have been found to be less accurate, generate a much higher risk-free rate, ranging from 4.8 percent at the first order to 2.3 percent
at the fifth order. At the third order (a popular choice when solving models with stochastic
volatility), the risk-free rate is 2.9 percent. Therefore, our evidence suggests that perturbation methods fail to approximate accurately the risk-free rate, unless one goes for very high

19

orders. At the fifth order, the approximation errors are relatively small, which is consistent with the results obtained by Levintal (2015). Nevertheless, researchers that seek higher
accuracy should use different methods. The approximation of the mean return on equity is
more volatile across the different perturbation solutions, but fairly close to the 5.8-5.9 percent
obtained by the four accurate solutions.
We next examine impulse response functions. We focus on the disaster variables, which
generate the main nonlinearity in our model. Figure 2 presents the response of the model
to a disaster shock. The initial point is the fixed point to which the model converges in the
absence of shocks. The figure plots the response of output, investment, and consumption.
In the left panels we plot three perturbation solutions and a third-order Taylor projection.
In the right panels we plot the three Taylor projections and Smolyak levels 2 and 3 (the
mnemonics in the figure should be easy to read). Although the scale of the shock is large
and, therefore, it tends to cluster all impulse response functions, we can see some non-trivial
differences in the impulse response functions from low-order perturbations with respect to
all the other impulse response functions (furthermore, the model is solved for the detrended
variables, which are much less volatile).
Figure 3 plots the impulse response functions of a disaster risk shock (θt ). We assume that
the disaster impact θt rises from a contraction of 40 percent to a contraction of 45 percent,
which under our calibration is a 3.5 standard deviation event. As explained in section 3, this
relatively small change has a large impact on the model, because the model is highly sensitive
to the disaster parameters. All solutions generate in response a decline in detrended output,
investment, and consumption, but the magnitudes differ considerably. As before, the left
panels of the figure compare the perturbation solutions to a third-order Taylor projection.
Low-order perturbation solutions fail to approximate well the model dynamics, although the
fifth-order perturbation is relatively accurate. The right panel of Figure 3 shows a similarity
of the four most accurate solutions (second- and third-order Taylor projection and Smolyak
levels 2 and 3). We read this figure, as well as the results from Tables 6-7, as suggesting
that the solutions generated by a second- and third-order Taylor projection are economically
indistinguishable from the solutions from a Smolyak collocation.
Figure 4 shows similar impulse response functions, but only for the four most accurate
solutions. The left panel depicts the same impulse response as in Figure 3 with some zooming
in. The right panel shows impulse response functions for a larger shock, which increases the
anticipated disaster impact from 40 percent to 50 percent. Given the standard deviation of
θt , which is calibrated at 2.5 percent, the shock we consider is a 7 standard deviation event.
Barro (2006) points out that, while rare, this is a shock that is sometimes observed in the
data. Note that differences among the solutions are economically small (the scale is log).
20

Nevertheless, there seem to be two clusters of solutions: second-order Taylor projection and
Smolyak level-2 and third-order Taylor projection and Smolyak level-3.
We conclude from this analysis that second- and third-order Taylor projections and
Smolyak solutions are economically similar. We could not find a significant difference between these solutions. The other solutions are relatively poor approximations, except for the
fifth-order perturbation solution, which is reasonably good.

5.3

Computational costs

Our previous findings suggest that the second- and third-order Taylor projections and
Smolyak solutions are similar. However, when it comes to computational costs, there are
more than considerable differences among the solutions. Table 8 reports total run time (in
seconds) for each solution. The second-order Taylor projection is the fastest method among
the four accurate solutions by a large difference. It takes less than 3 seconds to solve the
seventh version of the model with second-order Taylor projection, 100 seconds with thirdorder Taylor projection, 31 seconds with second-order Smolyak and 4,067 seconds with thirdorder Smolyak. Given that these solutions are roughly equivalent, this is a remarkable result.
Taylor projection allows us to solve large and highly nonlinear models in a few seconds, and
potentially to nest the solution within an estimation algorithm, where the model needs to be
solved hundreds of times for different parameter values. Note also that a second-order Taylor
projection takes considerably less time than a fifth-order perturbation (3.5 seconds versus
60.3 seconds for the full model), even if its mean Euler errors are smaller (-3.6 versus -2.2).
The marginal costs of the different methods are extremely heterogeneous. Moving from
version 7 to version 8 of the model adds only one exogenous state variable. This change
increases the run time of a second-order Taylor projection by 0.8 second. By comparison,
a third-order Taylor projection takes about 61 more seconds, Smolyak level-2 takes roughly
31 more seconds, and Smolyak level-3 could not be computed due to insufficient memory.
Extrapolating these trends forward implies that the differences in computational costs across
solutions would increase rapidly with the size of the model.
We conclude that the second-order Taylor projection solution delivers the best accuracy/speed tradeoff among the tested solutions. The run time of this method is sufficiently
fast to enable estimation of the model, which would be much more difficult with the other
methods tested. For researchers interested in higher accuracy at the expense of higher costs,
we recommend the third-order Taylor projection solution, which is faster than a Smolyak
solution of comparable order.
Finally, we provide MATLAB codes that perform the Taylor projection method on the class

21

of models defined in section 4. Given these codes, Taylor projection is as straightforward
and easy to implement as standard perturbation methods. In comparison, coding a Smolyak
collocation requires some degree of skill and care.

6

Conclusions
Models with rare disasters have become a popular line of research in macroeconomics and

finance. However, rare disasters, by inducing significant non-linearities, present non-trivial
computational challenges that have been largely ignored in the literature or dealt with only
in a non-systematic fashion. To fill this gap, in this paper, we formulated and solved a
New Keynesian model with time-varying disaster risk (including several simpler versions of
it). Our findings were as follows. First, low-order perturbation solutions (first, second, and
third) do not offer enough accuracy as measured by the Euler errors, computed statistics, or
impulse response functions. A fifth-order perturbation fixes part of the problem, but it is
still not entirely satisfactory regarding accuracy and it imposes some serious computational
costs. Second, a second-order Taylor projection seems an excellent choice, with a satisfactory
balance of accuracy and run time. A third-order Taylor projection can handle a medium
size model with even better accuracy, but at a higher cost. Finally, Smolyak collocation
methods were accurate, but they were hard to implement (we failed to find a solution on
several occasions and faced memory limitations) and suffered from long run times.
This paper should be read only as a preliminary progress report. There is much more to
be learned about the properties of models with rare disasters than we can cover in one paper.
However, we hope that our results will stimulate further investigation on the topic.

22

7

Appendix

7.1

Euler Conditions

Define the household’s maximization problem as follows:


 1−ψ
1−ψ
1−γ 1−γ
max
Ut
+ βEt Vt+1
∗

ct ,kt ,xt ,lt

s.t. ct + xt − wt lt − rt kt − Ft − Tt = 0



xt
∗
kt − (1 − δ) kt − µt 1 − S
xt = 0
xt−1
kt+1 = kt∗ exp (−dt+1 θt+1 ) .
Note that the value function Vt depends on the household’s actual stock of capital kt and on
past investment xt−1 , as well as on aggregate variables and shocks that the household takes
as given. Thus, let us use Vk,t and Vx,t to denote the derivatives of Vt with respect to capital
kt and past investment xt−1 (assuming differentiability). These derivatives are obtained by
the envelope theorem:
(1 − ψ) Vt−ψ Vk,t = λt rt + Qt (1 − δ)


2
xt
xt
−ψ
0
(1 − ψ) Vt Vx,t = Qt µt S
,
xt−1
xt−1

(24)
(25)

where λt and Qt are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the budget constraint and the
evolution law of capital (they enter the Lagrangian in negative sign). We exclude the third
constraint from the Lagrangian and substitute it directly in the value function or the other
constraints, whenever necessary.
Differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to ct , kt∗ , xt , and lt yields the first-order
conditions:
(1 − ψ) Ut−ψ Uc,t = λt
γ−ψ
1−γ

(26)



1−γ
−γ
(1 − ψ) βEt Vt+1
Et Vt+1
Vk,t+1 exp (−dt+1 θt+1 ) = Qt






xt
xt
xt
0
λt = Qt µt 1 − S
−S
+
xt−1
xt−1 xt−1
 γ−ψ

1−γ 1−γ
−γ
+ (1 − ψ) βEt Vt+1
Et Vt+1
Vx,t+1

(27)

(1 − ψ) Ut−ψ Ul,t = −λt wt

(29)

23

(28)

Substituting the envolope conditions (24)-(25) and defining:
qt =

Qt
λt

yields equations (5)-(7) in the main text.

7.2

The Calvo Block

The intermediate good producer that is allowed to adjust prices maximizes the discounted
value of its profits. Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006, pp. 12-13) derive the
first-order conditions of this problem for expected utility preferences, which yield the following
recursion:

−
Πχt
1
gt+1
= λt mct yt + βθp Et
Πt+1
 χ 1−  ∗ 
Πt
Πt
2
gt+1
.
gt2 = λt Π∗t yt + βθp Et
Πt+1
Π∗t+1


gt1

To adjust these conditions to Epstein-Zin preferences, divide by λt to have:
 χ − 1
gt+1
gt1
λt+1
Πt
= mct yt + βθp Et
λt
λt
Πt+1
λt+1
 χ 1−  ∗  2
2
gt+1
gt
Πt
Πt
λt+1
= Π∗t yt + βθp Et
∗
λt
λt
Πt+1
Πt+1 λt+1

(30)
(31)

Note that β λλt+1
is the stochastic discount factor in expected utility preferences. In
t
Epstein-Zin preferences the stochastic discount factor is given instead by (2.1). Substituting
and defining ḡt1 =

gt1
,
λt

ḡt2 =

gt2
λt

yields (10)-(14). The other conditions in the Calvo block follow

directly from Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006, pp. 12-13).

24

References
Andreasen, M. (2012): “On the Effects of Rare Disasters and Uncertainty Shocks for Risk
Premia in Non-Linear DSGE Models,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 15(3), 295–316.
Andreasen, M. M., J. Fernández-Villaverde, and J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2013):
“The Pruned State-Space System for Nonlinear DSGE Models: Theory and Empircal Applications,” NBER Working, 18983.
Aruoba, S. B., J. Fernández-Villaverde, and J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006): “Comparing Solution Methods for Dynamic Equilibrium Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 30(12), 2477–2508.
Barro, R. J. (2006): “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3), 823–866.
(2009): “Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs,” American Economic
Review, 99(1), 243–64.
Barro, R. J., and T. Jin (2011): “On the Size Distribution of Macroeconomic Disasters,”
Econometrica, 79(5), 1567–1589.
Barro, R. J., and J. F. Ursúa (2012): “Rare Macroeconomic Disasters,” Annual Review
of Economics, 4(1), 83–109.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and
the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
1–45.
Epstein, L. G., and S. E. Zin (1989): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica,
57, 937–969.
Farhi, E., and X. Gabaix (2008): “Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates,” Working Paper
13805, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., G. Gordon, P. A. Guerrón-Quintana, and J. F.
Rubio-Ramı́rez (2015): “Nonlinear Adventures at the Zero Lower Bound,” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 57, 182–204.

25

Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. A. Guerrón-Quintana, and J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez
(2015): “Estimating Dynamic Equilibrium Models with Stochastic Volatility,” Journal of
Econometrics, 185, 216–229.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., and J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2006): “A Baseline DSGE
Model,” Discussion paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez, and F. Schorfheide (2016): “Solution and Estimation Methods for DSGE Models,” Working Paper 21862, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Gabaix, X. (2012): “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles
in Macro-Finance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 645–700.
Gaspar, J., and K. L. Judd (1997): “Solving Large-Scale Rational-Expectations Models,”
Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1, 45–75.
Gourio, F. (2012): “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles,” American Economic Review,
102(6), 2734–66.
Gourio, F. (2013): “Credit Risk and Disaster Risk,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3), 1–34.
Gourio, F., M. Siemer, and A. Verdelhan (2013): “International risk cycles,” Journal
of International Economics, 89(2), 471–484.
Isoré, M., and U. Szczerbowicz (2013): “Disaster Risk in a New Keynesian Model,”
Working Papers 2013-12, CEPII research center.
(2015): “Disaster Risk and Preference Shifts in a New Keynesian Model,” Working
Papers 2015-16, CEPII research center.
Jin, H.-H., and K. L. Judd (2002): “Perturbation Methods for General Dynamic Stochastic
Models,” Manuscript, Hoover Institution.
Judd, K. L. (1992): “Projection Methods for Solving Aggregate Growth Models,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 58, 410–452.
(1998): Numerical Methods in Economics. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Judd, K. L., L. Maliar, and S. Maliar (2011): “Numerically Stable and Accurate
Stochastic Simulation Methods for Solving Dynamic Models,” Quantitative Economics, 2,
173–210.
26

Judd, K. L., L. Maliar, S. Maliar, and R. Valero (2014): “Smolyak Method for Solving Dynamic Economic Models: Lagrange Interpolation, Anisotropic Grid and Adaptive
Domain,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 44, 92–123.
Krüger, D., and F. Kubler (2004): “Computing Equilibrium in OLG Models with
Stochastic Production,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28, 1411–1436.
Levintal, O. (2015): “Fifth Order Perturbation Solution to DSGE Models,” Manuscript,
Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya.
(2016): “Taylor Projection: A New Solution Method to Dynamic General Equilibrium Models,” Manuscript, Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya.
Maliar, L., and S. Maliar (2014): “Numerical Methods for Large Scale Dynamic Economic Models,” in Handbook of Computational Economics, ed. by K. Schmedders, and K. L.
Judd, vol. 3, pp. 325–477. Elsevier.
(2015): “Merging Simulation and Projection Approaches to Solve High-Dimensional
Problems with an Application to a New Keynesian Model,” Quantitative Economics, 6, 1–
47.
Malin, B. A., D. Krüger, and F. Kubler (2011): “Solving the Multi-country Real Business Cycle Model Using a Smolyak-collocation Method,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 35, 229–239.
Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 15(2), 145–161.
Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, R. Barro, and J. Ursúa (2013): “Crises and Recoveries
in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3), 35–74.
Petrosky-Nadeau, N., L. Zhang, and L. Kuehn (2015): “Endogenous Disasters,”
Discussion paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Rietz, T. A. (1988): “The Equity Risk Premium: a Solution,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(1), 117–131.
Rudebusch, G., and E. Swanson (2012): “The Bond Premium in a DSGE Model with
Long-run Real and Nominal Risks,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4,
105–143.
27

Schmitt-Grohé, S., and M. Uribe (2004): “Solving Dynamic General Equilibrium Models Using a Second-Order Approximation to the Policy Function,” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 28, 755–775.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97, 586–608.
Swanson, E. T. (2012): “Risk Aversion and the Labor Margin in Dynamic Equilibrium
Models,” American Economic Review, 102(4), 1663–91.
Tsai, J., and J. A. Wachter (2015): “Disaster Risk and its Implications for Asset Pricing,” Working Paper 20926, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Wachter, J. A. (2013): “Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate
Stock Market Volatility?,” Journal of Finance, 68(3), 987–1035.

28

Table 1: Baseline Calibration
Parameter

Value

Source

Leisure preference (ν)
Risk aversion (γ)
b
Inverse IES (ψ)
Trend growth of TFP (ΛA )
Std of TFP shocks (σA )
Trend growth of investment shock (Λµ )
Std of investment shock (σµ )
Discount factor (β)
Cobb-Douglas parameter (α)
Depreciation (δ)
Fixed production costs (φ)
Disaster probability
Mean Disaster size (θ̄)
Persistence of disaster risk shock (ρθ )
Std of disaster risk shock (σθ )
Adjustment cost parameter (κ)
Calvo parameter (θp )
Automatic price adjustment (χ)
Elasticity of substitution ()
Inflation target (Π)
Inflation parameter in Taylor rule∗ (γΠ )
Output growth parameter in Taylor rule (γy )
Interest smoothness in Taylor rule∗ (γR )
Std of monetary shock (σm,t )
Persistence of intertemporal shock (ρξ )
Std of intertemporal shock (σξ )

2.33
3.8
0.5
.0028
.01
0
.0024
.99
.21
.025
0
.0043
.5108
.9
.025
9.5
.8139
.6186
10
1.0050
1.3
.2458
.5
.0025
.1182
.1376

Gourio (2012)
Gourio (2012)
Gourio (2012)
FQR (2015)
Gourio (2012)

29

FQR (2015)
FQR (2015)
FQR (2015)
FQR (2015)
FQR (2015)
Gourio (2012)

FQR
FQR
FQR
FQR

(2015)
(2015)
(2015)
(2015)

FQR (2015)
FQR (2015)
FQR (2015)
FQR (2015)

30

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12

state vars
1st
-2.8
-2.7
-2.8
-2.8
-2.8
-2.8
-2.7
-2.8

2nd
-3.4
-3.9
-4.0
-4.1
-4.1
-4.1
-3.9
-4.0

3rd
-5.3
-5.0
-4.4
-4.7
-4.6
-4.6
-4.6
-4.6

4th
-6.4
-6.7
-5.9
-6.2
-6.1
-6.1
-5.9
-5.7

Perturbation
5th
-7.1
-7.1
-6.5
-6.9
-6.7
-6.7
-6.6
-6.6

1st
-3.3
-3.1
-3.3
-3.3
-3.3
-3.1
-2.9
-3.0

2nd
-6.2
-4.9
-5.2
-5.2
-5.2
-4.9
-4.7
-4.8

3rd
-8.7
-6.8
-7.0
-7.0
-7.0
-6.8
-6.4
-6.5

Taylor Projection

Benchmark with EZ and disasters
+ capital adjustment costs
+ Calvo
+ Taylor rule depends on output growth
+ Taylor rule is smoothed
+ investment shock
+ monetary shock
+ intertemporal preference shock

4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12

state vars
1st
-1.3
-1.8
-1.6
-1.6
-1.6
-1.8
-1.8
-1.7
2nd
-2.3
-2.9
-2.7
-2.8
-2.8
-3.0
-3.0
-3.0

3rd
-4.2
-4.2
-4.1
-4.1
-4.2
-4.5
-4.4
-4.0

4th
-5.4
-5.4
-5.1
-5.4
-5.4
-5.5
-5.4
-5.1

Perturbation
5th
-7.1
-6.6
-6.0
-6.4
-6.5
-6.5
-6.4
-6.1

1st
-1.3
-1.8
-1.6
-1.6
-1.6
-1.8
-1.8
-1.7

2nd
-3.4
-2.9
-2.8
-2.8
-2.8
-3.1
-3.1
-3.1

3rd
-5.5
-4.2
-4.1
-4.1
-4.1
-4.5
-4.4
-4.4

Taylor Projection

Table 3: No disasters: Max Euler Errors (log10) across the ergodic set

Benchmark with EZ and disasters
+ capital adjustment costs
+ Calvo
+ Taylor rule depends on output growth
+ Taylor rule is smoothed
+ investment shock
+ monetary shock
+ intertemporal preference shock

Model

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Model

Table 2: No disasters: Mean Euler Errors (log10) across the ergodic set
2nd
-7.4
-5.1
-5.3
-5.3
-5.2
-5.3
-5.1
-5.2

3rd
-10.2
-7.1
-7.0
-6.5
-6.5
-6.7
-6.4
-

1st
-1.9
-1.4
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-2.1
-2.0
-2.1

2nd
-6.2
-3.2
-4.2
-4.2
-4.1
-4.1
-3.9
-4.1

3rd
-9.3
-5.5
-5.4
-5.0
-4.9
-4.9
-4.9
-

Smolyak collocation

1st
-3.3
-2.7
-3.2
-3.2
-3.2
-3.2
-3.0
-3.2

Smolyak collocation

31

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12

state vars
1st
-1.7
-1.6
-1.7
-1.8
-1.7
-1.8
-1.8
-1.7

2nd
-2.0
-2.0
-2.0
-2.1
-2.1
-2.1
-2.2
-2.1

3rd
-2.4
-2.4
-1.8
-2.1
-2.1
-2.1
-2.1
-2.1

4th
-2.9
-2.8
-1.7
-2.0
-2.1
-2.1
-2.1
-2.1

Perturbation
5th
-3.5
-3.2
-1.9
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2

1st
-3.1
-2.5
-2.4
-2.5
-2.2
-2.3
-2.2
-2.2

2nd
-5.3
-4.1
-3.8
-4.0
-3.7
-3.7
-3.6
-3.6

3rd
-6.9
-5.4
-4.8
-5.1
-4.5
-4.5
-4.5
-4.4

Taylor Projection

Benchmark with EZ and disasters
+ capital adjustment costs
+ Calvo
+ Taylor rule depends on output growth
+ Taylor rule is smoothed
+ investment shock
+ monetary shock
+ intertemporal preference shock

4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12

state vars
1st
-1.5
-0.8
-0.5
-0.5
-0.5
-0.8
-0.7
-0.4
2nd
-1.7
-1.2
-1.6
-1.7
-1.6
-1.7
-1.8
-1.5

3rd
-1.9
-1.8
-1.7
-1.8
-1.8
-1.8
-1.9
-1.8

4th
-2.1
-2.1
-1.6
-1.8
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-1.8

Perturbation
5th
-2.4
-2.4
-1.6
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-2.0
-1.9

1st
-1.5
-0.8
-0.6
-0.5
-0.5
-0.8
-0.9
-0.5

2nd
-3.1
-1.1
-1.7
-1.7
-1.6
-1.7
-2.0
-1.5

3rd
-3.8
-1.8
-2.5
-2.3
-2.2
-2.3
-2.4
-2.1

Taylor Projection

Table 5: Disaster Models - Max Euler Errors (log10) across the ergodic set

Benchmark with EZ and disasters
+ capital adjustment costs
+ Calvo
+ Taylor rule depends on output growth
+ Taylor rule is smoothed
+ investment shock
+ monetary shock
+ intertemporal preference shock

Model

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Model

Table 4: Disaster Models - Mean Euler Errors (log10) across the ergodic set
2nd
-6.0
-1.6
-2.6
-2.7
-2.7
-2.6
-2.6
-2.6

3rd
-8.5
-3.6
-3.6
-3.5
-3.7
-3.6
-3.8
-

1st
-1.8
-0.1
-0.1
-

2nd
-4.9
-0.7
-1.7
-1.7
-1.7
-1.7
-1.9
-1.9

3rd
-7.3
-2.4
-2.6
-2.6
-2.6
-2.7
-2.8
-

Smolyak collocation

1st
-3.2
-1.0
-1.0
-

Smolyak collocation

32

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12

state vars
1st
4.6
4.6
4.6
4.7
4.7
4.8
4.8
4.7

2nd
3.1
2.9
3.0
3.5
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.4

3rd
1.8
1.6
2.0
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.9
2.8

4th
1.0
0.8
1.4
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.5
2.4

Perturbation
5th
0.7
0.4
1.1
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.1

1st
0.6
0.3
0.4
1.5
1.4
1.5
1.5
1.3

2nd
0.5
0.2
0.4
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.5

3rd
0.5
0.2
0.4
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.6

Taylor Projection
1st
0.5
0.3
1.8
-

Benchmark with EZ and disasters
+ capital adjustment costs
+ Calvo
+ Taylor rule depends on output growth
+ Taylor rule is smoothed
+ investment shock
+ monetary shock
+ intertemporal preference shock

4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12

state vars
1st
5.3
5.5
5.5
5.4
5.4
5.5
5.5
5.4
2nd
5.3
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.7
5.7
5.5

3rd
5.4
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.9
6.1
6.1
5.9

4th
5.4
5.8
5.9
5.9
6.1
6.2
6.2
6.1

Perturbation
5th
5.4
5.8
6.0
5.9
6.1
6.2
6.2
6.1

1st
5.4
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.6
5.8
5.7
5.6

2nd
5.4
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.7

3rd
5.4
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.8
5.9
5.9
5.8

Taylor Projection

3rd
0.5
0.2
0.4
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.8
-

1st
5.4
5.1
4.7
-

2nd
5.4
6.2
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.7

3rd
5.4
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.9
5.9
-

Smolyak collocation

2nd
0.5
0.1
0.4
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.5

Smolyak collocation

Table 7: Disaster Models - Return on Equity (% annualized) - simulation average

Benchmark with EZ and disasters
+ capital adjustment costs
+ Calvo
+ Taylor rule depends on output growth
+ Taylor rule is smoothed
+ investment shock
+ monetary shock
+ intertemporal preference shock

Model

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Model

Table 6: Disaster Models - Risk-free rate (% annualized) - simulation average

33

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
We

state vars

Perturbation

1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Benchmark with EZ and disasters
4
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
+ capital adjustment costs
5
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3
+ Calvo
7
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.9
+ Taylor rule depends on output growth
8
0.0 0.0 0.0 1.2
+ Taylor rule is smoothed
9
0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5
+ investment shock
10
0.0 0.0 0.1 3.4
+ monetary shock
11
0.0 0.0 0.1 4.4
+ intertemporal preference shock
12
0.0 0.0 0.1 5.4
work on a Dell computer with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-5600U Processor and

Model

Table 8: Run time (seconds)
5th
0.3
1.6
4.5
6.6
10.3
18.4
31.7
60.3
16GB

1st 2nd
0.5 0.7
0.6 1.0
0.5 1.3
0.6 1.5
0.5 1.8
0.5 2.2
0.5 2.7
0.6 3.5
RAM.

3rd
1.6
2.0
7.7
13.7
29.2
54.3
100.4
161.5

Taylor Projection

1st
0.3
0.4
0.4
-

2nd
0.5
1.1
3.3
5.7
12.7
23.9
31.0
62.2

3rd
1.0
4.6
83.2
308.4
622.3
1444.0
4067.2
-

Smolyak collocation

Figure 1: Model residuals across the ergodic set
Taylor Projection 2nd order

0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
100
4

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

700

800

900

1000

700

800

900

1000

700

800

900

1000

Taylor Projection 3rd order

×10-3

2
0
-2
-4
100

200

300

400

500

600

Smolyak 2nd order

0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
100

200

300

4

400

500

600

Smolyak 3rd order

-3

×10

2
0
-2
-4
100

200

300

400

500

34

600

Figure 2: Impulse response functions to a disaster shock
log(output)

-0.5

tp3
pert1
pert3
pert5

-0.6
-0.7

-0.7
-0.8

-0.9

-0.9

-1

-1
5

10

15

20

25

-1.1
0

30

log(investment)

-2.5

-2.7

-2.9

-2.9

-3

-3
10

15

20

25

-3.1
0

30

log(consumption)

-0.7

-0.9

-1.1

-1.1

-1.2

-1.2
5

10

15

20

5

25

10

15

20

-1.3
0

30

35

30

25

30

log(consumption)
tp3
tp2
tp1
smol2
smol3

-0.9
-1

25

tp3
tp2
tp1
smol2
smol3

-0.8

-1

-1.3
0

20

log(investment)

-0.7
tp3
pert1
pert3
pert5

-0.8

15

-2.7
-2.8

5

10

-2.6

-2.8

-3.1
0

5

-2.5
tp3
pert1
pert3
pert5

-2.6

tp3
tp2
tp1
smol2
smol3

-0.6

-0.8

-1.1
0

log(output)

-0.5

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 3: Impulse response functions to a disaster risk shock
log(detrended output)

-0.91

-0.92

-0.94

-0.93

-0.945
tp3
pert1
pert3
pert5

-0.94

-0.95
0

-2.88

5

10

15

20

25

-0.955
0

30

log(detrended investment)

-2.93

5

10

15

20

25

30

log(detrended investment)

-2.94

-2.92

-2.95
tp3
pert1
pert3
pert5

-2.94

-1.065

tp3
tp2
tp1
smol2
smol3

-0.95

-2.9

-2.96
0

log(detrended output)

-0.935

5

10

15

20

25

tp3
tp2
tp1
smol2
smol3

-2.96

-2.97
0

30

log(detrended consumption)

-1.08

5

10

15

20

25

30

log(detrended consumption)

-1.07
-1.085
-1.075
-1.08

-1.09
tp3
pert1
pert3
pert5

-1.085
-1.09
-1.095
0

5

10

15

20

25

tp3
tp2
tp1
smol2
smol3

-1.095

-1.1
0

30

36

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 4: Impulse response functions to small (left) and big (right) disaster risk shocks
log(detrended output)

-0.938

-0.94

-0.94

-0.942

-0.945
tp2
tp3
smol2
smol3

-0.944

-0.946
0

-2.93

5

10

15

20

log(detrended output)

-0.935

25

tp2
tp3
smol2
smol3

-0.95

-0.955
0

30

log(detrended investment)

-2.93

5

10

15

20

25

30

log(detrended investment)

-2.935
-2.935

-2.94

-2.945
0

-1.084

-2.945

tp2
tp3
smol2
smol3

-2.94

5

10

15

20

25

-2.95
-2.955
0

30

log(detrended consumption)

-1.08

-1.086

-1.085

-1.088

-1.09

-1.09

-1.094
0

5

10

15

20

25

5

10

15

20

-1.105
0

37

30

tp2
tp3
smol2
smol3

-1.1

30

25

log(detrended consumption)

-1.095

tp2
tp3
smol2
smol3

-1.092

tp2
tp3
smol2
smol3

5

10

15

20

25

30

