                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INCLUDING HEALTH INSURANCE IN POVERTY MEASUREMENT:
          THE IMPACT OF MASSACHUSETTS HEALTH REFORM ON POVERTY

                                         Sanders Korenman
                                         Dahlia K. Remler

                                        Working Paper 21990
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21990


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016




We thank Rob Patrizzo for excellent research assistance, supported by a Baruch College School of
Public Affairs Graduate Assistantship. We thank Jonathan Gruber, Michael Norton of the Massachusetts
Health Connector and Keith Ericsson for assistance obtaining the Massachusetts health plan data used
in this paper. We thank Neil Bennett, Rebecca Blank, Richard Burkhauser, Irv Garfinkel, Thesia Garner,
Diane Gibson, David Johnson, Sherry Glied, Mark Levitan, Brendan Saloner, and discussants and
participants at the 2014 APPAM, 2014 ASHEcon and 2015 PAA conferences for comments on earlier
drafts and useful discussions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Sanders Korenman and Dahlia K. Remler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Including Health Insurance in Poverty Measurement: The Impact of Massachusetts Health
Reform on Poverty
Sanders Korenman and Dahlia K. Remler
NBER Working Paper No. 21990
February 2016
JEL No. I13,I32

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop and implement what we believe is the first conceptually valid health-inclusive poverty
measure (HIPM)—a measure that includes health care or insurance in the poverty needs threshold
and health insurance benefits in family resources—and we discuss its limitations. Building on the Census
Bureau’s Supplemental Poverty Measure, we construct a pilot HIPM for the under-65 population under
ACA-like health reform in Massachusetts. This pilot is intended to demonstrate the practicality, face
validity and value of a HIPM. Results suggest that public health insurance benefits and premium subsidies
accounted for a substantial, one-third reduction in the poverty rate. Among low-income families who
purchased individual insurance, premium subsidies reduced poverty by 9.4 percentage points.


Sanders Korenman
School of Public Affairs
Baruch College
City University of New York
One Bernard Baruch Way
Box D-901
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
sanders.korenman@baruch.cuny.edu

Dahlia K. Remler
School of Public Affairs
Baruch College
City University of New York
One Bernard Baruch Way
Box D-901
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
Dahlia.Remler@baruch.cuny.edu
I. Introduction

         The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has brought health insurance—and therefore greater

access to health care and relief from the risk of financially ruinous medical expenditures—to

millions, including millions of low-income individuals. Yet neither the Census Bureau’s

“Official” Poverty Measure (OPM) nor its Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM) can capture the

bulk of the ACA’s impact on poverty. The OPM does not include in-kind (i.e., non-cash)

benefits as resources available to meet basic needs. And although the SPM greatly improves

upon the OPM by including most in-kind benefits, it too excludes health insurance benefits from

resources and does not include a need for health care or insurance in the poverty threshold.

Instead, the SPM addresses health indirectly, by deducting from resources all out-of-pocket

expenditures on medical care or insurance (MOOP) (Short 2013; Caswell and O’Hara 2010). The

SPM measures whether income, net of MOOP expenditures, is sufficient to meet non-health

“material” needs. Therefore, health insurance and the ACA can reduce poverty as measured by

the SPM only to the extent that they reduce MOOP.

         But health insurance is valuable beyond reducing MOOP. First, the insured receive

valuable medical care that the uninsured do not—the access value of insurance (IOM 2002;

Nyman 2003, 2004; Sommers, Long and Baicker 2014). When the uninsured forego medical

care, the SPM does not measure their unmet health needs. Second, health insurance is valuable

because it reduces ex ante risk, even if in a given year, ex post, care was not needed, as in the

classic example of fire insurance that is valuable ex ante even when no fire occurs (Blinder

1985).

         The SPM has been used to estimate how Medicaid reduces poverty by reducing MOOP.

Sommers and Oellerich (2013) find that Medicaid reduces the SPM poverty rate by 0.7



                                                  2
percentage point overall and by one percentage point for children, suggesting that over $400

billion in annual Medicaid spending reduces poverty only slightly. However, these estimates

capture Medicaid’s impact only through reducing MOOP and miss Medicaid’s ability to meet

unmet health care needs. As Sommers and Oellerich write: “Beyond the program’s presumed

primary benefit of improved access to care and health, we find that Medicaid has significant

poverty-reducing effects of a similar order of magnitude of other dedicated anti-poverty

government programs” (p. 829, emphasis added). A more complete assessment of Medicaid’s

effects on poverty would also capture its “primary benefit.”

       While health care is widely perceived as a basic need, creating a valid measure of poverty

that incorporates the need for health care has “bedeviled analysts since the 1970s” (NAS 1995 p.

223; see also Ellwood and Summers 1985, Ruggles 1990, Moon 1993). Without a health need in

the poverty threshold, it is inconsistent to include health insurance benefits in resources (NAS

1995, p. 224).

       The distortion produced by poverty measures that do not include health has grown as

health care’s share of government and individual expenditures has grown, most recently with the

ACA (Martin et al. 2015). Drawing on insights from health economics, we argue that the ACA

has also made it possible to incorporate health insurance needs and resources into poverty

measurement, as we explain below.

       In implementing the SPM, the Census Bureau followed closely the recommendations of a

National Academy of Sciences (NAS) expert panel on poverty measurement (NAS 1995). The

NAS panel struggled to include health in its recommended poverty measure, finding no valid and

practical way to do so (see also Moon 1993). Including health care or insurance in the poverty

measure requires putting a dollar value on health needs and on resources such as health insurance



                                                 3
provided by government or employers. The key underlying barrier to including health insurance

was an inability to determine the cost of insurance to a particular family (Korenman and Remler

2013); at the time, what a US family needed to spend to obtain insurance depended on health

status, employment and other factors. Indeed health insurance might not have been available at

any price due to preexisting conditions. Consequently, the panel recommended subtracting

MOOP from resources and excluding health care/insurance from needs, resulting in a poverty

measure based on the ability to meet non-health (“material”) needs only. This recommendation

was controversial from the outset (Cogan 1995; Bavier, 1998; Corbett 1999; Betson 2000). The

NAS panel stressed that the recommended approach “…does not explicitly acknowledge a basic

necessity, namely, medical care that is just as important as food and housing…and devalues the

benefits of having health insurance, except indirectly” (NAS 1995, p. 236).

       Moreover, the current SPM (based on the NAS approach) could become a misleading

indicator of the effect of health reform. The ACA transfers large subsidies for health insurance to

lower-income persons, materially affecting the distribution of income (Aaron and Burtless 2014;

Burkhauser, Larrimore and Simon 2013; CBO 2012). Yet, in subtracting out-of-pocket premium

payments from income and excluding the value of health insurance benefits from resources and

needs, the SPM could very well indicate that the ACA has made low-income households poorer.

The SPM will not register increased care for the formerly uninsured as meeting health needs nor

the reduced financial risk as meeting insurance needs. The SPM captures only reductions in

MOOP, if they occur. A HIPM, in contrast, captures the role of health insurance in meeting all

these health care and insurance needs—access, ex ante risk reduction, and MOOP. 1



1
  In addition, separating health from material poverty measures can result in different poverty
classifications for people who make different health insurance and health care purchase decisions
despite identical resources, opportunities, and health statuses.
                                                 4
       We previously analyzed the impediments to a valid Health Inclusive Poverty Measure

(HIPM)—a measure that includes health needs and counts health insurance benefits as resources

available to meet those needs (Korenman and Remler 2013). We showed that a valid HIPM can

be constructed if health insurance is considered the basic health need and the health system has

certain characteristics: universally available health insurance with premiums unrelated to health

status (community rating) and caps on MOOP expenditures for care. (Since health insurance is

not fungible—usable for non-health needs—the HIPM must never value health insurance

benefits more than health insurance needs.) These health system requirements are met, for

citizens and legal residents, by a combination of Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug Plans

and the ACA. Since ACA-like reforms took effect in Massachusetts in 2008 (Gruber 2011, Long

and Masi 2009), we are able implement a HIPM for 2010 Massachusetts. A HIPM can be

implemented for the US as required data become available (Pascale, Boudreaux and King 2014;

CMS n.d.).

       Our purpose is to demonstrate the practicality, value and face validity of a HIPM for the

under-65 population, the primary beneficiaries of health reform. 2 We (1) explain why ACA-like

reforms make the HIPM conceptually valid; (2) demonstrate its practicality by implementing a

pilot HIPM under the Massachusetts health reform; and (3) demonstrate its value by using the

HIPM to assess the direct impact of health benefits on poverty rates and poverty gaps. Although

we believe the HIPM to be an improvement over existing measures, we also discuss limitations.

       According to our pilot HIPM, the poverty rate for the under-65 in Massachusetts in 2010

was 12.2%, compared to 13.5% for the SPM. The HIPM rate was modestly lower than the SPM

rate because most health insurance needs were met. However, the HIPM rate would likely be

2
 The treatment of the population aged 65 and older involves different institutional
considerations; see Korenman and Remler (2013).
                                                5
much higher than the SPM in states with substantial unmet health insurance needs. Public health

insurance programs reduced poverty by 3.9 percentage points, 0.6 percentage points of which is

due to Massachusetts’s premium subsidies. The “cash income” HIPM poverty gap (as a percent

of the HIPM poverty line) was 43.7%. When we added all in-kind benefits to income, the gap

fell by 26.5 percentage points, of which 3.6 points derives from employer-provided health

insurance and 6.9 points from Medicaid and Medicare. Among poor persons covered by

individually-purchased insurance, premium subsidies alone reduced the poverty gap by nearly 20

percentage points, from 51.5% to 32.4%. These direct impacts of health insurance transfers on

poverty are not captured by the OPM or SPM.

        Although only illustrative, our estimates show the feasibility of constructing a poverty

measure that incorporates health in both resources and needs. Thus, the ACA has made reaching

this goal, which eluded researchers for decades, both possible and increasingly important. The

estimates suggest that public health insurance programs and subsidies substantially reduce

poverty, particularly poverty gaps. As data become available, a HIPM could show the impact on

poverty of other heath policies, such as states’ expanding—or failing to expand—Medicaid

eligibility.



II. When a Health Inclusive Poverty Measure Is Possible

        Our HIPM includes health insurance in the poverty threshold. This requires that health

insurance be considered a basic need, no matter an individual’s health status. In other words,

basic health insurance is deemed essential and not wasted even if ex post an individual used little

or no health care and even for someone with little ex ante expected health care usage.




                                                 6
       Whether or not health insurance is a need is a philosophical and political question about

which people can disagree. However, it is clear that health insurance is widely considered a need

since all high-income countries other than the US have universal health insurance. In the US,

Medicaid, Medicare, and the ACA, particularly its insurance mandate and subsidies for those

who cannot afford it, suggest that health insurance is considered a need in the US as well. Still,

the lack of Medicaid expansion in some states indicates that the consensus is incomplete. Since

the ACA plans and subsidies are the outcome of a political process, they arguably express a

national standard for health insurance needs. Indeed, it is essentially impossible to define any

need, especially a health care or insurance need, without reference to some social standard or

norm. Therefore, we use the political authority of the ACA to justify our choice of a national

need standard.

       Some argue that, while health care is a need, health insurance is not, because uninsured

poor people receive free care, through hospital uncompensated care and free clinics. But free

care does not fully substitute for insurance (e.g., Dillman et al. 2014). For example, while

hospitals must treat people in unstable conditions (e.g., having a heart attack) who are unable to

pay, they are not required to treat those with non-acute conditions, such as many cancer patients

(CMS 2003). Thus, viewing health insurance as unnecessary is equivalent to adopting a lower

standard of health care need. Although we always treat insurance as the primary health care

need, we recognize that free care provides implicit (inferior) insurance, and therefore conduct

sensitivity analyses incorporating that resource.

       The logic and practicalities of poverty measurement further justify considering health

insurance to be the basic health care need. It is true that any immediate need is for health care

and that care can be purchased directly, without insurance. However, the resources needed to



                                                    7
provide care to a heart attack victim are not the dollars needed to buy that care, but rather

insurance. The vast majority of Americans use insurance to meet their health care needs. Further,

the funds needed to pay directly for health care vary tremendously by detailed health status,

making it utterly impractical to determine the direct costs of needed care for a poverty threshold.

In contrast, insurance covers the care needed for a wide variety of health conditions. If basic

health insurance is considered a need, it is valid and straightforward to add that need to the

poverty threshold since Medicare, the ACA, and similar reforms break the link between health

status and resources required to meet health needs.

       To understand how the ACA and Massachusetts health reforms enable construction of a

HIPM, consider a health care system that makes eligibility universal for basic insurance, the

“Basic Plan.” The Basic Plan covers all care deemed essential by society, so it is complete in the

events, treatments and procedures covered. However, it does not fully pay for all essential care.

First, people must pay part of the premium out-of-pocket (premium MOOP). But that premium is

not risk-rated: it does not depend on health status. Second, the Basic Plan includes cost-sharing,

such as deductibles and co-pays (nonpremium MOOP). (However, it caps cost-sharing

payments.) In such a system, all essential health needs can be met with premium MOOP equal to

the Basic Plan premium and nonpremium MOOP less than or equal to the Basic Plan

nonpremium MOOP cap. Any premium MOOP payments above the Basic Plan premium and

any nonpremium MOOP payments above the Basic Plan cap are discretionary, as socially

defined. Essentially, the political process determines the Basic Plan and, in so doing, defines the

basic health need.

       We argue that the benchmark Silver plan provides a reasonable norm for the basic health

insurance plan envisioned for the HIPM. While even that assertion may prove controversial



                                                  8
(given continuing political controversy about the need for the ACA and Medicaid expansions),

adopting a richer plan that requires little cost-sharing as the basic health insurance plan would be

more difficult to defend.

       Thus, the US political process has made accessible and affordable health insurance

policies in which cost-sharing is expected (in order to reduce moral hazard). Consequently, to

meet their health care needs, people also need enough income to pay for cost-sharing for

necessary covered care. Therefore, in post-ACA US, needs are (1) a basic health insurance

policy in which cost-sharing is expected and (2) sufficient income to pay out-of-pocket for cost-

sharing, whatever their health status, and (3) material (i.e., non-health) needs.




III. Implementing a HIPM

   Both the ACA and Massachusetts health reforms meet conditions for a valid HIPM.

Exchange plans cover all care deemed essential and premiums cannot be tied to health status

(Focus on Health Reform 2011a). Those with low income receive premium subsidies and have

lower nonpremium MOOP caps. However, the reforms fall somewhat short of universal

eligibility because undocumented immigrants cannot use the exchanges, and, therefore, should

be excluded from HIPM calculations

   Our HIPM builds on the SPM, by adding health insurance needs to the threshold, adding any

health insurance benefits received to resources, and modifying the SPM’s deduction of MOOP

expenditures for care. Health insurance needs are the unsubsidized premium (“full cost”) of the

Basic Plan. Health insurance resources include any subsidies to, direct payments for, or direct

provision of health insurance by government or employers. The value of insurance benefits must

never exceed the value of health needs, since health insurance benefits are nonfungible.

                                                  9
      Specifically, to create the HIPM:

      •   Add health insurance (unsubsidized premium of Basic Plan) to the SPM needs threshold

      •   For those with insurance from employers or government, add to SPM resources 3 the net
          value of insurance (Basic Plan premium less required premium MOOP payment)
              o But do not allow the subtraction to exceed the premium MOOP required for Basic
                 Plan

      •   For those who receive premium subsidies, add the subsidy to SPM resources3
             o But do not allow this addition to exceed the premium of the Basic Plan

      •   To incorporate the need to pay for cost-sharing, subtract actual nonpremium MOOP from
          resources
              o But do not allow this subtraction to exceed the nonpremium MOOP cap available
                 for the Basic Plan

The family unit is poor if resources are less than needs.


          Three factors determine whether the likelihood of poverty is higher or lower under a

HIPM relative to the SPM. We illustrate with an example (Table 1) with two families that are

identical except that Family A has no health insurance benefits while Family B has insurance

fully provided by the government. First, all else the same, adding health insurance needs (the

$10,000 Basic Plan) increases the poverty threshold from $20,000 to $30,000 and therefore the

likelihood of HIPM poverty relative to SPM poverty.

          Second, adding health insurance to resources can meet, fully or partially, the higher needs

threshold. Adding the same value of health insurance to needs and resources can never make

HIPM poverty less likely than the SPM poverty. In our example, according to the SPM, neither

family is poor because their material resources of $22,000 exceed the $20,000 SPM threshold.

However, under the HIPM, Family A is poor while Family B is not, because Family A has no

health insurance provided while Family B has insurance fully provided.


3
    SPM resources before the MOOP deduction.

                                                  10
       Third, the HIPM limit on deductions for premium and nonpremium MOOP, by itself,

makes HIPM poverty less likely than SPM poverty. Appendix II Section 1 explains the HIPM

MOOP limits in detail and Appendix II Section 2 provides a detailed example and step-by-step

explanation of the HIPM implementation, including the MOOP capping procedures. Thus, when

health insurance resources largely meet health insurance needs, we expect the HIPM poverty rate

to be lower than the SPM rate, but when low-income families lack employer-provided health

insurance, government insurance or subsidies for private insurance, we expect the HIPM poverty

rate to be higher, perhaps much higher, than the SPM rate.



Data

       We implement the HIPM with the data used by the Census Bureau for the OPM and

SPM, the Current Population Survey (CPS) Annual Social and Economic Supplement (King et

al. 2010, NBER n.d.). We calculate a pilot HIPM for the under-65 population, the main

beneficiaries of health reforms. We dropped SPM “resource units” (e.g., families, Short 2013)

that contain individuals over age 64, reducing our sample from 3101 to 2582, or by 16.7%. Since

the CPS does not allow identification of undocumented individuals, we also dropped SPM units

that include one or more non-citizens who is either uninsured or has individually-purchased

insurance, further reducing the analysis sample to 2504, for a total sample reduction of 19.3%. 4

Although our sample size limits precision, it is adequate for our purposes: demonstrating the

practicality and some important applications of the HIPM.




4
 We could instead impute undocumented status (e.g., Kaiser Family Foundation 2013) and drop
units with (imputed) undocumented persons who report individually-purchased insurance or who
are uninsured.
                                                11
Health Insurance Needs: The Basic Plan

          Determining which exchange plan is the Basic Plan involves judgment, as do many

aspect of poverty measurement (NAS, 1995, p. 99). Since the ACA provides cost-sharing

subsidies only for Silver plans (Claxton and Panchal 2015), and determines premium subsidies

by ensuring that the second cheapest Silver tobacco-free plan premiums are affordable, under the

ACA we would designate this benchmark plan as the Basic Plan. Each state’s exchange database

can provide the unsubsidized Basic Plan premium for a family. For our pilot HIPM for

Massachusetts in 2010, we designated the cheapest Bronze Low plan the Basic Plan, since it was

closest to today’s ACA Silver. (Appendix II Section 3 describes our premium estimates and the

Massachusetts plan data.)

          Poverty is determined at the SPM-unit level, but health insurance plans are held by a

variety of sub-units. For example, an unmarried couple living together forms an SPM unit but

cannot receive exchange health insurance together. Within each SPM unit, we assign people

covered by the same health insurance to a separate health insurance unit (HIU) and determine

health needs and resources for each HIU, as described in Appendix II Section 4. We aggregate

health insurance needs (and resources) over the HIUs to determine the SPM unit’s HIPM poverty

status.



Health Insurance Resources

          For those provided health insurance by the government or employers, health insurance

resources are the Basic Plan premium minus premium MOOP payments required to obtain that

coverage. We do not allow the deduction to exceed what the family would have to pay for the

Basic Plan; buying a more expensive plan cannot make a family poorer. What the family would



                                                  12
have to pay to obtain the Basic Plan depends on their potential eligibility for public and private

insurance and subsidies. Data limitations, however, constrain our ability to fully determine this

amount and therefore, we make some assumptions. For a summary, see Appendix I, Table A1;

for details see Appendix II.

       Those who do not receive health insurance benefits have no health insurance resources to

help them meet health insurance needs. If they are eligible for premium subsidies, however, we

credit their resources with the subsidies. This includes the uninsured who have not heeded the

mandate to purchase insurance and, therefore, not taken-up the subsidies for which they are

eligible. However, in section V, we test the sensitivity of our results to this approach.

       In states that have not expanded Medicaid eligibility, poor Medicaid-ineligible

individuals are not eligible for subsidies (Rasmussen et al., 2013). However, their HIPM

thresholds are defined because they are permitted to purchase unsubsidized plans on the

exchanges.

       In summary, health insurance resources are, for those provided health insurance plans:

Health Insurance Resources = Basic Plan Premium– premium MOOP (up to available

Basic Plan premium MOOP),

and for those not provided health insurance plans:

Health Insurance Resources = Subsidy to Premium, if eligible for premium subsidies

                                = 0, if ineligible

Appendix I, Table A1 describes the determination of health insurance resources and caps for all

insurance types.




                                                     13
Cost-sharing Needs

          While health insurance is the primary health care need, some health care needs are paid

out-of-pocket, due to cost-sharing. Several approaches to cost-sharing are possible and none is

without problems. 5 Our treatment of cost-sharing currently hews closely to the SPM, but limits

the deduction from resources of non-premium MOOP expenditures to the non-premium MOOP

cap available with the Basic Plan.

          In addition to cost-sharing expenditures, families may spend out-of-pocket on uncovered

care (non-premium MOOP expenses), including out-of-network care. Because the Basic Plan

covers all needed care, as determined politically and socially, ideally we would only deduct cost-

sharing payments, not expenditures on uncovered care. However, the CPS does not currently

distinguish cost-sharing expenditures from uncovered care and therefore we deduct all non-

premium MOOP up to a cap.

          Both the ACA and the Massachusetts health reform cap nonpremium MOOP for all

exchange plans: under the ACA, the maximum was $6,350 for an individual and $12,700 for a

family in 2014; in 2010 Massachusetts, $5000 and $10,000, for the individual and family,

respectively. Both laws reduce nonpremium MOOP caps further for those with low income,

according to a sliding scale, implemented through government subsidies additional to the

premium subsidies. Under the ACA, with Silver plans, lower nonpremium MOOP caps apply to

those with incomes below 400% of poverty (Focus on Health Reform 2011a, 2011b), and in

Massachusetts, 300% of poverty. (For example, in Massachusetts, the cap was $2,300 for

incomes up to 200% of the OPM threshold).

          In summary, HIPM resources are:



5
    Korenman and Remler (2013) discuss alternative approaches to cost-sharing.

                                                    14
HIPM Resources = SPM resources (before MOOP deduction) + Health Insurance

Resources –nonpremium MOOP (up to available Basic Plan cap)



Poverty Status

A family is poor if HIPM resources are insufficient to meet HIPM needs.



The following box summarizes and compares the Official, Supplemental and Health-Inclusive

Poverty Measures.




                                              15
                                          Poverty Measure Concepts: Official, Supplemental and Health Inclusive




                           Official Poverty Measure                 Supplemental Poverty Measure                        Health Inclusive Poverty Measure
                                                                                                                                 under the ACA

                         Families or unrelated               Families, including any coresident                 SPM Uniti
Measurement              individuals                         unrelated children who are cared for by
Units                                                        the family (such as foster children) and
                                                             any cohabiters and their relatives, or
                                                             unrelated, noncohabiting individuals
                         Three times cost of minimum         The mean of expenditures on food, clothing,        Same as SPM measure of non-health needs
Non-Health Needs         food diet in 1963ii                 shelter, and utilities (FCSU) over all two-child
                                                             consumer units in the 30th to 36th percentile
                                                             expenditure range multiplied by 1.2
      Adjustments to     Vary by family size, composition,   Geographic adjustments for differences in          Same as SPM
      Non-health Needs   and age of householder              housing costs by tenure and a three-
                                                             parameter equivalence scale for family size
                                                             and composition
      Updating Non-      Consumer Price Index: all items     5-year moving average of expenditures on           Same as SPM
      health Needs                                           FCSU


                         Noneii                              Explicit: None                                     Explicit: Unsubsidized Premium of Basic Health
Health Insurance Needs                                                                                          Insurance Plan
                                                             Implicit: All out-of-pocket expenditures on
                                                             insurance (premium MOOP)


                         Noneii                              Explicit: None                                     Explicit: None
Cost-sharing and
Uncovered Health Care                                        Implicit: All out-of-pocket expenditures on        Implicit: Capped out-of-pocket expenditures on care
Needs                                                        care (non-premium MOOP)                            (non-premium MOOP up to the cap available with
                                                                                                                Basic Plan).
                                  Poverty Measure Concepts: Official, Supplemental and Health Inclusive




Non-Health Resources           Gross before-tax cash income         Sum of cash income, plus noncash benefits      SPM Resource Measure without the MOOP
                                                                    that families can use to meet their FCSU       subtraction
                                                                    needs minus taxes (or plus tax credits),
                                                                    minus work expenses and child support
                                                                    paid to another household
                                                                    minus out-of-pocket medical care and
                                                                    insurance and Over-the-counter expenses
                                                                    (MOOP)
                                None                                None                                           For those who get private or public health
Health Insurance Resources                                                                                         insurance benefits: Net Value of Health Insurance
                                                                                                                   Benefits
                                                                                                                   Specifically, unsubsidized premium of Basic Plan
                                                                                                                   minus actual premium MOOP (limited to premium
                                                                                                                   MOOP necessary to obtain Basic Plan).


                                                                                                                   For those eligible for premium subsidies: subsidy
                                                                                                                   value.




 Source: The OPM and SPM descriptions are partly based on Short (2013, page 3).
 i
      However, health insurance needs & resources are determined for Health Insurance Units, subunits of the SPM unit, then aggregated to SPM unit.
 ii
      A small amount of out of pocket expenditures for health insurance and care (the 1963 budget share of approximately 4% of median income) is captured by the
 OPM needs threshold (NAS 1995, p. 226).




                                                                                   17
IV. Implicit Thresholds and Poverty Gaps


Implicit Thresholds

       The SPM does not attempt to measure whether health insurance or care needs are met; it

only aims to measure material (food, clothing, shelter and utilities) poverty. But it implicitly

treats whatever health insurance and care a family purchases as essential—nondiscretionary—by

deducting MOOP expenditures from resources. That approach is equivalent to adding all MOOP

expenditures to the needs threshold and determining if (pre-deduction) resources are sufficient to

meet the expanded needs threshold (e.g., Burtless and Siegel 2001).

       We define a poverty measure’s Implicit Threshold as the measure’s explicit needs

threshold plus the health deductions from resources that the measure treats as needs (i.e.

nondiscretionary expenditures). The HIPM implicitly treats as health needs only basic health

insurance and actual cost-sharing up to the Basic Plan cap. As noted, the SPM implicitly treats as

health needs all insurance and care expenditures.



Poverty gaps

       Researchers often measure the intensity of poverty by the poverty gap—the amount by

which the poor’s resources fall below the poverty threshold (Ben-Shalom, Moffitt and Scholz

2012; Ziliak 2004; Short 2011). We use the HIPM to estimate poverty gaps incorporating health

needs. For each individual, we calculate the proportional poverty gap—the difference between

his family’s needs and resources, as a proportion of needs (the HIPM Implicit Threshold). To

calculate the mean poverty gap, we averaged individual gaps over all individuals in SPM units

that have resources below HIPM needs threshold.
       Census reports show how government transfer programs reduce the SPM poverty rate by

recalculating the rate as each transfer is excluded from income (e.g., US Census 2011; Short

2011). We estimate the effects of health insurance benefits on the HIPM gap in a similar way.

We begin by including only pre-tax cash income in resources (OPM resources)—referred to as

the “cash only” poverty rate and gap. We then add, in turn, non-health in-kind benefits plus net

tax credits and various health insurance resources to calculate their poverty-reducing effects. We

use the HIPM poverty gaps to show how health insurance benefits reduce poverty intensity and

compare those effects to the combined effect of other transfer programs.



V. Results: HIPM Poverty Rates and Gaps under the Massachusetts Health Reform

Poverty rates

       For the under-65 population in 2010 Massachusetts the HIPM poverty rate of 12.2% is

1.3 percentage points lower than the 13.5% SPM poverty rate (Table 2, column 1, rows 2 and 4);

for comparison, the OPM rate is 11.9% (row 1). The HIPM poverty rate is lower than the SPM

rate because, in Massachusetts, the vast majority of people near the poverty line have their health

insurance needs met and the HIPM limits MOOP deductions. (The effect on the SPM of

deducting all MOOP is shown in the comparison of row 2 and row 3; it increases the SPM

poverty rate by 3.1 percentage points, from 10.4% to 13.5%.)

       The other columns of Table 2 show a similar pattern of results for children and across

family types: HIPM poverty rates fall zero to 2.7 percentage points below SPM rates (compare

rows 2 and 4). The difference is largest for groups with high MOOP expenditures, as suggested

by the difference between the SPM rate before and after MOOP deductions (row 2 vs. 3). For

example, the SPM rate among persons in two-parent families is 8.0% before the MOOP



                                                19
deduction but 12.8% after. The HIPM, which limits the MOOP deduction, falls between these

two: 10.1%.

       Table A3 in Appendix III presents suggestive evidence for the validity of the HIPM

MOOP limits: on average, in 2010 Massachusetts, those classified as poor by the SPM but not-

poor by the HIPM due to limits on MOOP deductions do not appear to be particularly needy and

have fewer characteristics typically associated with poverty. For example, they are far less likely

to receive public assistance such as Food Stamps/SNAP, to be uninsured, immigrants or to

racially identify as black, and far more likely to be married, citizens or homeowners.

       For the HIPM poverty rates reported in Table 2, the resources of the uninsured include

the full value of the subsidies for which they are eligible. We test the sensitivity of our results to

this assumption. We find that results do not change substantively when we instead crediting the

uninsured with either no insurance subsidies or an implicit insurance value for free care 6; the

HIPM rate rises by only 0.36 percentage points (results available upon request). The results are

not sensitive to these different assumptions because there were few uninsured persons in

Massachusetts in 2010.

       Although the SPM and HIPM for Massachusetts differ modestly, only the HIPM can

show the direct impact of health transfers on poverty. Table 3 shows how the proportion poor

(i.e., having insufficient resources to meet material and health insurance needs) falls as additional

benefits are included in the resource measure (e.g., Ziliak 2004). (Figure 1 shows the health

insurance impacts on poverty from Table 3.) Keep in mind that the needs threshold is the HIPM

implicit needs threshold: the SPM needs threshold (“material” needs) plus health insurance needs


6
  Garthwaite, Gross and Notowidigdo (2015) find that each additional uninsured person increases
hospital uncompensated care costs by $900. We credit each uninsured HIU with free care
(implicit insurance) resources of $900, adjusting for age and family size with the equivalence
formula we used to adjust Basic Plan insurance needs (see Appendix II, section 3).
                                                  20
(unsubsidized premium of Basic Plan) plus a “need” for cost-sharing (non-premium MOOP

expenditures up to the out-of-pocket maximum of the Basic Plan available to the family).

       The first column of Table 3 shows results for the entire analysis sample. We begin by

including only cash pre-tax income in resources (i.e., comparing OPM resources to the HIPM

needs threshold). If only pre-tax cash income were available, the HIPM poverty rate would be

19.1%. When we add non-health in-kind transfers and tax credits net of taxes paid (and make

SPM adjustments to resources, other than the MOOP deduction), 19.2% have material resources

below the HIPM Implicit Threshold. (In this case, the poverty-increasing effects of taxes and

child-care expenses offset the poverty-reducing effects of in-kind transfers and tax credits.)

Employer-provided health insurance reduces the poverty rate by 3.1 percentage points to 16.1%.

Public health insurance reduces it another 3.3 points and premium subsidies another 0.6

percentage point. Together, public and private health transfers reduce poverty by seven

percentage points. Of course, private health insurance transfers from employers are also partially

subsidized by government, through the income tax exclusion.

       This exercise is not an estimate of the causal impact of (eliminating) transfer programs,

since it does not account for any behavioral adjustments as Sommers and Oellerich (2013) do for

Medicaid and Ben-Shalom, Moffitt and Scholz (2012) do for a variety transfer programs.

However, a HIPM could be used for such estimates. Two other limitations likely lead us to

understate the impact of Massachusetts health reform on poverty. While we know whether a

household member is covered by a policyholder outside the household, we cannot determine if

they benefit from subsidies to the policyholder. More importantly, in contrast to our treatment of




                                                 21
premium subsidies, we are unable to assess the impact on poverty of cost-sharing subsidies,

including the income-related reductions in nonpremium MOOP caps. 7

       The remaining columns of Table 3 show transfers’ impacts on poverty by family type and

health insurance. Children’s health-inclusive poverty is reduced 2.6 percentage points by in-kind

transfers and tax credits, 3.3 percentage points by employer-provided health insurance, 2.4

percentage points by public health insurance, and 0.8 percentage point by premium subsidies

(column 2). The relatively large impact of transfers on child poverty reflects the targeting and

greater generosity of benefits for families with children. Although the impacts of private and

public health insurance appear comparable (3.3 and 3.2 percentage points), we should be careful

in apportioning credit since employer coverage was stimulated by health reform (Gruber 2011;

Long and Fogel 2014). In any case, the HIPM shows that, in Massachusetts, public and private

health insurance benefits together account for a huge, one-third reduction in the child poverty

rate (from 19.5 to 13.0), a major direct effect that is not detected by either the OPM or the SPM.

       Lone-adult (with no children) poverty is high compared to other groups. Yet lone-adults

get little or no net poverty reduction from in-kind benefits and tax credits, and only a 1.7-point

reduction from employer-provided health insurance. However, they benefit considerably from

public health insurance, which lowers their poverty rate by 6.5 percentage points, and from

premium subsidies, which lowers it by another one-half point. The HIPM thus illustrates that

low-income adults without children benefit greatly from government transfers; the SPM and




7
 Cost-sharing subsidies work by increasing the actuarial value of the insurance plan, allowing
insurers to reduce cost-sharing, such as co-pays and deductibles, flexibly. Therefore, we cannot
know what cost-sharing terms low-income enrollees would have faced and, in turn, what their
expenditures would have been, without the cost-sharing subsidies. Future research, however,
could estimate the average change in cost-sharing expenditures and therefore the average change
in HIPM resources.
                                                 22
OPM do not, because transfers to this group are primarily health insurance (Medicaid) and

premium subsidies.

       In contrast to the experience of lone adults, non-health in-kind transfers and net tax

credits account for large reductions in poverty rates (8.7 points) of persons in one-parent families

(Bitler, Hoynes and Kuka 2014; Ben-Shalom, Moffitt, and Scholz 2012). Employer health

insurance reduces the single-parent poverty rate by 2.8 points, reflecting substantial labor force

participation (e.g., Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001); public health insurance accounts for another

3.5 point reduction.

       Two parent-present families have low rates of “cash income” poverty (17.7%). Yet

government transfers lower their poverty markedly. Non-health in-kind benefits and tax credits

reduce their poverty rate by 2.7 percentage points; employer health insurance another 1.9 points,

public health insurance 2.2 points, and premium subsidies 0.8 points. The HIPM rate for

individuals in two parent families is 10.1%.

       Similarly, two-adult (no child present) families also have low poverty rates, yet in-kind

benefits and health insurance reduce their HIPM poverty. In-kind benefits and tax credits account

for a 1.2 percentage point reduction, employer health insurance, 1.8 points, and government

health insurance, a surprisingly large 4.1 points.

       The final three columns of Table 3 show the effects of transfers on HIPM poverty by

health insurance coverage. (Poverty is determined at the SPM-unit level, so each SPM unit may

contain multiple health insurance units, which may have different insurance.) Among those with

employer-provided insurance (column 7), after adding in-kind transfers and tax credits net of

taxes paid (which increase poverty for this group), the poverty rate is 8.5 percent. Employer

health insurance cuts their poverty markedly, to 4.8 percent. They benefit slightly (0.1



                                                 23
percentage point) from government health insurance to other HIUs within the SPM unit and from

premium subsidies (0.3 percentage points), resulting in a HIPM rate of 4.4 percent.

          Not surprisingly, public health insurance reduces poverty of Medicaid beneficiaries

greatly, 14.3 percentage points, which equals the reduction from (other) in-kind benefits and tax

credits (column 8). Together, health insurance, in-kind transfers, and tax credits lift nearly 30

percent of this population out of poverty. Premium subsidies reduce poverty most among people

covered by privately-purchased insurance (column 9), by 9.4 percentage points. In contrast, they

get little net poverty reduction from in-kind transfers and tax credits, most likely because they

have few children or their incomes are too high to qualify for substantial tax credits or in-kind

transfers.

          Because uninsured people get some free care, they have some implicit insurance, which

reduces poverty relative to having no health insurance resources. The estimates in Table 3 ignore

the value of free care. As a sensitivity analysis, therefore, we added a value for the implicit

insurance of free care for everyone without employer-provided insurance. 8 The results (available

on request) suggested that free care would have approximately one-third the anti-poverty impact

of the government health insurance and subsidies indicated in Table 3. This exercise make the

assumption that, in the absence of all government health insurance transfers, everyone without

employer insurance could get free care. Nonetheless, under this assumption, the analysis

suggests that the impact of government health benefits on poverty may be only two-thirds as

large as indicated by the figures in Table 3.




8
    We calculate the free care implicit insurance value as described in footnote 6.
                                                   24
Poverty gaps

       We estimate HIPM poverty gaps using the HIPM Implicit Threshold, which includes

material needs, health insurance needs, and cost-sharing (nonpremium MOOP) needs. We begin

by calculating the gap based on pre-tax cash income only and then recalculate the gap as we add

back resources. The population over which all average gaps are calculated is persons in families

with pre-tax cash income below the HIPM Implicit Threshold.

       Table 4 present poverty gaps for the entire sample (first column) and by health insurance

type (columns 2 through 4). For all persons (column 1), the average poverty gap based on cash

income alone was 43.7 percent—about half the health-inclusive poverty line. Adding in-kind

transfers and tax credits net of taxes paid reduces the gap by 14.3 percentage points to 29.4%;

employer health insurance benefits reduce it by another 3.5 points; and public health insurance

reduces the gap by a further 6.9 points, to 18.9%. The greater effect on the poverty gap of public

health insurance (6.9 percentage points) compared to private health insurance (3.5 points) stands

in contrast to their roughly equal effect on the poverty rate (Table 3), reflecting the targeting of

public insurance on the poorest persons. Premium subsidies reduce the poverty gap from 18.9 to

17.2 percent. In sum, non-cash transfers including health insurance reduced the cash poverty gap

by nearly 2/3 (from 43.7 to 17.2 percent). This two-thirds reduction in the poverty gap

considerably exceeds the one-third reduction in the poverty rate because many transfers move

families toward but not over the poverty threshold.

       On average, poor individuals covered by employer-provided insurance have a relatively

small “cash only” health-inclusive poverty gap (34.5%). In-kind transfers and tax credits reduce

the gap 5.5 points; employer insurance reduces it by another 12.6 points to 16.5%, and public

insurance and premium subsidies reduce it to 16.0%. Medicaid recipients have a large initial



                                                  25
HIPM poverty gap (48.6%). In-kind transfers and tax credits reduce the gap by more than twenty

points (to 27.2%); public health benefits reduce it by another 12.1 points to 14.9%.

       Although few people who buy individual insurance are cash-income poor, among cash-

poor individual purchasers of insurance, the poverty gap is large, 50%. After all in-kind transfers

and tax credits, their poverty gap remains high, 51.5%. However, premium subsidies reduce

their gap by nearly 20 percentage points, from 51.5% to 32.4%. Thus, although poor persons

who buy individual insurance have cash incomes sufficient to meet only half their basic material

and health insurance needs, thanks mainly to Massachusetts health insurance reform, they have

resources (including premium subsidies) sufficient to meet over two-thirds of their needs.

Neither the OPM nor SPM can account for these substantial direct impacts of premium subsidies

on poverty for this group.



VI: Caveats, Critiques and Practical Difficulties of the HIPM

       Although the HIPM has many advantages, it also has its weaknesses. We have already

discussed implementation difficulties related to undocumented persons. Six conceptual issues

require further discussion.

Overvaluation of health insurance

       Crediting resources with the full cost of health insurance (unsubsidized premium) might

over-value health insurance. First, low-income individuals could value health insurance at less

than its cost (NAS 1995). Second, the US health care system may be inefficient, raising costs

without raising benefits commensurately (e.g., Cutler and Ly 2011). These issues complicate

incorporating health insurance benefits in income inequality measures, as in Burkhauser,




                                                26
Larrimore and Simon (2012, 2013), CBO (2012) and Aaron and Burtless (2014); see also Meyer

and Sullivan (2012a), Ruggles (1990).

       Overvaluing health insurance, however, cannot affect the HIPM poverty rate, because

health insurance resources are never valued at more than health insurance needs. Therefore,

health insurance resources alone can never remove a “materially poor” person from poverty.

(Overvaluing health insurance would, however, inflate the HIPM poverty gap and overstate the

impact of health insurance benefits on the gap.) The cost of health insurance may be

unnecessarily high and lower-income individuals may value it at less than cost, but if they need

insurance and do not have the resources to meet that need, they have unmet needs and are poor.



Single vs. Multiple Measures

       One reason the NAS narrowed the focus of poverty measurement to “material” poverty

was the lack of fungibility of health insurance benefits—that health insurance cannot be used to

meet material needs. Although the HIPM rate does not suffer from this fungibility problem,

nonetheless, multiple measures can provide a more complete picture of different dimensions of

need (Blank 2008).

       In fact, the NAS panel (1995, page 237) recommended a split measure; a measure of

material poverty, like the SPM, and a separate measure of health care economic risk. They

favored separate measures because, “To do otherwise is to overwhelm the poverty measure with

operational and conceptual difficulties.” We believe this justification, while compelling at the

time, is no longer. As we have argued, ACA-like reforms enable a conceptually valid combined

measure of health and material poverty, if one accepts that the health care need of the poor is a




                                                27
basic health insurance plan. And our Massachusetts pilot demonstrates its feasibility.

Furthermore, as Bernheim notes:

       I suspect that we have focused on poverty rates primarily to satisfy the demands of
       politicians and the press, who generally seem to limit their attention to single numbers.
       To the extent that economists wish to affect the policy process, it may be necessary to
       cater to the demand for oversimplification; thus….if politicians insist on using a single
       number, we should make sure that it is the best number possible.
On the same point, Meier and Wolfe (2012) argue that a

       … split approach is superior to a combined approach; it allows the capture of both the
       medical care burden and medical care risk perspectives in poverty measurement. In
       making this argument, we note the loss of simplicity offered by a single measure and
       recognize that, for policy purposes, the need for simplicity may dominate the wish for
       greater accuracy. Even in this view, we still favor the calculation of a separate medical
       care economic risk index to capture current and changing medical risk as a separate and
       important indicator of well-being and deprivation.
We agree that, while a separate medical care economic risk index would be valuable, it does not

reduce the importance of creating the best possible single poverty measure (Garner, Short and

Gudrais 2013).



The Basic Plan, Take-up Failures and Poor Decisions

       Our HIPM is based on the idea that MOOP expenditures—premium and nonpremium—

are discretionary if they result from choosing a plan other than the Basic Plan. In some respects,

this approach is uncharitable since choosing health insurance is difficult, due to plan and system

complexity and the need to consider health and financial circumstances. For example, each year

the second cheapest Silver plan (the Basic Plan) may change, reducing subsidies available for

last year’s plan. Nonetheless, for the purpose of poverty measurement, if the Basic Plan is

universally available and people have sufficient resources, how can we say that they lack

resources to meet their basic health insurance needs? Instead, we advocate policies that directly



                                                28
address complexity, such as making the low MOOP-risk insurance option the default plan for

lower-income persons.

       Similarly, some may object to our counting as resources the premium subsidies for which

families are eligible, even when they remain uninsured. (As described previously, we conducted

a sensitivity analysis to this assumption.) But for poverty measurement if the Basic Plan is

universally available, there is a mandate to purchase insurance, and people have sufficient

resources, how can we say that they lack adequate resources to meet their basic health insurance

needs? This approach is similar to the Census Bureau's procedure for imputing taxes owed or

credits received based on income, rather than using actual taxes paid and credits received, though

research continues on this issue (Short, Donahue and Lynch, 2012).



The Insured Don’t Get Needed Care and Get Unnecessary Care

     Whether spending on nonpremium MOOP up to the Basic Plan nonpremium MOOP cap is

discretionary depends on the “discretionarity” of the care purchased. The NAS panel implied

that nearly all care is essential in citing as examples of nondiscretionary care “elective cosmetic

surgery…extra laboratory tests or ineffective drugs” (pp.232-236). At the other extreme, Cogan

(1995) described “health as an economic good, responsive to both income and price changes.”

To the extent that care is discretionary, we would not want to deduct the resulting cost-sharing

expenditures. Different approaches to cost sharing merit additional research.

       A different problem is that cost-sharing dissuades some people with the Basic Plan from

receiving needed care. The HIPM would not measure this unmet need. However, the SPM will

miss more unmet health care needs than the HIPM because the SPM is not designed to measure

health needs and does not consider insurance a need. More importantly, the political process

determines the Basic Plan and the means-tested subsidies to assure affordability. Critics may feel
                                                 29
the political process erred, resulting in plans with excessive cost-sharing or insufficient subsidies.

But the HIPM accepts the Basic Plan and associated subsidies as the politically-determined

standard of need and affordability. It is not clear that there is a valid alternative. In fact, “needed

care” has no generally agreed upon conceptual definition and would be impossible to measure

directly in social surveys such as the CPS. Our approach to cost-sharing in the HIPM is practical

and builds directly on the SPM.



Risk-segmentation and Basic Plan Premium

        The HIPM’s health insurance need is the price of the Basic Plan available for purchase on

the exchange in the rating area, the price that any marginal (unsubsidized) customer would pay.

That price reflects the risk pool of those in fact covered by exchange plans. 9 If everyone in an

area, including those with Medicaid or employer-provided insurance, purchased insurance on the

exchange, then the risk pool would change and so, likely, would the Basic Plan premiums.

Nonetheless, we use the current Basic Plan price as the “need” for everyone, irrespective of their

actual insurance coverage or risk profile.

        We do so for three reasons. First, the premium data are actually available. Another choice

would require imputation and additional assumptions. Second, these premiums reflect what is

available for purchase by anyone lacking similar or better health insurance (except the

undocumented). Third, and most importantly, this choice should not affect the HIPM poverty

rate, because the same values of basic insurance go into needs and resources. For example,

because Medicaid fully meets health insurance needs, we also add the Basic Plan premium to

resources for those covered by Medicaid. Since we add the same value to needs and resources,

9
 Premiums available to specific individuals or families also depend on government regulations,
such as community rating rules, risk corridors, risk adjustment and so on.
                                                  30
any “errors” due to risk segmentation will appear both in needs (denominator) and resources

(numerator) and leave the poverty rate estimate unaffected.

       Poverty gap calculations (Table 4) and accounting exercises (Table 3) would, however,

change somewhat if we used a different value for the plan premium and needs for the segmented

Medicaid population (or other segmented populations). Specifically, our estimates would likely

understate the impact of Medicaid on HIPM poverty rates and gaps to the extent that the

Medicaid population is systematically higher risk.



Over-the-counter medications.

       The SPM includes over-the-counter (OTC) medications in the MOOP deduction (Short

2013). While some OTC drugs are essential (e.g., children’s acetaminophen), others are not (e.g.,

brand name ibuprofen). Moreover, since spending (in dollars) on OTC drugs is not likely skewed

or high variance, it might be better to incorporate it into the HIPM by expanding the SPM

material threshold beyond food, clothing, shelter and utilities. 10 Sensitivity analysis shows that

HIPM poverty estimates are not sensitive to including them; the HIPM increased by only 0.3

points when we deducted OTC expenses.



VII: Conclusions

       The NAS Report considered a HIPM desirable but unattainable. Despite concerns about

ignoring an important necessity and devaluing health insurance, the report recommended

excluding health care and insurance from the revised poverty measure’s threshold and resources.

Yet the NAS Report (p. 69) anticipated that “…as changes are made to the US system of health


10
  Long-term care expenses are excluded from both the SPM and HIPM and are not measured by
the CPS.
                                                 31
care, it will be important to reevaluate the treatment of medical care expenses in the definition of

family resources…” That day is here for the US and arrived in Massachusetts several years ago.

       The HIPM conceptualizes health insurance as the core health need. If instead the core

health needs were conceptualized as a need for health care, it would be exceedingly difficult to

measure. In writing about the development of a health care economic risk measure, Meier and

Wolfe (2012) and Meier (2014) describe many of the challenges. The “tails” of health care

expenditures are extremely long. Moreover, an individual’s expenditure depends on extensive

clinical detail. Therefore, one needs health care databases with large sample sizes and much

clinical detail to measure health care expenditures—or needs—with any precision. The

expenditure distribution and its relationship to clinical and other characteristics change over time

as technology changes. The purpose of health insurance, however, is to deal with those tails. If

everyone has insurance, their health needs can be met, no matter how large the expenditures or

what new technologies arise.

       The HIPM has several advantages. Unlike the SPM, the HIPM directly measures unmet

health insurance needs—and thus unmet needs for care and risk reduction. Although the SPM

can measure the impact of health insurance on poverty through any reductions in MOOP (e.g.,

Sommers and Oellerich 2013), it cannot measure the risk reduction among the healthy (with little

MOOP), nor improved access to health care provided by health insurance. If a family foregoes

health care because it is uninsured, the SPM does not capture the unmet need. If Medicaid

expansions or the ACA allow the family to obtain health care, the SPM will register no direct

poverty decrease. The SPM also does not show a healthy uninsured family to have unmet

insurance needs. If they gain Medicaid coverage, the SPM registers no poverty decrease.




                                                 32
       Put differently, a HIPM can more fully reflect the difficult tradeoffs between material

well-being on the one hand, and health insurance and health care on the other. Many Americans

face those tradeoffs because the US health care system requires significant expenditures on both

premiums and cost-sharing. Although the SPM may properly capture how meeting health care

needs compromises material well-being, the SPM cannot capture how meeting material needs

may compromise adequate health care. Thus, poverty measures that ignore health, or separate

measures of material deprivation and health care/insurance deprivation, are ill-suited to today’s

US health care system.

       As a consequence, some uninsured people mandated to purchase even highly subsidized

insurance under the ACA will be measured by the SPM as poorer. When they pay even modest

premiums, MOOP increases and SPM resources decrease, but the SPM assigns no value to the

highly subsidized insurance they receive. Thus, if basic health insurance and health care are

needs, the SPM misses and a HIPM captures important ways that Medicaid, the ACA and

employer-provided insurance reduce poverty. A HIPM could also allow international

comparisons of poverty that explicitly account for cross-national differences in health benefits.

       Though based on small samples and several approximations, our pilot HIPM suggests

that public health insurance benefits account for a three-percentage point reduction in the poverty

rate for the under-65 in Massachusetts and premium subsidies account for another point. Impacts

on poverty gaps are even larger. Government health insurance accounts for a 2.4 percentage

point reduction in the child poverty rate in Massachusetts and premium subsidies another 0.8

percentage point. Among those with individual insurance, the premium subsidies reduce HIPM

poverty from 36.6% to 27.2%. Given the large expenditures on low-income persons through

programs such as Medicaid, their substantial impact on poverty should not be surprising.



                                                33
Nonetheless, the result is novel because other poverty measures do not directly value health

insurance in resources and needs.

        We believe a HIPM will provide a more accurate assessment of the direct impact of the

ACA on poverty than any of the currently available measures. By providing a single measure of

poverty that validly incorporates health needs, it could show the anti-poverty impacts of policy

differences, such as differences between states that expand Medicaid eligibility and those that do

not. Thus, a HIPM can show the impact of the ACA and other major health insurance programs

across states, nationally and, in principle, internationally.




                                                  34
References


Aaron, Henry and Gary Burtless. 2014. “Potential Effects of the Affordable Care Act on Income

Inequality.” Brookings. Available at http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/01/potential-

effects-affordable-care-act-income-inequality-aaron-burtless


Richard Bavier. 1998. Medical needs and the poverty thresholds. March.

http://www.census.gov/hhes/povmeas/publications/medical/bavier4.html


Ben-Shalom, Yonatan, Robert Moffitt, and John Karl Scholz. 2012. An Assessment of the

Effectiveness of Antipoverty Programs in the United States. In Philip N. Jefferson, ed. The

Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Poverty. New York: Oxford University Press.


Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1998. Comment on Deaton and Paxson’s “Measuring poverty among the

elderly,” in D.A. Wise, ed. Inquiries in the economics of aging. Chicago: NBER/University of

Chicago Press.


Betson, David M. 2000. Response to Bavier’s Critique of the NRC Panel’s Recommendations.

November. www.census.gov/hhes/povmeas/publications/wp-medical.html



Bitler, Marianne, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka. 2014. Do In-Work Tax Credits Serve as a

Safety Net? NBER Working Paper No. 19785. January


Blank, Rebecca M. 2008. Presidential address: How to Improve Poverty Measurement in the

United States. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 27(2): 233-254.




                                                   35
Blinder, A. 1985. Commentary on Ellwood and Summers. In U.S. Department of Commerce,

Bureau of the Census, Proceedings of the Conference on the Measurement of Noncash Benefits,

Volume I. Williamsburg, VA. December 12-14: pp. 28-31.


Burkhauser, R.V., J. Larrimore and K.I. Simon. 2012. "A “Second Opinion” on the Economic

Health of the American Middle Class" National Tax Journal, 65: 7-32.


Burkhauser, R.V., J. Larrimore and K. Simon. 2013. Measuring the impact of valuing health

insurance on levels and trends in inequality and how the Affordable Care Act of 2010 could

affect them. Contemporary Economic Policy 31(4): 779-794.




Burtless, G. and S. Siegel. 2001. Medical Spending, Health Insurance, and the Measurement of

American Poverty. Focus 21(3): 17-22.


Caswell, Kyle J. and Brett O’Hara. 2010. Medical Out-of-Pocket Expenses, Poverty, and the

Uninsured SEHSD Working Paper 2010-17. U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, D.C. December.


Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). 2003. Clarifying Policies Related to the

Responsibilities of Medicare-Participating Hospitals in Treating Individuals with Emergency

Medical Conditions. https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-

Guidance/Legislation/EMTALA/Downloads/CMS-1063-F.pdf


Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS). n.d. Health Insurance Marketplace Public

Use Files. https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Data-Resources/marketplace-puf.html




                                              36
Claxton, Gary and Nirmita Panchal. 2015. “Cost-Sharing Subsidies in Federal Marketplace

Plans.” http://kff.org/health-costs/issue-brief/cost-sharing-subsidies-in-federal-marketplace-

plans/


Cogan, John F. 1995 Dissent. Appendix A, in Citro, C. and R. T. Michael, eds. 1995. Measuring

Poverty: A New Approach. National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences.

National Academy Press.


Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2012. The Distribution of Household Income and Federal

Taxes, 2008 and 2009. http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/43373-06-11-

HouseholdIncomeandFedTaxes.pdf


Corbett, T. 1999. Poverty: Improving the measure after 30 years. Focus 20(2): 51-55.


Cutler, David M. and Dan P. Ly. 2011. The (paper) work of medicine: Understanding

international medical costs. Journal of Economics Perspectives 25(2): 3-25.


Daniels, Norman, Brendan Saloner and Adriane H. Gelpi. 2009. “Access, Cost, And Financing:

Achieving An Ethical Health Reform.” Health Affairs 28(5): w909–16.


Dillman, J., B. Mancas, M. Jacoby and L. Ruth-Sahd. 2014. A review of the literature:

differences in outcomes for uninsured versus insured critically ill patients: opportunities and

challenges for critical care nurses as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act begins open

enrollment for all Americans. Dimensions of Critical Care Nursing 33(1): 8-14.


Ellwood, David T. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. “Measuring income: What kind should be

in?“ in U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Proceedings of the Conference on

the Measurement of Noncash Benefits, Volume I. Williamsburg, VA. December 12-14, pp. 8-27.

                                                37
Focus on Health Reform. 2011a. Summary of New Health Reform Law. Last modified April 15,

2011.


Focus on Health Reform. 2011b. What the Actuarial Values in the Affordable Care Act Mean.

April 2011.


Garner, Thesia I, Kathleen Short and Marissa Gudrais. 2013. The Supplemental Poverty Measure

Under Alternate Treatments of Medical Out-of-Pocket Expenditures. December 19. Paper

Presented to the Allied Social Science Association (ASSA) Meetings, Philadelphia, PA. Jan. 4,

2014. https://www.aeaweb.org/aea/2014conference/program/retrieve.php?pdfid=327


Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2015. Hospitals as Insurers of Last

Resort. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 21290.


Gruber, Jonathan. 2011. Massachusetts Points the Way to Successful Health Care Reform,”

Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(1), Winter, p. 184-192.


Institute of Medicine (IOM). 2002. Care Without Coverage: Too Little, Too Late. Washington,

DC: The National Academies Press.


Kaiser Family Foundation. 2013. Issue Brief. Technical Appendix B: Immigration Status

Imputation. October


King, Miriam, Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Sarah Flood, Katie Genadek, Matthew B.

Schroeder, Brandon Trampe, and Rebecca Vick. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series,

Current Population Survey: Version 3.0. [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University

of Minnesota.




                                              38
Long, Sharon K., and Paul B. Masi. 2009. Access and Affordability: An Update on Health

Reform in Massachusetts, Fall 2008. Health Affairs 28(4):w578–87.




Long, Sharon K. and Ariel Fogel. 2014. Health insurance coverage and health care access, use,

and affordability in Massachusetts: An update as of Fall 2012. Report to the Blue Cross Blue

Shield of MA Foundation. March.


Martin, Anne B., Micah Hartman, Joseph Benson, Aaron Catlin and the National Health

Expenditure Accounts Team. 2015. “National Health Spending In 2014: Faster Growth Driven

By Coverage Expansion And Prescription Drug Spending” Health Affairs. December: published

online prior to print publication.


Meier S. and B. Wolfe. 2012. Conceptual Framework for Measuring Medical Care Economic

Risk. In Medical Care Economic Risk: Measuring Financial Vulnerability from Spending on

Medical Care. Panel on Measuring Medical Care Risk in Conjunction with the New

Supplemental Income Poverty Measure, M.J. O’Grady and G.S. Wunderlich, Eds. Committee on

National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, and Board on

Health Care Services, Institute of Medicine. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press,

pp. 225-266.



Meier, Sarah. 2014. “Measuring Medical Expenditure Risk: Implications for the Development of

a Measure of Medical Care Economic Risk.” Mayo Clinic Manuscript.




                                               39
Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan Rosenbaum. 2001. "Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the

Labor Supply of Single Mothers," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3):1063-1113.


Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2012a. “Winning the War on Poverty from the Great

Society to the Great Depression.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall, pp. 133-183.


Moon, Marilyn. 1993. Incorporating Health Issues in the Measurement of Poverty. Urban

Institute.


National Academy of Sciences (NAS).1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach. National

Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences. Citro, C. and R. T. Michael, eds.

Washington, DC: National Academy Press.


NBER. nd. National Bureau of Economic Research CPS Supplements.

www.nber.org/data/current-population-survey-data.html


Nyman, John A. 2003. The Theory of Demand for Health Insurance. Stanford, CA: Stanford

University Press.


Nyman, John. 2004. “Is Moral Hazard Inefficient?” Health Affairs 23(5): 194-199.


Pascale, Joanne, Michel Boudreaux, and Ryan King. 2014. Understanding the New Current

Population Survey Health Insurance Questions. US Census RESEARCH REPORT SERIES

Survey Methodology #2014-02. https://www.census.gov/srd/papers/pdf/RSM2014-02.pdf


Rasmussen, Petra W., Sara R. Collins, Michelle M. Doty and Tracy Garber. 2013. In States’

Hands: how the Decision to Expand Medicaid Will Affect the Most Financially Vulnerable

Americans. September. The Commonwealth Fund. Vol. 23. Pub. 1702.



                                              40
Ruggles, Patricia. 1990. Drawing the Line: Alternative Poverty Measures and Their Implicatinos

for Public Policy. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.


Short, Kathleen S. 2011. The Supplemental Poverty Measure: Examining the Incidence and

Depth of Poverty in the U.S. Taking Account of Taxes and Transfers. US Census Bureau

SEHSD working paper # 2011-20 June 3


Short, Kathleen S. 2013. The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2012. Current

Population Reports P60-247, U.S. Census Bureau. November.


Short, Kathleen, Dennis Donahue & George Lynch. 2012. EITC Estimates in the CPS ASEC

Simulations of After-Tax Income Hispanic Population. SEHSD Working Paper # 2012-19.

August.


Sommers, Benjamin D. and Donald Oellerich. 2013. The Poverty-Reducing Effect of Medicaid.

Journal of Health Economics 32: 816-832.


Sommers, Benjamin D., Sharon K. Long, and Katherine Baicker. 2014. Changes in Mortality

After Massachusetts Health Care Reform: A Quasi-experimental Study. Annals of Internal

Medicine 160(9): 585-593.


US Bureau of the Census. 2011. Income, poverty and health insurance coverage in the United

States: 2010. Current Population Reports. P60-239. September.


Ziliak, James P. 2004. Filling the Poverty Gap, Then and Now. Discussion Paper. University of

Kentucky Center for Poverty Research. Revised January 2004




                                              41
Table 1: Illustrative Calculation of the SPM and HIPM for Two Hypothetical Families
Line                                                                     Family A     Family B
No.
       Needs
(1)      Material needs (SPM threshold)                                  20,000       20,000
(2)      Health Insurance Needs (Basic Plan)                             10,000       10,000
       Resources
(3)     Income (SPM resources)                                           22,000       22,000
(4)     Health insurance resources provided                              None         Medicaid
                                                                                      policy, no
                                                                                      MOOP
                                                                                      premium
                                                                                      payment
                                                                                      required.
                                                                                      Value =
                                                                                      Basic Plan
                                                                                      (10,000).
       SPM Poverty Status (line 3 versus line 1)                         Not poor     Not poor
(5)    HIPM Resources (line 3 + line 4)                                  22,000       32,000
(6)    HIPM Poverty Threshold (line 1 + line 2)                          30,000       30,000
(7)    HIPM Poverty status: line (5) vs. line (6)                        Poor         Not Poor


Note: Neither family has any premium or nonpremium MOOP.




                                                    42
        Table 2: Official, Supplemental and Health Inclusive Poverty Rates, Massachusetts, 2010
                               SPM Units with All Persons Under Age 65
                             Poverty Rates (%) for Persons, By Family Type

                                                                       Family Type

                                                                                             Persons in
                                                                                Persons in     Two-
                                                           Lone    Persons in     Two-         Adult
                              All                         Adults   One-Parent     Parent      SPMUs
Poverty Measure             Persons       Children        SPMUs     SPMUs        SPMUs
(1) OPM                      11.9          15.0            21.2       37.3         9.7            7.9
(2) SPM                      13.5          14.9            23.4       27.0         12.8           7.1
(3) SPM, no MOOP             10.4          10.9            19.5       25.7         8.0            5.9
Deduction
(4) HIPM                      12.2          13.0           21.5       25.7         10.1           7.1

Unweighted Sample            2504           819            222        182         1183            292
Count
Notes:
Sample weighted using CPS March Supplement person weights.
OPM: Official Poverty Measure
SPM: Supplemental Poverty Measure
MOOP: Medical Out of Pocket Expenses
HIPM: Health Inclusive Poverty Measure




                                                     43
                         Table 3: Effects of Public and Private Transfers on Health Inclusive Poverty Rates, Massachusetts, 2010
                          Individuals in SPM Units with All Persons Under Age 65, By Family Type and Health Insurance Type

                                                                                 Family Type                                        Health Insurance Type1

                                                                                                Persons in     Persons in
                                                                     Lone       Persons in        Two-           Two-
                                                                     Adult      One-Parent        Parent         Adult                                    Individual
Resources                                     All      Children     SPMUs        SPMUs           SPMUs          SPMUs         Employer2     Medicaid3      Purchase
                                               (1)       (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)            (9)
“Cash” only (OPM resources)                   19.1      22.1         28.2          42.0            17.7           14.2          6.0           68.8           27.2
Add: in-kind government transfers &           19.2      19.5         30.2          33.3            15.0           13.0          8.5           54.6           36.6
   tax credits, less taxes, etc.4
(SPM resources, pre-MOOP deduction)
Add: employer health insurance                16.1       16.2         28.5          30.5           13.1           11.2            4.8           54.0         36.6
Add: government health insurance              12.8       13.8         22.0          27.0           10.9           7.1             4.7           39.3         36.6
Add: MA health insurance subsidies            12.2       13.0         21.5          27.0           10.1           7.1             4.4           39.3         27.2
(HIPM)

Unweighted sample count                      2504        819          222           182            1183            292           1757           369           56

    1. The “all” column includes persons covered by types of insurance not shown separately: Medicare (<65), VA and other veterans programs, those covered by
    individuals outside households and uninsured individuals. Public health insurance benefits or subsidies to persons outside the household to the benefit of the
    sample member cannot be measured. Poverty is determined at the SPM-Unit level. SPM Units are divided into multiple health insurance units (HIUs) according
    to members’ HI coverage. Our HI units differ from CPS/IPUMS HI units. See Appendix II Section 4 for details.
    2. For Medicaid: the OPM rate is 53, the SPM rate is 41.5;
    3. For Employer Provided Insurance: the OPM rate is 2.0; the SPM rate is 5.5.
    4. This also includes other SPM adjustments to resources such as deducting necessary childcare expenses.
 Table 4: Effects of Public and Private Transfers on Health Inclusive Poverty Gaps, Massachusetts, 2010
                           Individuals in SPM Units with All Persons Under Age 65
                                          By Health Insurance Type1, 2
                                                      All        Employer      Medicaid     Individual
Resources                                                                                    Purchase
                                                      (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)
Cash only (OPM resources)                            43.7           35.4          48.6         49.4
Add: in-kind government transfers & tax
credits, less taxes, etc.3                           29.4           29.1          27.2         51.8
(SPM resources, pre-MOOP deduction)
Add: employer health insurance                       25.8           16.5          27.1         51.8

Add: government health insurance                      18.9             16.3             15.0            51.5
Add: MA health insurance subsidies
(HIPM)                                                17.2             16.0             14.9            32.4

Unweighted sample count                               489              114              251              14

 1. Note the “all” column includes persons covered by types of insurance not shown separately: Medicare (<65), VA
 and other veterans programs, those covered by individuals outside households and uninsured individuals. Public
 health insurance benefits or subsidies to persons outside the household to the benefit of the sample member cannot
 be measured.
 2. Poverty is determined at the SPM-Unit level. SPM Units are divided into multiple health insurance units (HIUs)
 according to members’ HI coverage. Our HI units differ from CPS/IPUMS units. See Appendix II Section 4 for
 details.

 3. This also includes other SPM adjustments to resources such as deducting necessary childcare expenses.
Notes:
    1. “Single Parent” is persons in single parent families; Indiv. Insured are individuals in health insurance units
       (subunits of SPM family units) who purchase insurance as individuals or families, rather than as part of a
       group plan or government insurance program.
    2. The number in each bar is the HIPM poverty rate for the group.
    3. See Table 2 for additional information and figures for other groups.




                                                         46
Appendix I. Table A1: Health Insurance Resources & MOOP Deductions by Health Insurance Type

Health Insurance            Health Insurance Resources                Nonpremium MOOP Deduction
Type
Employer Provided           Basic Plan Unsubsidized Premium           Actual nonpremium MOOP
                            – Actual Premium (up to BP                (up to BP nonpremium MOOP cap, with no
                            premium)                                  income-related reductions)1
Individually                Subsidy to premium                        Actual nonpremium MOOP
Purchased                   (unless family member has                 (up to BP nonpremium MOOP cap; income-
                            employer provided insurance)2             related reductions apply unless family member
                                                                      has employer-provided insurance)3
Covered by Someone          Basic Plan Unsubsidized Premium4          Actual nonpremium MOOP
Outside SPM Unit                                                      (up to BP nonpremium MOOP cap; income-
                                                                      related reductions apply unless family member
                                                                      has employer-provided insurance) 3 4
Full-year Medicaid          Basic Plan Unsubsidized Premium5          Actual nonpremium MOOP
                                                                      (up to low Medicaid nonpremium MOOP cap) 6
Veterans Affairs            Basic Plan Unsubsidized Premium7          Actual nonpremium MOOP
                                                                      (up to BP nonpremium MOOP cap; ; income-
                                                                      related reductions apply unless family member
                                                                      has employer-provided insurance) 8
Medicare (non-              Basic Plan Unsubsidized Premium           Actual nonpremium MOOP
elderly)                    – Actual Premium up to MA-PD              (up to MA-PD nonpremium MOOP cap)10
                            BP premium9
Part-year Medicaid          Basic Plan Unsubsidized Premium           Actual nonpremium MOOP
                            pro-rated to number of months             (up to BP nonpremium MOOP cap; income-
                            covered by Medicaid                       related reductions apply unless family member
                                                                      has employer-provided insurance) 11
Uninsured                   Subsidy to premium12, 2                   Actual nonpremium MOOP
                                                                      (up to BP nonpremium MOOP cap; income-
                                                                      related reductions apply unless family member
                                                                      has employer-provided insurance)12
Notes:
BP = Basic Plan; MOOP = Medical Out-of-Pocket Expenditures; MA-PD = Medicare-Advantage-Prescription Drug;
IPUMS-HIU = Integrated Public Use Microsample Health Insurance Unit
1
  Nonpremium MOOP caps set by law.
2
  Subsidy is the difference between the BP unsubsidized premium and maximum premium MOOP allowed, based on household
income and the sliding scale set by law. Family (IPUMS-HIU) income-based maximum MOOP premiums apply even if only part
of the household purchases insurance on the exchange. We assume that those in a family with someone with employer provided
insurance are not eligible for subsidized premiums and are therefore capped at the unsubsidized BP premium. See Appendix II
for details and citations.
3
  Sliding-scale for nonpremium MOOP caps is also determined by family (IPUMS-HIU) income.
4
  For those covered by someone outside the SPM unit, we cap the entire MOOP subtraction at the BP cap.
5
  For states that require Medicaid recipients to pay premium MOOP, premium MOOP payments up to the maximum amount
required would be deducted.
6
  States determine nonpremium MOOP caps for Medicaid.
7
  VA eligible do not pay any premiums.
8
  VA cost-sharing depends on priority statuses such as service-related disability and other factors not available in our data.
Veterans who are already VA qualified are not eligible for the exchange subsidies, including the income-based nonpremium
MOOP reductions. However, since they are eligible for low VA cost-sharing, we cap their MOOP expenditures at the BP caps.
9
  We assume Medicare recipients’ BP is the cheapest available MA-PD plan. The MA-PD plan premium is the Part-B premium
plus the additional MA-PD premium, if any. In this study we assume no additional MA-PD plan beyond Part-B premium is
required since that is currently the case. See Appendix II Section 5.
10
   MA-PD nonpremium MOOP caps did not exist in Massachusetts in 2010. Nationally, they started for medical care in 2011
after the ACA but still do not exist for prescription drug coverage. See Appendix II Section 5. Since we have only non-elderly
Medicare recipients, we use the BP caps.
11
   We capped nonpremium MOOP for those with part-year Medicaid at the full-year BP cap.



                                                             47
12
  Although the uninsured do not receive premium subsidies, they could have had them and we treat them as government
resources available to meet health insurance needs. See text for sensitivity analyses.




                                                            48
Appendix II.
1. Limiting MOOP Deductions

       The HIPM is based on the idea that all needed health care is covered and made affordable

by the Basic Plan and subsidies available for it. Therefore, the HIPM should not show a family

as poorer because it buys a more expensive plan than the Basic Plan. Nor should the HIPM show

a family as poorer because it spends more on health care than the Basic Plan’s cap on cost-

sharing expenditures. (This could happen even to a family with the Basic Plan if they purchase

uncovered procedures or out-of-network care.) Limiting (capping) premium and nonpremium

MOOP deductions ensures these conditions. In this appendix we describe the procedures for

limiting these deductions. Appendix I Table A1 describes how to determine the deduction limits

for each insurance type.

       The HIPM credits the resources of those with health insurance benefits from government

or employers with the net value of their insurance: the Basic Plan minus out-of-pocket premium

payments. Since only for groups with insurance benefits is net insurance value credited, only

those groups have premium MOOP deducted. Therefore, the limit to the premium MOOP

deduction applies only to those groups. For those with employer-provided or government-

provided insurance:

Health Insurance Resources = Basic Plan Premium – premium MOOP (up to amount

required for Basic Plan)

       The premium MOOP deduction is limited to what the family would be required to pay for

the Basic Plan. For many families, that limit is simply the unsubsidized premium for the Basic

Plan. However, if a family would be eligible for premium subsidies, then the limit would be

lower by the amount of the premium subsidies.


                                                49
       Subsidies are not available to those with “qualified and affordable” employer-provided

insurance. Nor are subsidies available to their families, if the employer plan is qualified and

affordable to the employee only—the so-called “family glitch” (Brooks 2014). Because we

cannot identify whether plans are qualified, we assume that all employer provided plans are

qualified and affordable, and that anyone in the same family (i.e., same IPUMS HIU; see

Appendix II Section 4) of someone with employer provided insurance is not eligible for

subsidies. This assumption could lead us to understate somewhat the impact on poverty of

premium subsidies.

       To address cost-sharing needs, the HIPM follows the SPM and deducts from resources

whatever families of any insurance type spend on nonpremium MOOP. However, we limit that

deduction to the cap available to the family under the Basic Plan:

HIPM Resources = SPM resources (before MOOP deduction) + Health Insurance

Resources – nonpremium MOOP (up to available Basic Plan cap)

If a family could have had cost-sharing subsidies that reduced their maximum cost-sharing

expenditures, we limit the deduction to that maximum. As for premium subsidies, we assume

that the lower nonpremium MOOP caps are not available to anyone with employer-provided

insurance or to their families (see Appendix II Section 1). The Appendix I Table A1 describes

how to determine the nonpremium MOOP deduction caps for each insurance type.


       HIPM health resources, needs, and caps are first determined and applied at the HIU level.

The HIU health needs and resources are aggregated to the SPM-unit level and combined with

material needs and resources to determine HIPM poverty status.


       Limits to premium and nonpremium MOOP deductions are the only HIPM changes that

can increase the likelihood of poverty under the HIPM relative to the SPM. In 2010

                                                 50
Massachusetts, where the vast majority of people have their health insurance needs met, limiting

MOOP deduction made the HIPM poverty rate higher than the SPM poverty rate.


2, Step-by-step Example of Implementing HIPM Poverty Status and Gaps

       We illustrate the step-by-step procedure of implementing HIPM poverty status and

poverty gaps and provide comparisons with the OPM and SPM. This section is meant to help

those familiar with poverty measurement with details necessary for implementation.


       Example Family C has employer-provided insurance for which it pay an out-of-pocket

premium. Details and calculation steps are shown in Table A2. We determine the family’s

poverty status according to the HIPM, OPM and SPM, though for comparability, we use the

SPM measure of material needs ($20,000, line 1) for all three measures.


The basic poverty status calculation for each measure compares resources to the

appropriate needs threshold. When we do this, Family C is poor according to both the OPM

and the SPM. For OPM status, Family C lacks pre-tax cash income (OPM resources) to meet its

material needs (line 3 < line 1). But its SPM resources are higher, due to including tax credits

(net of taxes paid) and in-kind transfers (line 4) other than health insurance. If the family’s only

resources were SPM resources before MOOP deductions, it would not be poor since those

resources exceed the SPM threshold (line 5 > line 1). However, the SPM deducts all MOOP

expenditures (line 8, the sum of line 6 and line 7) from SPM material resources. So the family is

poor according to the SPM, because, after subtracting MOOP expenditures, its resources are less

than its material needs (line 9 < line 1). Thus, if there were no MOOP deduction, the family

would not be poor.




                                                 51
Table A2: HIPM Calculations for Family with Employer-Provided Insurance Benefits and
MOOP Expenses
Line                                                                        Family C
No.
       Needs
(1)     Material needs (SPM threshold)                                      20,000
(2)     Health Insurance Needs (BCP)                                        10,000
       Resources
(3)     Cash income, pre-tax (OPM resources)                                18,500
(4)     In-kind benefits (non-health) and tax credits net of taxes paid      3,500
(5)    Income (SPM resources before MOOP deductions) (line 3 +line 4)       22,000
(6)     Health insurance resources provided                                 Employer-provided
                                                                            insurance
                                                                            $3,000 premium MOOP
                                                                            required
(7)    Actual nonpremium MOOP                                               1,500
(8)    Actual total MOOP (line 6 + line 7 required MOOP)                    4,500
(9)    SPM resources after MOOP deduction (line 5 – line 8)                 17,500
       SPM Poverty Status (line 9 versus line 1)                            Poor
       HIPM
(10)   BCP nonpremium MOOP cap                                              9,000


(11)   Net Health Insurance Resources (line 2 – line 6)                     7,000
(12)   HIPM Poverty Threshold (line 1 + line 2)                             30,000
(13)   HIPM Resources = (line 5 + line 12) - min. of (line 7 and line 11)   27,500
       HIPM Poverty status: line (13) vs. line (14)                         Poor


       Implicit Thresholds
(14)   SPM Implicit Threshold (line 1 + line 8)                             24,500
(15)   HIPM Implicit Threshold (line 13 + min. of (line 7 and line 11)      31,500




                                                   52
       How does the HIPM poverty calculation differ from the SPM? To determine HIPM

poverty status, we compare HIPM resources to the HIPM threshold. The HIPM threshold is

simply the SPM threshold plus basic health insurance needs (the Basic Plan), or $30,000 (line

12). For resources, the HIPM includes material resources before the MOOP deduction (line 5)

and health insurance resources. Family C’s health insurance resources are the net value of their

employer-provided health insurance: the basic plan premium ($10,000) minus a required

premium MOOP payment of $3,000, or $7,000 (line11). Since HIPM resources ($22,000 +

$7,000 – $1,500 = $27,500, line 13) fall short of the HIPM threshold the family is HIPM-poor.

Family C’s employer-provided health insurance largely, but not completely, meets their health

insurance needs. In this case, the SPM and HIPM poverty status are the same because the HIPM

adds the $10,000 Basic Plan to needs, adds something less than $10,000 to resources to reflect

required premium payments, and the HIPM caps on MOOP subtractions did not bind: the $9,000

cap on the deduction for nonpremium MOOP (line 10) exceeds the actual nonpremium MOOP of

$1,500 (line 7). But in other cases, those who are not provided health insurance (like Family A in

Table 1) will be poorer according to the HIPM than the SPM. In addition, those who have health

insurance but high premium or nonpremium MOOP can be poorer according to the SPM than the

HIPM if MOOP spending is above the HIPM limits and, thus, the MOOP caps bind.

       In summary, the HIPM poverty rate can be either higher or lower than the SPM rate.

However, importantly, the HIPM’s inclusion of health insurance benefits as resources can never

move a family out of poverty because health insurance resources can never exceed health

insurance needs (or, therefore, be used to meet non-health needs). However, by limiting




                                                53
allowable MOOP deductions, the HIPM can classify as nonpoor a family that the SPM classifies

as poor.



Implicit Threshold

        The SPM Implicit Threshold adds all MOOP expenditures (line 8) to the explicit material

SPM threshold (line 1) to get $24,500 (line 14). Implicitly, the SPM assumes that all MOOP

expenditures are needed (non-discretionary). Family C is SPM poor because its (pre-deduction)

SPM resources of $22,000 (line 5) are less than its implicit needs of $24,500 (line 14). Similarly,

the HIPM Implicit Threshold is the explicit HIPM threshold (for material and health insurance

needs) plus the allowed deduction for cost-sharing needs. For Family C, the HIPM Implicit

Threshold adds allowed nonpremium MOOP expenditures of $1500 (the minimum of line 7 and

line 10) to the explicit material HIPM threshold of $30,000 (line 12) to get $31,500 (line 15).

Family C is HIPM poor because its pre-deduction resources of $22,000 plus the net value of its

employer-provided insurance ($7,000)—$29,000—falls short of its HIPM Implicit Threshold of

$31,500: $20,000 for material needs, $10,000 of resources for health insurance needs, and

$1,500 for cost-sharing needs. We use the implicit thresholds to calculate poverty gaps with the

HIPM.

Poverty Gaps

        A family’s poverty gap is one minus the ratio of its resources to the HIPM Implicit

Threshold. If the only resources were cash income, the cash-only poverty gap would be 1- (cash

income/HIPM Implicit Threshold). For Family C, this would be:

Cash poverty gap = 1 – [18,500 / 31,500] = 1 - .59 = 0.41 or 41%.




                                                54
Pre-tax cash income fills 59 percent of Family C’s basic material, health insurance and cost-

sharing needs, leaving a gap of 41 percent. We continue to show how different resources fill the

health inclusive poverty gap.

        We next add $3,500 of in-kind benefits and tax credits net of taxes paid and recalculate

the gap:

        1 – [ (18,500+3,500) / (31,500) ]= 1 - .70 = 0.30,

        so in-kind transfers close 11 percentage points or more than a quarter of Family C’s

initial poverty gap. Finally, adding health insurance resources of 7,000, the $10,000 Basic Plan

less the $3,000 premium:

1 – [ (18,500 + 3,500 + (10,000 - 3,000)) / (31,500) ]= 1 - 0.92 = 0.08.

Therefore, together, health insurance, in-kind transfers and net tax credits nearly close Family

C’s cash-only poverty gap, leaving the family’s resources only eight percent below the HIPM

Implicit Threshold. If their cash resources fell below, but their after-transfer resources exceeded,

the HIPM Implicit Threshold, we would set their post-transfer poverty gap to zero for calculation

of the average gap, calculating the average gap over the same baseline population with cash

income below the HIPM Implicit Threshold.



3. Premium Estimates and Other Data for 2010 Massachusetts 11

        Unlike the ACA, the Massachusetts health reform had separate exchanges for subsidized

and unsubsidized insurance plans, Commonwealth Care and Commonwealth Choice,

respectively. We lack data on the full cost of the subsidized plans (unsubsidized premiums) and

so use the premiums on the unsubsidized exchange (Commonwealth Choice). If the unsubsidized
11
  We thank Keith Ericcson for providing us selected premium data from the 2010 unsubsidized exchange
(Commonwealth Choice). We thank Michael Norton for providing us with data on Commonwealth Care (subsidized
exchange) and Medicaid for 2010 Massachusetts, specifically, the nonpremium MOOP caps for Medicaid and
schedules relating out-of-pocket premiums and nonpremium MOOP caps to (adjusted) income for 2010.

                                                   55
exchange had a healthier risk pool than the subsidized exchange, we underestimate premiums

and understate health insurance needs, relative to what they would have been under the ACA. No

analogous problem exists under the ACA since there is one exchange for subsidized and

unsubsidized plans.

         The HIPM requires identification of the Basic Plan and its premium for all Health

Insurance Units (HIUs). The premiums will depend on the number of people in the HIU and their

ages, as well as their geographic location. Under the ACA, tobacco use also affects premiums,

but we consider a Tobacco-Free plan the basic need. Although the exchanges have all the

necessary information needed to calculate a HIPM, we did not have access to that information

for Massachusetts in 2010. Instead, we predicted premiums by family size and age of members

using limited information from 2010 Massachusetts as we now explain.

         Starc and Ericcson (2013) collected premium data for 2010 Massachusetts for the zipcode

02130 for 35-year old adults and any family members. We selected the cheapest bronze low plan

as our Basic Plan since that plan was closest in actuarial richness to the ACA silver plan. We

extracted information for the cheapest silver plan for a variety of ages and family sizes from the

2014 Massachusetts health exchanges for zipcode 02130, and fit a regression model to predict

variation by age and family size. 12 Using the predicted premium regression equation, anchored

with the premiums from Ericcson and Starc, for each HIU, we predicted 2010 Massachusetts the

premium of the cheapest low bronze plan. Our prediction model overstates age-variations in

premiums in 2010 because the ACA regulations in operation in 2014 allowed a 3:1 maximum

variation by age, while the 2010 Massachusetts regulations allowed only a 2:1 maximum

variation by age.


12
  Predictors were the total number of children (20 years old or less) and the total number of adults in 5-year age
bands (21-24, 25-29, etc.).

                                                          56
       Since the public-use version of the CPS does not include detailed geographic identifiers,

we assumed that the 02130 premiums applied throughout. Premiums may be lower outside the

greater Boston area.



4. Assigning Individuals to Health Insurance Units within Households

       In order to calculate health insurance needs and resources, individuals must be grouped

into health insurance units (HIUs). For HIPM purposes, those who receive health insurance

together must be put into the same HIU.

       We use the following rules to construct our HIUs and to define HIU “types”:

   •   Each person reported as having Medicare is put in his/her own one-person HIU of type
       “Medicare.”
   •   Employer-provided insurance policyholder and all dependents of that policy are put in the
       same HIU with health insurance type “employer-provided insurance.”
   •   Individually purchased insurance policyholder and all dependents of that policy are in the
       same HIU with health insurance type “individually purchased insurance.”
   •   Each person reported as having full-year Medicaid coverage is given health insurance
       type “full-year Medicaid.” Everyone in the same family (i.e., IPUMS HIU) with full-year
       Medicaid is put in the same HIU. In addition, children (under 18-year-old) with no other
       health insurance coverage who have a parent with full-year Medicaid are considered to
       have full-year Medicaid and placed in the same HIU as that parent. The assumption is
       that they could obtain Medicaid.
   •   Those who report any type of Veterans Affairs (VA) coverage (either VA Milt or VA
       Champus) are given health insurance type “VA” and put in their own, one-person, HIU.
   •   Each person reported as being covered by someone outside the household is considered
       to have HI type of “covered outside the household.” Everyone in the same family (i.e.,
       IPUMS HIU) covered outside the household is put in the same HIU. For example, a
       mother and her child both covered outside the household are in the same HIU, but a


                                               57
       grandmother or roommate in the same SPM unit, also covered by someone outside the
       household, would be placed in separate HIUs.
   •   Those who report being covered by Medicaid for part of the year and report no other
       insurance are included in the same HIU of type “part-year Medicaid.” All those in the
       same family (i.e., IPUMs HIU) who report being part-year Medicaid are put in the same
       HIU.
   •   Everyone who is reported to be uninsured is given HI type “uninsured.” All those in the
       same family (i.e., IPUMs HIU) who report being uninsured are put in the same HIU.



       In cases where more than one type of insurance is reported, we assigned insurance type

using the following order of priority: Medicare, employer-provided, individually purchased, full-

year Medicaid, VA, covered by someone outside the household, uninsured, part-year Medicaid.

The health insurance questions on the new CPS will improve classification of insurance coverage

(Pascale, Boudreaux and King 2014)


       Premium subsidies may not be available to families of those with employer-provided

health insurance if the employer-provided insurance is considered qualified and if coverage for

the employee only is considered affordable—the “family glitch” (e.g., Brooks 2014). Since the

CPS does not collect information about whether an employee plan is qualified and affordable to

the employee only, we assume it is qualified and affordable and exclude such family members

from premium subsidies.

       SHADAC (2012) have constructed similar family units (also referred to as HIUs) for the

IPUMS CPS; we will refer to them as “IPUMS HIUs.” Their IPUMS HIUs are based on family

definitions for exchange and Medicaid rules. Our HIUs are often identical to IPUMS HIUs but

differ when actual health insurance coverage differs among those in the same IPUMS HIU.

Examples include: a wife with employer provided insurance and a husband on Medicare; a

                                               58
mother with employer provided insurance and children on exchange plans. The income of the

IPUMS HIU determines our HIU’s Medicaid and subsidy eligibility. While this may be

confusing, it best captures reality: the entire family (IPUMS HIU) income determines the

maximum premium payments (and, therefore, subsidies) for those actually covered by the same

insurance (our HIU).



5. Plan Full Cost and MOOP caps for under-65 Medicare beneficiaries

       Medicare beneficiaries, even those under 65, are not eligible for the exchanges. However,

the Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug (MA-PD) plans meet nearly all the HIPM criteria—

and so we use them as the Basic Plan for Medicare beneficiaries. These plans cover all

necessary care, including prescription drugs, and, often even vision and dental. Their premiums

are not risk rated. As of 2011, (nonpremium) MOOP for all medical care provided by MA-PD

plans is capped at $6700 (the 95th percentile in costs in the traditional Medicare fee-for-service)

and CMS encourages plans to lower the cap to $3400, the 85th percentile in the traditional

Medicare program (Biles, Nicholas and Guterman 2006).

       Present MA-PD plans fall short of our ideal Basic Plan because they lack an explicit cap

on prescription drug nonpremium MOOP spending. (The Federal government funds and

regulates the prescription drug coverage part of MA-PD plans separately, as part of the

prescription drug (Part D) benefits.) However, several features of the plans and of Federal

regulations reduce prescription drug nonpremium MOOP and create de facto caps. First, for all

beneficiaries, once the catastrophic level of nonpremium MOOP is reached (currently $4700),

cost sharing is substantially reduced (MedPAC, 2012). Second, the Medicare Part D low-income

subsidy program reduces or eliminates cost-sharing for Medicare beneficiaries with low income

and low assets (Summer, Hoadley and Hargrave, 2010). Third, many MA-PD plans offer

                                                 59
enhanced prescription drug coverage that eliminates the deductible and substantially reduces co-

pays, particularly for generic drugs, meaning high prescription drug expenditures are, to some

extent, discretionary. Finally, even conventional Part D plans are reducing the extensive

prescription drug coverage cost-sharing in the “donut-hole,” eliminating it by 2020. So we

expect MA-PD enhanced coverage could have even less cost-sharing (Focus on Health, 2011).

        In Massachusetts in 2010, there was no legally required cap for MA-PD plans for out-of-

pocket spending on medical care. Nonetheless, we apply the exchange caps to the Medicare

beneficiaries. This is justified for several reasons and is unlikely to affect our illustrative

estimates. First, as noted, most MA-PD plans have limited cost-sharing. Second, poor Medicare

beneficiaries are protected through Medicaid and other programs. Third, there are only 62

Medicare beneficiaries in our analysis sample.

        To construct the HIPM, we must identify a particular MA-PD plan as the Basic Plan. The

terms and features of MA-PD plans vary considerably. Plans may trade off premium MOOP and

nonpremium MOOP. Major metropolitan areas have plans with little or no premium above the

Part B premium and little, if any cost-sharing. In fact, an MA-PD plan with no additional

premium above the Part-B premium was available in 2014 in zipcode 02138. . We assume that

the same was true in 2010. Such information can be obtained by searching the CMS interactive

Plan Finder Web Site https://www.medicare.gov/find-a-plan/questions/home.aspx). For national

implementation, some rural areas have no HMO MA-PD plans, but even in these areas it should

be possible to identify a PPO or fee-for-service MA-PD plan as the Basic Plan.

        A further complication is that the premiums paid by Medicare beneficiaries for MA-PD

plans are far below the unsubsidized premium, since the government contribution is so large.

Unfortunately, we cannot determine the government contribution to Medicare for under-65



                                                   60
beneficiaries alone. Therefore, we cannot calculate the unsubsidized premium for the MA-PD

plan for our sample, and instead use the exchange Basic Plan as a proxy for it in needs. For those

with Medicare, the Basic Plan is an MA-PD plan. In 2010, MA-PD plans had no nonpremium

MOOP caps; those were instituted as part of the ACA legislation. We nonetheless apply the

Basic Plan nonpremium MOOP caps. For this illustration with the under-65, we treat the Basic

Plan unsubsidized premium as the unsubsidized premium (full cost) for the under-65 Medicare

beneficiaries. This problem is eliminated when the HIPM is implemented for both those over and

under 65, because the average government contribution can be calculated for both groups

together.




                                                61
Appendix III: Differences between HIPM and SPM Poor

       The HIPM and SPM poverty populations have very similar characteristics because the

two measures assign the same poverty status to nearly the entire population; the HIPM and SPM

poverty rate in Massachusetts differs by only one to two percentage points. The difference in the

rate results nearly exclusively from 38 SPM-poor persons reclassified as “non-poor” by the

HIPM. (Only two HIPM-poor persons are classified as not poor by the SPM.) As explained in

the text, since the low-income population of Massachusetts is well-insured, the reclassification

results from HIPM caps of the MOOP deductions. Thus we refer to the HIPM poor who are not

SPM poor as those “capped out” of poverty and we refer to people classified poor by both

measures as “other poor persons.” Table A3 presents descriptive statistics for the 38 capped out

persons (column 2) and 310 other poor persons (column 1).

       Relative to other poor persons, those capped-out of poverty by the HIPM have far higher

average cash income ($42,422 vs. $15,656) and far higher SPM resources pre-MOOP deduction

(cash income plus in-kind transfers plus tax credits minus tax payments: $39,525 vs. $18,896).

But the capped out report nearly $16,000 in MOOP compared to only $2,800 among other poor

persons. After MOOP deductions, average SPM resources of both groups (third row) falls below

the average SPM needs threshold (fourth row), since both groups are poor according to the SPM.

       Statistics in the remainder of the table suggest that, in addition to much higher cash

income, the capped out are far less likely to have characteristics associated with poverty than

other poor persons. For example, they are less likely to receive SNAP (Food Stamps); 21%

percent of the capped out live in a family that gets SNAP vs. 36% among other poor persons.

The capped out are also more likely to own a home (only 46% are renters vs. 64% among other

poor persons). Fully 75% of the capped out are persons in two-parent-present families compared

                                                62
to just 34% of other poor persons; none of the capped are single parent families compared to

about 14% among other poor persons. The capped out are more likely to have employer-

provided health insurance (54% vs. 25.5%), less likely to be covered by Medicaid (29% vs.48%)

and less likely to be uninsured (5.0% vs. 8.5%). Finally, the capped out are less likely to be non-

citizens (4.2% vs. 12.7%) or racially identify as black (0.0 vs. 19.3), characteristics typically

correlated with poverty. However, the capped out somewhat more likely to be children (42.3%

vs. 35.9%).

       While based on small samples and limited by imperfectly-measured income (Meyer and

Sullivan 2012b; Meyer, Mok and Sullivan, 2015), the figures in Table A3 suggest that those

capped out of poverty by the HIPM MOOP limitation appear much less needy than other poor

persons; this provides evidence to support the validity of the HIPM, particularly (in this case) the

HIPM caps on MOOP.




                                                 63
Table A3: Means and proportions for persons, weighted
                                                  SPM poor &     SPM poor but
Characteristic                                    HIPM poor      not HIPM poor
                                                  “other poor”    “capped out”
                                                      (1)              (2)
Unweighted sample count                               310              38
Income and related
  Cash Income before taxes                          $16,656         $42,422
  SPM Resources, before MOOP Deduction              $18,896         $39,525
  SPM Medical expenditures (MOOP)                   $2,812          $15,916
  SPM Resources, after MOOP Deduction                               $23,609
                                                    $16,084
 SPM needs threshold                                $25,360         $26,353
SPM SNAP (Food Stamps)                               36.2%           21.3%
SPM Housing tenure
 Owns, no mortgage                                  7.4%            4.2%
 Owns, with mortgage                                28.3%           49.5%
 Rents                                              64.2%           46.2%
SPM Family type
 Single Parent                                      13.8%           0.0%
 Two Parent                                         33.8%           75.1%
 Lone Adult                                         21.9%           16.4%
 Adult Couple (no children present)                 8.4%            8.5%
 Other                                              22.1%           0.0%
Health Insurance Unit Type
 Medicaid                                           47.8%           29.2%
 Employer                                           25.5%           54.0%
 Outside household                                  9.1%            11.8%
 Medicare                                           3.5%            0.0%
 Individually purchased                             5.4%            0.0%
 Uninsured                                          8.5%            5.0%
Demographic Characteristics
 Noncitizen                                         12.7%           4.2%
 Black racial identification                        19.3%           0.0%
 SPM number of persons in unit                      3.15%           3.47%
 SPM number of children                             1.18%           1.64%
 Age (years)                                        30.2%           30.7%
 Child                                              35.9%           42.3%




                                          64
Appendix References

Biles, Brian, Lauren Hersch Nicholas and Stuart Guterman. 2006, Medicare Beneficiary Out-of-

Pocket Costs: Are Medicare Advantage Plans a Better Deal? Commonwealth Fund pub. 927 Vol.

19. May, 1-16.


Brooks, Tricia. 2014. "The Family Glitch." Healthy Policy Briefs. November 10. Available at

http://www.healthaffairs.org/healthpolicybriefs/brief.php?brief_id=129

Ericson, Keith M.M. and Amanda Starc. 2013. How product standardization affects choice:

Evidence from the Massachusetts health insurance exchange. NBER Working Paper 19527.

October.


Focus on Health Reform. 2011. Summary of New Health Reform Law. Last modified April 15,

2011.


Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC). 2012. “Status Report on Part D, with

Focus on Beneficiaries with High Drug Spending” in Medicare Payment Report to Congress,

March 2012.


Meyer, Bruce. D. and James X. Sullivan. 2012b. Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official

Poverty, Consumption Poverty and the New Supplemental Poverty Measure. Journal of

Economic Perspectives 26(3): 111-136.


Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K.C. Mok and James X. Sullivan. 2015. Household Surveys in Crisis.

NBER Working Paper No. 21399. July.




                                              65
Pascale, Joanne, Michel Boudreaux, and Ryan King. 2014. Understanding the New Current

Population Survey Health Insurance Questions. US Census RESEARCH REPORT SERIES

Survey Methodology #2014-02. https://www.census.gov/srd/papers/pdf/RSM2014-02.pdf


SHADAC (State Health Access Data Assistance Center). 2012. “Defining ‘Family’ for Studies

of Health Insurance Coverage.” May. Available at http://www.shadac.org/publications/defining-

family-studies-health-insurance-coverage.


Summer, Laura, Jack Hoadley and Elizabeth Hargrave. 2010. The Medicare Part S Low-Income

Subsidy Program: Experience to Date and Policy Issues for Consideration.

http://kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/the-medicare-part-d-low-income-subsidy/




                                              66
