NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECT OF INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION ON FIRM PRODUCTIVITY AND
MARKET POWER
Jan De Loecker
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Working Paper 21994
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21994

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

The authors thank Tim Bresnahan, Penny Goldberg and Frank Verboven for conversations on the topic.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jan De Loecker and Johannes Van Biesebroeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Effect of International Competition on Firm Productivity and Market Power
Jan De Loecker and Johannes Van Biesebroeck
NBER Working Paper No. 21994
February 2016
JEL No. F10,L1,O30
ABSTRACT
We propose a framework to evaluate the potential impact of international competition on firm performance
and highlight two points. First, it is important to consider effects on productive efficiency and market
power in an integrated framework. The popular concept of (revenue) TFP combines both effects which
can lead to problems of estimation and interpretation. Second, greater international competition enlarges
the relevant market and can affect both the number and the type of competitors a firm faces, as well
as the nature of competition. While it is possible that firms respond by adjusting their production operations,
pricing adjustments are all but guaranteed. We contrast three estimation approaches that start, respectively,
from the demand side, the product extensive margin, and the production side. We conclude with a
few avenues for future research.

Jan De Loecker
Department of Economics
307 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jdeloeck@princeton.edu
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Center for Economic Studies
KU Leuven
Naamsestraat 69
3000 Leuven
BELGIUM
jo.vanbiesebroeck@econ.kuleuven.be

1

Introduction

A large literature studies the effect of international trade on firm performance. A wide range of performance measures and different ways of international integration have been investigated. In this overview we intend
to focus on just two methodological issues. We provide only a partial coverage of the literature, highlighting representative studies that illustrate the
main points we want to make.
The first point we emphasize is that it is imperative to study two aspects of firm performance, productive efficiency and market power, in an
integrated framework. If all product and factor markets are perfectly competitive, productivity estimates are direct measures of efficiency and they
can be studied on their own. Prices equal marginal costs and market power
is irrelevant. However, it is hard to deny that perfect competition is the
exception. Market power, for example due to product differentiation, is
ubiquitous. As emphasized by Katayama, Lu, and Tybout (2009) and De
Loecker and Goldberg (2014), this leads to firm-level variation in prices
and makes it much harder to determine the meaning of any productivity
change as conventionally measured, i.e. capturing the variation in sales not
explained by input use. In a domestic context, Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Syverson (2008) illustrate explicitly that revenue-based TFP is not a good
measure of productive efficiency if firms have market power.
Our focus in this chapter is on correctly decomposing the standard recovered residual of production function into cost, markups and efficiency.
Ignoring the different components of measured productivity can lead to
misleading conclusions of how competition, and trade liberalization in particular, affect firms and economies as a whole. Rather than measuring productivity as a residual, the methods we review tend to put enough structure
on the problem to identify firm-level marginal costs directly. Given sufficient data, changes in marginal cost can be decomposed into changes in
efficiency or input prices. However, the level of technical efficiency tends
to be less relevant for differentiated products. Knowing what to produce is
at least as important as how to produce it.
In most of the paper we do not discuss productivity explicitly in great
detail, but that is a deliberate choice. The primitives of the model are firmlevel technical efficiency and demand, and two market-level variables: input prices and the strength of competition. Once one has recovered these,

2

it is possible to construct marginal costs and the optimal price-cost margin
which in turn determine sales, productivity, and everything else. Rather
than estimating productivity directly, we consider it a specific performance
measure that might be interesting for some purposes, but not a primitive
of the model. As different estimation approaches for productivity can recover a different function of the primitives, a focus on productivity will
often hamper comparability of results across studies rather than facilitate
it.
Our second point is that trade liberalization, by enlarging the relevant
market, has the potential to increase competition. Whether it actually has
this effect, and in which cases such effects are strongest is not well understood. Holmes and Schmitz (2010) and De Loecker and Goldberg (2014)
survey evidence of the impact of competition on productivity, respectively
domestic and foreign competition, but they focus specifically on cases where
it is unambiguous that an exogenous change has raised the extent of competition.
Especially in the case of geographic market boundaries, it is natural
to consider the strength of competition along a continuous spectrum. A
change sufficiently far away will have no effect, but the threshold distance
will vary by context. Trade policy changes can have similar effects as lowering of transport costs and therefore naturally influence whether products
belong to the same market or not.
The effect of international integration is not always clear-cut. Tariff reductions will only affect a firm if its product competes with the products
that benefit. The relevant market definition, both in terms of product characteristics and geographical distance, is not always known. It is not even
necessarily constant over time as, for example, a change in technology or
transportation costs can implicitly lead to entry of products. Moreover,
competition can be itself endogenous to policy. We are concerned with a situation where trade liberalization, broadly defined, has the potential to affect the competition firms face, but where one still needs to verify whether
it actually does.
The two issues, the impact of market power on the interpretation of productivity and the impact of trade on competition, are related even beyond
measurement. Empirical studies have emphasized that trade liberalization
raises average productivity by raising the minimum productivity threshold
for survival; and by inducing reallocation of resources towards more pro3

ductive producers. However, incorporating market power also changes
the theoretical gains from trade. In a situation with heterogeneous firms
and variable markups, the net effect on welfare crucially depends on which
firms take advantage of the exporting possibilities and which firms see the
largest increase in competition due to imports. Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodriguez-Clare (2015) show that adding a pro-competitive
effect in the Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012) framework
lowers welfare gains from trade, while in the oligopoly model of Edmond,
Midrigan, and Xu (2015) the effect goes the other way.
Traditionally, the Industrial Organization (IO) literature has focussed
on market power questions, often imposing constant marginal costs on the
analysis. In contrast, the trade literature has by and large interpreted observed productivity growth as greater efficiency, which is only valid under
perfect or monopolistic competition. The remainder of this chapter illustrates that the two approaches are complementary and that several studies
have already blended insights from the two literatures.
In the remainder of the chapter we discuss, in turn, three approaches
to estimating the extent of market power. First, in Section 3, we discuss
the dominant IO framework that starts from a well-defined demand system. In Section 4 we discuss an alternative approach that exploits the zero
profit condition governing equilibrium market entry and exit. In Section 5
we discuss the production-side approach that relies on input choices and
refrains from specifying the relevant market upfront. To highlight the different assumptions the alternative approaches make with respect to market
definition, we discuss this first briefly in Section 2. Section 6 closes with a
few concluding remarks and avenues for further research.

2

Market Definition

Defining the relevant market has been at the forefront in the IO literature
on estimating and analyzing market power. The development of flexible
models of consumer demand was in part to help determine the relevant
market. In particular, products belong to the same market, in geographical
or product space sense, if consumers consider them to be good substitutes
and therefore have non-zero cross-price elasticities. We can use an estimated demand system to investigate these elasticities, but the estimates
themselves are inherently conditional on a particular sample of products.
4

Therefore it is indispensable to conduct some robustness analyses.
Defining the market is also critical when studying market structure
more generally, as variation in the number of firms in a market is one aspect
of the strength of competition. To avoid problems associated with at least
partly integrated markets or with imports and exports, a range of applications study local service markets where markets can be straightforwardly
segmented geographically, see for example the studies by Bresnahan and
Reiss (1991), Syverson (2004), and Schaumans and Verboven (2015) which
we discuss below.
The IO approach of clearly delineating markets is in contrast to the international trade literature where the gains from integration is a central
research theme. Lowering trade barriers or reducing transportation costs
enlarges the market and can impact the competitive pressure on firms. It
implies that the market definition itself can be endogenous to a change in
the economic environment. In practice, however, empirical work in trade
has also relied on an implicit market definition. A set of producers operating in a industry as classified by statistical agencies are pooled together
and national boundaries are considered as discrete market barriers.
The literature on exchange rate pass-through has taken a different approach and it is precisely interested in the extent to which markets are segmented or integrated. See Goldberg and Knetter (1997) for a survey on this
approach. In particular, price and cost variation across markets (typically
countries) in response to exchange rate shocks is used to infer the degree of
segmentation across markets.
The production-side approach we propose does not require one to commit to a specific market definition to study the effects of competition on
firm performance. It allows for the usual productivity effects, but also for
additional effects from competition on price-cost markups. The method
does, however, crucially rely on the ability to pool firms and products that
produce with a common production technology. To identify the extent of
market power an individual firm has, we need to measure the output elasticity of a variable input at the observed combination of output and inputs.
To recover this we specify a flexible production technology and we need to
estimate this using a sample of firms actually employing this technology.
Once we have estimates of productivity and market power we can relate
these to changes in competition, for example as triggered by trade policy
changes.
5

3

Estimating competition from the demand side

In this section we describe the so-called demand approach to analyze the
impact of competition, be it domestic or international in nature, on firm
performance. As mentioned before, we always consider firm performance
to include not only technical efficiency, but also marginal cost of production
and the ability to mark up, which are components of the usual productivity measures. A first step in this type of analysis is to estimate demand,
which we review first. Studies of the impact of international competition
have, in a second step, supplemented the estimated demand system with
a behavioral assumption on market competition to perform counterfactual
simulations of trade policies, which we review next. The existing literature
focuses mostly on price effects and markups, but given that marginal costs
and counterfactual market shares are recovered other types of analysis are
possible. We review some extensions in the third sub-section and revisit
potential applications that are more directly linked to the productivity literature as an avenue for future research at the end of this chapter.

3.1

The standard framework: Discrete choice demand

Many applications in field of industrial organization require knowledge
about firms’ own and cross-price elasticities. Berry (1994) sets out a powerful framework of how to estimate very flexible elasticities in differentiated
goods markets with many products using only aggregate, product-level
information: quantities, prices and other characteristics. It starts from a
random indirect utility function that is a function of observable product
characteristics, including price, as well as idiosyncratic consumer-specific
tastes. Assuming that consumer-level tastes are distributed according to
an extreme value distribution, choice probabilities can be aggregated over
consumers to obtain an explicit expression for the market shares of all products.
The application in Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) for the US automobile market uses a random coefficients demand system that incorporates
consumer heterogeneity in the valuation of product characteristics. The
results demonstrate that even with tightly parameterized preferences that
can be estimated using only market-level data, the discrete choice model
can still generate very flexible substitution patterns between products. Demand curves are continuous at the market level and incorporate the intu6

itive feature that substitution is stronger between products that are similar
in characteristics space.
In principle, the demand model can be estimated without any supply
restrictions. The supply side of the market can help mitigate the price endogeneity, as firms are likely to set prices taking into account unobservable product quality which enters the residual of the demand curve. Berry,
Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) use the characteristics of competing products
to construct instruments for price. In order to increase estimation precision, they supplement the demand system with a set of first order conditions derived from profit-maximizing price setting behavior and a Nash
equilibrium assumption. Firms take into account how each price they set
influences sales of all their own products as well as the strategic responses
of other firms.1
In addition to relying on an explicit supply model to calculate markups,
it allows for counterfactual analysis by changing a primitive of the model.
An important application is in merger analysis where the effect of a potential merger on the market equilibrium is predicted ex ante. Using an explicit
behavior assumption, one can recover the product-level marginal costs that
are consistent with the estimated demand model and the observed prices.
A merger affects the equilibrium because the merging firms have an incentive to raise prices as their multi-product price setting behavior now takes
into account demand-stealing over an increased set of own-products. Firms
not party to the merger are also likely to raise prices in response as prices
tend to be strategic complements. Possible efficiency gains from the merger
can readily be incorporated in the analysis as lower marginal costs for the
directly affected firms.
The entire analysis starts from a well-defined product market, populated by a set of consumers with stable preferences. Different behavioral
assumptions directly imply different strengths of competition. Assuming
that firms behave as oligopolists leads to a prediction of positive pricecost markups, while assuming price-taking behavior directly fixes marginal
costs to the observed prices. The Cournot assumption of quantity competition leads to a positive markup even for homogenous products, while the
Bertrand assumption of price competition requires some product differentiation before prices can exceed marginal costs. The product-level marginal
1
Reynaert and Verboven (2014) take derivatives of the entire set of first order conditions
to obtain optimal instruments for the price.

7

costs that are backed-out as primitives of the model will depend on the
specific behavioral assumption used and the particular functional form assumptions.
In another application to the automobile industry, Bresnahan (1987)
jointly estimates demand and marginal cost parameters under different assumptions for the mode of competition. One criterion to assess the appropriateness of alternative assumptions is to use a non-nested test to compare the fit with the data. An alternative criterion is to estimate the model
separately for each year and verify which sequence of market conduct assumptions leads to the greatest parameter stability. The results indicate
that parameter estimates for demand and marginal cost, the primitives of
the model, are very similar in all three years if one derives the first order conditions assuming monopoly pricing in 1954 and 1956, but BertrandNash pricing in 1955. The data thus suggests that a collusive arrangement
in the industry broke down for a single year when firms’ behavior is well
explained by a change to oligopoly pricing with stable preferences and production technologies.
A difficulty is that it is not straightforward to model the mode of competition as varying in a continuous fashion with a parameter to be estimated.
An older literature in IO considered conjectural variation games, but Corts
(1999) illustrated that in a more general dynamic context a range of competitive situations are consistent with the same value of the conduct parameter. Nevertheless, Genesove and Mullin (1998) show that with a freely
varying conduct parameter their model leads to price-cost markups in line
with those obtained directly from marginal costs which are observable in
their application to the sugar refining industry. They further show that the
marginal costs one can back-out of a fully specified structural model are
sensitive to the particular behavioral assumption used to derive the firms’
first order conditions. They are, however, not very sensitive to the functional form assumption of the demand system.
From a purely empirical standpoint, one would gauge the competitiveness of a market by the average prevailing price-cost margin. But unless
one is willing to take accounting data at face value, which Genesove and
Mullin (1998) argue is valid in some (rare) situations, one already needs to
make a behavioral assumption to recover marginal costs as outlined above.
Even if demand were estimated separately, different assumptions on the
mode of competition will lead to different price-cost markups and differ-

8

ent conclusions.
In practice, the literature has by and large adopted the flexible assumption of a Nash equilibrium in prices for strategically behaving multi-product
firms. This particular ‘mode of competition’ or ‘behavioral assumption’ can
accommodate markets with different levels of competitiveness by varying
the distance between goods in product space. Higher price sensitivity of
consumers, higher cross-price elasticities, and less concentrated ownership
of products will all increase the elasticity of a firm’s residual demand and
in turn lower equilibrium price-cost markups.

3.2

Evaluating trade policy using counterfactual simulations

The above framework has been used to evaluate the economic impact of
trade policies or to study other questions of interest to the trade literature.
Any change in a primitive of the model will influence the strength of competition each firm faces as the observed equilibrium is supported by the intersection of best-response functions of all market participants. To predict
likely effects of a policy change, researchers calculate a counterfactual market equilibrium that again leads to a situation no firm unilaterally wants to
deviate from.
To accomplish this, the estimated demand model is supplemented with
an explicitly specified behavioral model that generates a system of first order conditions, one for each firm. The most common assumption is that
firms set prices according to a multi-product Bertrand pricing game. The
observed market shares and prices then imply a set of marginal costs for
which the data is consistent with profit maximization given the assumed
behavior. After changing a primitive, e.g. the tariff wedge incurred by imports from one country, re-solving the system of first order conditions leads
to a new equilibrium price vector for all products, which in turn implies a
new set of market shares.
A wide range of trade policies have already been evaluated in this framework. The automobile industry has been the proving ground as it fits the
assumption of an oligopolistic market structure and has rich data that is
widely available. The most straightforward application is a unilateral reduction in import tariffs which lowers the relevant marginal cost that firms
take into account when determining the profit-maximizing prices for their
goods on an export market. Tovar (2012) studies the welfare effects of such
9

a tariff reduction on the Colombian automobile market. The model predicts
very large benefits, around $3,000 per car purchaser, arising mostly due to
greater variety.
Other studies have looked at the same question in the context of the
establishment of a Preferential Trade Area. Brambilla (2005) studies the
Customs Union between Argentina and Brazil; Park and Rhee (2014) study
two Free Trade Agreements (FTA) from the Korean perspective, one with
the United States and one with the European Union; Gao, Van Biesebroeck,
and Verboven (2014) study FTAs between Canada and several potential
FTA partners, including the European Union, Japan, Korea and China.
The impact of the Voluntary Export Restraints (VER) that Japanese firms
agreed to on their US and EU exports are a variation on this theme. Goldberg (1995) introduces VERs into the importers’ first order conditions through
a Lagrange multiplier on aggregate Japanese imports.2 Berry, Levinsohn,
and Pakes (1999) model the VERs as a specific tariff on the targeted imports.
In both cases, they amount to an implicit tax on Japanese cars. The average impact on marginal cost can be estimated using a sample period that
includes both years when this type of protectionism was in place and years
when it was not. As the fully specified structural model provides information on consumer welfare, domestic firm profit and government revenue,
it can be used to evaluate whether the imposition of VERs was a welfare
improving US policy or not.
Still focusing on the automobile market, Fehrstman and Gandal (1998)
study the effect of the Arab boycott on the Israeli market. In this case,
the counterfactual, post-boycott equilibrium is not characterized by different marginal costs, but by the removal of Japanese and Korean car models
from the market. Goldberg and Verboven (2001) use the same framework
to study international price dispersion in the European car market. Exploiting the fully specified structural model, they can simply eliminate one
potential explanation for the observed cross-country price differentials and
verify how much prices are predicted to change.
In other differentiated goods industries, Irwin and Pavcnik (2004) evaluate the impact of the 1992 US-EU agreement that limited subsidies in the
global market for large passenger airplanes. They show that the observed
2
It implies that all Japanese firms internalize the constraint they face on their joint exports, something that is not implausible given the important coordinating role played by
the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI).

10

price change in the market equilibrium, an Airbus-Boeing duopoly, is similar to what would be expected from a 5% increase in marginal cost. Kitano and Ohashi (2009) assess to what extent the strong recovery of HarleyDavidson in the US motorcycle market could be explained by the safeguard
provisions applied by the United States. A counterfactual simulation of the
likely effect of the US’ imposition of temporary tariff protection of 45% suggests that this alone cannot explain much of the sales boost as consumers
perceive Japanese motorcycles to be rather poor substitutes.
A few studies use the discrete choice demand framework to study gains
from trade more generally. Friberg and Ganslandt (2006) do this in the context of simultaneous imports and exports of bottled water by Sweden. They
use the random utility model implied by their estimated demand system
to quantify the value of increased product variety, a first source of welfare
gains. The welfare gains from the pro-competitive impact of imports on domestic prices is computed in a counterfactual simulation that eliminates all
imports from the market. They find that the benefits through these two
channels outweigh any plausible resource cost from international trade.
Sheu (2014) investigates the same question in the Indian printer market.
Following its entry into the WTO and the gradual elimination of an import
tariff of 20%, the country experienced a large increase in imports. The relative importance of three possible factors that could boost welfare—lower
price, higher quality, and greater variety—are assessed without a counterfactual analysis. She finds that higher quality of imports was the most important channel for welfare gains from trade.3
Khandelwal (2010) also does not perform a counterfactual simulation,
but uses the residuals from the estimated demand system as proxies for
product quality, in line with the structural interpretation of Berry (1994).
The novelty is that he only uses widely available product-level trade information and the Armington assumption—which implies products are (only)
horizontally differentiated by their country of origin—to estimate the demand system. He considers imports from each country as a different product variety and products are defined as all 10-digit HS category by country
interactions. He then estimates demand for a large number of ‘markets’,
pooling all ‘products’ in a 4-digit HS category. The results highlight that
these product markets vary substantially in their scope for quality differ3

This contrasts with the finding for the Colombian car market in Tovar (2012) which
stressed the importance of increased variety.

11

entiation.
Gao, Van Biesebroeck, and Verboven (2014) use similarly estimated demand systems for several product markets to evaluate the impact of an FTA
between Canada and potential partners. Rather than perform counterfactual simulations in each market, they calculate the marginal effect of tariff reductions on consumer surplus, domestic profits and government revenue. They use the estimated demand systems, but perform a partial equilibrium analysis only calculating first-round effects from the initial price
reductions of affected imports. For the automobile industry, the most important category of differentiated goods by import volume, they compare
the predicted welfare effects using both approaches. With only a few exceptions, the sources of welfare gains from different FTAs are estimated
remarkably similar with the fully-fledged counterfactual simulation using
detailed product information and the partial equilibrium calculation using
trade data.

3.3
3.3.1

Possible extensions
Reallocation

In the trade literature there has been a lot of theoretical work, starting with
Melitz (2003), showing that the reallocation of market share from less to
more productive firms boosts aggregate welfare. In the setup of (Arkolakis,
Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare 2012), this type of market share reallocation
together with utility gains from increased product variety are the primary
channels through which trade raises aggregate welfare.
Existing empirical exercises, see for example Pavcnik (2002) and Eslava
et al. (2004), have evaluated the impact of trade policy on aggregate productivity through a reallocation of market share towards more productive firms. A thorny issue is that measures of productivity confound productive efficiency and market power. This is an inherent problem since researchers rely on (deflated) sales to proxy for output, which except in the
case of price-taking firms or product homogeneity leaves price variation
unaccounted for and therefore captured by the productivity residual. CollardWexler and De Loecker (2015) illustrates that the results from such a reallocation analysis are extremely sensitive to whether one controls for price
variation, both output and input prices, or not. While we are incorrectly
measuring the underlying mechanism, the alignment of productivity to
12

market shares, it is important to note that the lack of producer-level price
data does not invalidate the aggregate (say industry-wide) productivity effects.
If one were to calculate a counterfactual equilibrium along the lines described in the previous section, it would be straightforward to isolate the
effects of reallocation on the strength of competition in a market. Such a
calculation generates a full vector of new prices and market shares for all
active firms. The effect of reallocation on the sector’s average price-cost
margin, a weighted average of the product-level margins, can be readily
computed in this framework. Moreover, one can decompose the aggregate
change into a change in product-level markups and a change due to shifting weights in the aggregation. Even if the marginal cost of each product
remains unchanged after a trade policy change, the average marginal cost
among active firms or products is likely to change due to differences in
product-weights.4
It is not hard to predict what the expected effect of a tariff reduction
should be. Highly productive foreign producers have low intrinsic marginal costs, but import tariffs inflate the relevant, landed marginal cost on their
export markets. This form of protectionism depresses their market share
and diminishes the strength of competition for domestic firms which can
price higher. Heterogeneous firm models of trade predict that the most productive foreign firms will enter export markets first. Lowering tariffs will
thus reallocate market share away from less productive (domestic) firms
to more productive imports. The magnitude of this effect can easily be investigated using a counterfactual simulation of a new market equilibrium
under the assumption of a reduced import tariff.
3.3.2

Productivity effects

The above framework can provide a direct estimate of the effect of any
trade policy change on the price-cost margin. If marginal costs are assumed
to be constant over time or to vary only idiosyncratically, it is by construction purely a market power effect. The average cost in a sector can change
due to weighting, but firm-level or product-level changes do not contribute
to aggregate welfare.
4

Katayama, Lu, and Tybout (2009) provides a nice illustration of this approach in a different context, namely to evaluate the productivity gap between exporters and nonexporters.

13

Another strand of the trade literature has found important productivity effects of domestic trade liberalization. Amiti and Konings (2007) show
that lower input tariffs raise firm-level total factor productivity (TFP) in
Indonesia. De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2012) show
that in India a similar effect on TFP should not be interpreted as higher efficiency, but as incomplete pass-through of input price reductions. Brandt,
Van Biesebroeck, Wang, and Zhang (2014) show for China that even controlling for input tariffs and price changes, lower output tariffs did raise
productivity. They argue that state-owned firms in particular were forced
to increase efficiency to avoid bankruptcy in the face of stronger import
competition.
In the methodological framework outlined in this section, a particular
behavioral assumption has to be used in a counterfactual simulation, but
one can already impose it at the estimation stage. Jointly estimating the
demand and supply sides would increases estimation efficiency and guarantee that the demand estimates are consistent with profit maximization,
e.g. generate an own price absolute elasticity of at least one. In addition, it
allows one to recover how marginal costs vary with observable variables.
For example, Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) and Bresnahan (1987) include input factor prices in the functional form specification of marginal
costs.
When price effects of a potential merger are calculated in a merger analysis that precedes the actual merger, one can include a direct effect of the
merger on marginal costs. Such an exercise can reveal for example how
large of an efficiency gain is needed to avoid price increases following a
merger. One could similarly include import tariffs directly in the marginal
cost specification to incorporate potential productivity gains from trade liberalization in the model. Such a specification can provide some sensitivity
analysis on the predicted effects of trade liberalization if one has outside
information on likely efficiency effects.
The studies reviewed in Section 3.2 calculate the counterfactual equilibrium assuming that marginal production costs stayed constant. As a
result, any productivity effects have to be due to changes in output prices.
When the industry is observed both before and after the policy change, it
would be straightforward to back out marginal costs for each product-year
observation from the first order conditions using unchanged behavior but
incorporating the primitive that changed. In a second step, one could then

14

verify whether there is a systematic relationship between these costs and
the policy change. This approach would be similar in spirit to studies that
regress productivity on policy changes, but have the advantage of controlling for changed price-cost margins.
If such effects on marginal costs are present, one could even incorporate them in the model. For example, when evaluating the impact of
VERs, Goldberg (1995) and Berry et al. (1999) recover a parameter that captures the implicit tax on Japanese vehicles that such a trade policy implies.
Importantly, this parameter is identified assuming unchanged production
costs. If policy changes influence efficiency, as for example the learningby-exporting literature suggests, one should allow for such effects in the
model when performing a counterfactual exercise.5
In other literatures, a few studies have already followed this approach.
Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) allow for a direct efficiency-enhancing effect
of export activity on a firm’s marginal cost, through its impact on productivity, in line with the learning-by-exporting hypothesis. They do this in
a dynamic model where forward-looking firms make both innovation and
exporting decisions, but one could also incorporate this in a static model
where exporting decisions are exogenous. Hashmi and Van Biesebroeck
(2014) investigate the two-way impact of competition on innovation. They
allow for higher product quality to boost demand, but the same variable
also enters their specification for the marginal production cost.

4

Estimating competition from product entry

In this section we focus more specifically on the extensive margin, entry
of either firms or products. Opening up to international competition is expected not only to impact firm’s intensive margins (like sales, efficiency,
etc.), but will also affect the incentives to enter or exit the market, or introduce or drop products. Given that such investments will also impact
a firm’s organization, product portfolio, and most likely even its cost of
production, their effects will thus again show up in standard measures
of revenue-based productivity (TFPR). We discuss a common approach in
Industrial Organization that relies on equilibrium entry patterns, and we
5

This mirrors the critique in De Loecker (2013) who argues that models failing to find
evidence for learning-by-exporting effects often do not allow for the existence of such effects
in their specification of the productivity evolution.

15

draw the analogy to theoretical models in international trade that evaluate the effect of trade liberalization on welfare, typically measured by aggregate (revenue) productivity. In the extensions, we discuss studies that
imply an effect of trade-driven market expansion on measured productivity through its impact on innovation incentives, product introductions, and
product prices.

4.1

The standard framework: Geographically isolated markets

One shortcoming of the demand-side approach is the absence of endogenous entry and exit of products or firms. A trade policy that forces some
products from the market can still be evaluated, see for example Fehrstman and Gandal (1998), but one has to specify exogenously which products exit. How firms decide to enter or exit a market is not modeled in
the static framework, but this is likely to be an important feature of many
trade policies, in particular of trade liberalization. Alternatively, product
characteristics may respond to trade liberalization as well, which further
complicates such an approach.
A separate strand of the IO literature estimates the strength of competition in an industry solely by exploiting equilibrium patterns of product entry. It avoids explicit functional form assumptions on demand, only specifying that we observe a market-scale factor that is proportional to aggregate demand. The seminal application of Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) specifies the demand for a homogenous good by a representative consumer as
d(Z, PN ) and multiplies this with the number of consumers S(Y ) to obtain
the aggregate market demand Q. The vectors Z and Y denote demographic
variables affecting market demand. The price PN is indexed by the number
of active firms N as firms are expected to set prices taking into account the
number of competitors they face.6
With these minimal assumptions one can learn about the strength of
competition in a particular industry simply by comparing the number of
active competitors in geographically isolated local markets of different size.
In equilibrium, firms will enter as long as they make positive profits. If
competition depresses prices, and thus price-cost margins, there will exist
a market size threshold SN that is minimally needed for the N th entrant to
6

The per-capita demand and market size shifters Z and Y generate additional variation
in aggregate demand, but they are not crucial to the identification strategy.

16

just break even. The following zero profit condition pins down the market
size threshold SN at which the N th entrant just break even:
πN

= [PN − c(

Q
SN
, W )]dN
− FN = 0.
N
N

(1)

By observing many localized markets that vary in size and number of entrants, a series of thresholds {S1 , S2 , ..., SNmax } can be estimated.
In general, both the average variable cost c(.), which is allowed to vary
with local factor prices W , as well as fixed entry cost FN could vary across
entrants or with the scale of production. To distinguish such variation from
the dependency of the price on the number of competitors one needs to
observe prices or quantities or make behavioral assumptions, e.g. assuming
the most efficient firms enter first.
In the absence of firm heterogeneity in technology or costs, the model
assumes a constant and uniform marginal cost per unit, the impact of competition can be uncovered directly from the pattern of market size thresholds sN = SN /N . This series of thresholds, one for each N , indicate how
many consumers per firm are needed in a market in order for all N active
firms to avoid losses. The ratio of successive thresholds provides a one-toone mapping of the ratios of variable profits per consumer:
sN +1
sN

=

(PN − c)dN
.
(PN +1 − c)dN +1

(2)

If the number of active firms N rises less than proportionately with the
market size S, it indicates that the price-cost margin falls if additional firms
compete in a market. More customers are needed per firm in order for the
marginal entrant still to be able to recover its fixed costs. Such a situation
will be characterized by sN +1 /sN > 1. As prices gradually converge to
marginal costs with increased competition, as happens for example in the
Cournot case, the ratio of thresholds converges to one. The relationship between N and S becomes a proportional relationship as price-cost margins
do not fall anymore with N .
The strength of competition is thus an industry feature that can be identified by observing the same industry in a series of separate markets, for
example in geographically isolated local markets. One measure of market
competitiveness would be the number of firms needed for the sN +1 /sN ratio to become insignificantly different from unity. For a given number of
17

firms, the slope of the N − S relationship is a direct measure of the strength
or the lack of competition. Once the relationship is proportional and the
threshold ratio has converged to unity, market power has been exhausted.
An important caveat is that the above relationship is identified from
variation in the number of active firms across markets of different size,
which is interpreted as variation in the price-cost margins. The framework does not allow one to distinguish between perfect competition and
perfect collusion as the profitability level is not identified. In either case
the markup would not vary with the number of active firms in the market.
Moreover, a monopolistically competitive market with horizontal product
differentiation would only look different from perfect competition if the
residual demand each firm faces has a variable elasticity. The case of a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) demand at the individual level would
be indistinguishable from perfect competition irrespective of whether the
elasticity of substitution is 1 or 10. While the price-cost margin would be
lower for higher elasticities, the crucial feature is that in both cases it does
not respond to the number of active firms.
While evaluating the competitiveness of a market is straightforward
once the size thresholds are obtained, estimating the shape of the variable
profit function is not so straightforward. Econometric estimation is complicated if one allows firms’ entry decisions to depend on the unobservables
in the variable profit equation. This seems a plausible empirical feature,
but given that each firm’s equilibrium strategy in a dynamic entry game
depends on the actions of other firms, correlation between unobservables
gives rises to an endogeneity problem. Bresnahan and Reiss (1990) discuss
identification strategies.
Syverson (2004) exploits a similar idea, but instead of varying the total
market size he compares markets that differ in the density of consumers.
He studies the market for ready-mix concrete where competition is highly
localized (spatially) as firms face a physical limit how far they can ship
their final product. As a result, denser markets can support more firms,
even conditional on total market size. Comparing regions with different
densities generates a similar type of exogenous variation in the number of
competitors as comparing geographically isolated markets of different size.
Moreover, higher density makes it easier for consumers to switch between
producers. It raises product substitutability and further lowers equilibrium
price-cost margins.

18

To evaluate the extent of competition in an industry, Syverson (2004)
does not compare the number of active firms to some absolute measure of
market density. Instead, he assumes that firms differ in productivity such
that the zero profit condition implies a minimum productivity level a firm
needs to attain to be able to operate profitably. In denser markets, more
firms will enter and their products will be better substitutes. They will
compete more fiercely, lowering price-cost margins and raising the productivity threshold needed for survival. On average, the selection of surviving
firms is more stringent in denser markets and the minimum as well as the
average productivity levels will be higher.

4.2

Effect of trade policy on the number of competitors

This type of comparative statics is similar to the way theoretical models
of international trade evaluate the impact of trade on an economy. The
market equilibrium is first solved in an autarky situation. The effect of
trade is then investigated by comparing this to a situation where the home
and foreign markets are merged in a free trade equilibrium with a larger
global market. A similar comparison can be achieved by decreasing trade
barriers from infinity to zero, which even allows for a comparison with
intermediate situations as trade barriers can be varied continuously.
In the homogenous firms literature, following Krugman (1979), an increase in the relevant market size following trade integration is shown to
raise output per firm. Due to scale economies in production—constant
marginal costs with a fixed cost—the average cost per unit falls. As firms
produce on the elastic portion of demand, it induces them to lower prices
which raises the real wage and thus welfare. For general demand curves, at
the higher output the price elasticity tends to be lower and markups higher.
This is a consequence of the higher output and will only offset the output
and welfare gains partially, not overturn them.
Much of the subsequent literature, especially once firm heterogeneity
was introduced, has assumed monopolistic competition, constant marginal
costs, and CES preferences, see Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare
(2012). This severely limits possible adjustment channels following trade
opening. In particular, price-cost margins do not adjust when the number
of firms increases, nor does firm-level productivity. Melitz (2003) stresses
a different, general equilibrium effect of increased aggregate sales in the

19

open economy case. As firms expand output by exporting, they bid up the
wage rate forcing less productive firms to exit. Even though firm-specific
productivity is constant, greater selectivity raises the average productivity
of surviving firms and redistributes labor input towards more productive
uses—as in Syverson (2004). Such a market outcome could also be characterized as more competitive, even in the absence of any effect on price-cost
margins, as sales are increasingly concentrated in more efficient firms.
Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) use a similar setup, but with quadratic
preferences for consumer demand which generates price-cost markups that
decline when the market enlarges and more firms compete. As a result,
trade-liberalization now has an additional pro-competitive effect on the
prices of surviving firms. At the same time, however, the elimination of
low-productivity firms from the market reallocates market share towards
highly productive survivors. These firms produce further down on their
demand curve and will optimally set a higher price-cost margin. Market
selection thus raises the average markup over all active firms and this is
a drag on aggregate welfare gains, as highlighted by Arkolakis, Costinot,
Donaldson, and Rodriguez-Clare (2015).
Eckel and Neary (2010) further generalize this setup by introducing
multi-product firms. Consumers still have quadratic preferences over all
product varieties, but firms now endogenously decide their scope of production. Their marginal costs are lowest for their ‘core’ product and rise
if they adapt varieties to better serve consumers with horizontally differentiated tastes. Globalization, which is modeled directly as an increase in
market size, raises total output but has opposite effects on high and lowcost varieties. The increased competition that accompanies the larger market size leads to a contraction in the production of high-cost varieties some
of which will even be discontinued. For low-cost varieties the market expansion effect dominates and their production expands. This raises firmlevel productivity, as firms focus on their core competences, but also raises
the average price-cost margin as low-cost, high-margin varieties are more
likely to survive. The impact of the increase in market size on the total
number of active firms is ambiguous and depends on the substitutability
of products.
Other studies have used different assumptions on market demand and
production technology to study behavior of multi-product firms. However,
they mostly compare only theoretical predictions for the autarky and free

20

trade equilibria. The few studies that provide empirical evidence illustrate
equilibrium patterns of exporting and product churn, but do not compare
directly the number of active firms in markets of different size.

4.3

Extensions

4.3.1

Market expansion

The trade context seems well-suited to apply the Bresnahan and Reiss (1991)
framework for identifying the strength of competition, but to our knowledge this has never been done (yet). From each country’s perspective, a
lowering of trade barriers its firms face overseas is akin to a market expansion. Lileeva and Trefler (2010) have shown that a decline in US import tariffs increased the productivity of Canadian firms, especially for
intermediately-productive firms for which the incentive to make productivity-enhancing investments—in order to boost productivity enough and
make it as an exporter—is likely to have increased the most following the
change in US trade policy. One could similarly study whether such a change
increased the number of viable Canadian firms and in turn the competitiveness in the market.
However, in the context of differentiated goods markets, which is the
dominant framework in international trade, it is imperative to take into account that product entry can expand the relevant market size. Schaumans
and Verboven (2015) demonstrate that the minimum market size needed
for an additional firm to be viable decreases with the number of firms if
market expansion, due to product variety, dominates the decrease in pricecost margins due to increased competition. This is a likely outcome in the
CES demand case which is a popular assumption in the theoretical trade
literature. Profit margins do not respond at all to entry, while the love-ofvariety built into the utility function leads to higher per-capita sales when
product variety increases. As a result, the market increment needed to recover fixed costs falls with the aggregate market size. Discrete choice demand specifications have a similar property as new products take away
some market share from the outside good and directly expand the market.7
Ignoring this channel leads to an underestimate of the impact of the
number of firms on the strength of competition. It also leads some theoreti7

See Berry and Waldfogel (1999) for an application to entry in the US radio market.

21

cal trade models to predict that the overall number of active firms, the sum
of home and foreign firms, increases as we move from autarky to free trade,
even though the global market size is unchanged and firms compete more
directly. In other cases this is merely a possibility if the effect of competition
on price does not outweigh the beneficial effects from product variety, see
for example Eckel and Neary (2010).
Schaumans and Verboven (2015) illustrate how to correct for this effect when constructing the ratio of successive market thresholds. Their
approach requires information on the total revenue per customer in each
market. This allows for market expansion, even holding the number of
customers in a market, i.e. the potential market size, fixed. Together with
the number of active firms, it can be used to estimate an equation for the average revenue per firm as a function of the market size. On export markets
this type of information is directly observable, but it might not be readily
available on a firm’s domestic market.
4.3.2

Integrating supply and demand

Abstracting from the need to correct for market expansion, the Melitz and
Ottaviano (2008) study bridges the approaches in Berry, Levinsohn, and
Pakes (1995) and Bresnahan and Reiss (1991). It features a demand function
with varying elasticity and trade policy directly affects markups. However,
competition is monopolistically competitive which precludes strategic responses. Moreover, as in most of the trade literature, products are only
differentiated horizontally and symmetrically. An exogenous productivity
draw for each firm fixes its profitability without any real scope for firm decisions. Greater competition following trade liberalization will force some
products from the market, but a zero profit condition for marginal firms is
all that is needed to pin down market participants.
This is a natural assumption in the Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) or Schaumans and Verboven (2015) framework, but a more flexible demand system
allows for richer forms of differentiation. A few studies connect the two
literatures even more closely. They use a more flexible demand system and
supplement the model with supply responses. For example, Thomas (2011)
conducts a counterfactual analysis to evaluate the loss in variable profits
if some laundry detergent variants would be eliminated from the market.
Her results suggest that fixed costs of keeping a product in the market have

22

to be extremely small to rationalize firm behavior. Goettler and Gordon
(2011) and Eizenberg (2014) study new product introductions in the semiconductor and computer industries and the competitive interactions this
entails. However, as product introduction is a dynamic decision, the estimation becomes exceedingly complicated.
Dynamic considerations of product entry will also influence pricing in
models with market power. Even the mere threat of new product entry
can already change current behavior. In a context of international trade,
Holmes and Schmitz (2001) and Salvo (2010) provide evidence that firms
with market power practice limit pricing to keep out potential foreign competitors.
Similar dynamic considerations apply to the impact of trade policy. It
can, for example, generate a different response to temporary versus permanent forms of trade protection. A large literature has shown that firms
benefitting from import tariffs tend to have lower productivity, presumably
because they face lower incentives to make productivity-enhancing investments, see Brandt et al. (2014) for an overview. However, Konings and
Vandenbussche (2008) find the opposite for firms that benefit from temporary trade safeguard protections. They argue that firms will behave differently if they know the import protection will end in the near future. Firms
can use temporarily elevated sales and variable profits to take actions that
boost productivity and prepare for the expected future competition.

5

Estimating competition from the production side

In this section we discuss the so-called production approach to investigate
the impact of trade liberalization on firm performance. While this approach
delivers an estimate of markups and thus, via price data, an estimate of
marginal costs, the standard variable of interest, productivity, is immediately subsumed in this measure. In the absence of variation in input prices
and scale effects, variation in marginal costs equals variation in technical efficiency. We highlight that two separate literatures, the trade liberalizationproductivity literature on the one hand, and the international pass-through
literature on the other hand, are highly interconnected. It is imperative to
study both efficiency and price effects jointly in any analysis of productivity in a context where firms might have some market power.

23

5.1

Identifying market power at the firm level

Let’s now turn back to our original question. We want to know whether
greater (international) competition affects firm performance. In terms of
performance, we consider both productive efficiency and profitability, as
measured by markups.
Increased global competition, say through trade liberalization, has the
potential to affect any producer. However, the extent to which a firm is
affected by an exogenous change to its operating environment depends on
a few factors. First, whether the change in the operating environment is a
cost or demand shock, or both. Second, the degree of substitutability across
products of the affected industry will play an important role. A reduction
of import tariffs for Japanese cars in the United States will affect other car
producers differently depending on the substitution patterns across brands
and models.
While we might expect a policy change to have a competitive effect on
the industry, the effect is likely to vary considerably across producers. The
production approach to estimating markups and marginal cost is a natural
way to allow for such continuous and heterogeneous effects of competition
on firm performance.
In the Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) framework, we inferred from a less
than proportional increase in the number of firms with market size that
the price-cost margins must have declined with the number of active firms,
giving each firm a harder time to recover fixed costs. If price-cost margins
were observable, we could investigate this directly by regressing them on
variables that influence the relevant market size, for example trade barriers.
In the structure-conduct-performance paradigm in the IO literature, it
was customary to take markup information directly from company accounts.
Nickell (1996) is a recent example treating the Lerner index as directly observable and Tybout and Westbrook (1995) is a comparable example from
the trade literature. Genesove and Mullin (1998) uses such information to
evaluate the demand-side approach to recover price-cost margins.
As an alternative, De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) propose a methodology to recover the firm-specific price-cost margin (µ ≡ P/M C), as the
ratio of the physical output elasticity a firm faces when changing a variable
input, say material inputs and intermediates (M ), and the corresponding

24

revenue share of that input, i.e.
µ≡

P
MC

=

θM
,
sM

(3)

ln Q
WM 8
with θM ≡ ∂∂ ln
M and sM = P Q . If output prices are directly observed,
this approach generates estimates of marginal costs as well.

The intuition is as follows. Holding other inputs constant, a competitive
firm will expand its use of input M until the revenue share of M equals
the output elasticity, which is naturally declining in M . If a firm does not
increase M all the way until equality holds, but prefers to produce a lower
quantity and raise the output price instead, it indicates the firm is able to
exercise market power and charge a price above marginal cost.
Importantly, deviations from perfect competition complicate the identification and estimation of the production technology in the absence of
firm-specific output price information. Using deflated revenue rather than
then actual output level as dependent variable in the production function
inflates the output elasticities. Klette and Griliches (1996) and De Loecker
(2011) show how a demand assumption can be used to recover the underlying production function parameters.
Recent work has used data on prices to estimate physical production
functions, see Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008). De Loecker et al.
(2012) further show that an analogue problem arises on the input side. If
firms produce differentiated products they are likely to rely on differentiated inputs as well, and therefore input prices will also vary across producers. They propose a methodology to estimate (multi-product) physical
production function where input price variation, conditional on geography and exogenous factors, stems from quality variation across products
and producers.
The production approach has its own limitations, of course. The main
one is the need to flexibly identify the shape of technology. In the CobbDouglas case, all variation in input shares are interpreted as market power,
which would be unreasonable. On the positive side, there has been a tremendous amount of work on the estimation of production functions in a wide
range of industries and countries. The output elasticity estimates can be
subjected to a wide range of robustness checks varying the model specifi8

Note that the sum of revenue shares over all inputs will not sum to one if a firm has
market power as total revenue (P Q) will exceed total cost.

25

cation and estimation procedure. Results from the demand-side approach
can in principle be subjected to a similar robustness analysis by varying the
mode of competition and the functional form of demand, but there is a tendency in the empirical IO literature to stick with the static Nash in prices
model and a linear random utility specification.
In recent work De Loecker and Scott (2015) compare markups obtained
from the production and demand approach for the US beer industry. Both
approaches yield very similar average markups for different brewers. It
suggests one can rely on either the demand or production approach, depending on the data availability and the particular research question.

5.2

Effect of trade on productivity and market power

Some studies have investigated the impact of trade liberalization—tariff
reductions—on domestic market power. Examples of such analysis are De
Loecker et al. (2012) for India, Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, Wang, and Zhang
(2014) for China, and De Loecker, Fuss, and Van Biesebroeck (2014) for Belgium. In the latter application, not only tariff changes are exploited as exogenous changes in the extent of foreign competition, but also the proximity to the border interacted with relative wage evolutions between Belgium
and its neighbors.
Some studies have looked at the price-cost margins of exporters in both
the cross section and in the time series, see for example De Loecker and
Warzynski (2012) and Garcia Marin and Voigtländer (2013). From a reduced form regression to describe the equilibrium relationship between
markups and a firm’s export status they conclude that exporters tend to
have higher markups and that markups increase following export market
entry. The challenge in this literature is to identify the mechanism and the
causality behind this correlation. Export entry is clearly not an exogenous
event and additional structure is needed for causal inference, such as an export selection equation in Van Biesebroeck (2005) or a matching algorithm
in De Loecker (2007).
To get at the causal effect of international competition on firm performance, De Loecker et al. (2012) study the impact of the extensive and
unexpected trade reforms in India on markups, marginal cost and prices.
They do not use productivity itself as a dependent variable, but note that
marginal cost will combine the effect of production efficiency and input
26

prices. They run separate regressions for all three dependent variables and
follow Amiti and Konings (2007) allowing for separate effects from tariffs
on final products (output tariffs, τ O ) and tariffs on inputs (input tariffs,
τ I ). Brandt et al. (2014) perform a similar analysis investigating the impact
of Chinese tariff reductions around the time of WTO entry. Due to data
limitations, they use markups and productivity at the firm rather than the
product level and prices at the sector level.
The price regression does not contain any estimated variables and both
studies find that output prices decline with tariffs. At the same time, De
Loecker et al. (2012) find a very strong relationship between input tariffs
and marginal costs. Naturally, as input prices fall, this has a direct downward impact on firms’ marginal cost of production.
The same input tariff decline also impacts markups. All things equal, it
is found to raise markups, indicating that cost savings are not fully passed
on to consumers in the form of lower final product prices. In the case of
China, this effect is only present for younger firms, not for (mostly stateowned) incumbents. The approach taken in these studies underscores the
benefits of not committing to a particular demand system and a mode of
competition. One can relate markups to the exogenous change in trade protection in a flexible way, and verify whether this affected the competitive
pressure faced by domestic producers.9

5.3
5.3.1

Extensions based on the pass-through literature
Generalizing the markup formula

The identification of the firm’s price-cost margin in equation (3) is related
to the way the pass-through literature exploits imperfect price adjustments
to infer market power and the (residual) demand elasticity. In some situations researchers have access to marginal cost information or to a large
component of it. For example, the wholesale price of a gasoline is a good
proxy for a gasoline station’s marginal cost. Observing that a firm does not
adjust the retail price in line with the wholesale price is an indication of
potential market power.
9
In fact with long enough panels we can in theory evaluate this for an individual producer, or at least for a narrow subset of producers. For example, Brandt et al. (2014) find a
differential impact of the same foreign competition shock on incumbents and more recently
entered firms.

27

We now make the relationship between these two approaches more explicit. In particular, we illustrate that the market power formula used in the
production approach can be derived from the standard practice in the passthrough literature. In the process we derive a formula to estimate markups
that generalizes De Loecker and Warzynski (2012).
Under constant returns to scale, Verboven (2012) characterizes the passthrough rate as
ρ =

dP
W
.
=
dM C
sM

(4)

ln P
It is the ratio of the input price elasticity W = ∂∂ ln
W to the share of total
WM
expenditure on input M in total revenue P Q . Under variable return to
scale, the expression generalizes to

W 1
sM M

ρ =

(5)

with M the input demand with respect to output, i.e. the percentage in∗
crease in the input demand for each percentage increase in output ∂∂lnlnMQ .
We can rewrite expression (5) as
ρ
=
W

dP
dM C
∂ ln P
∂ ln W

=

∂ ln Q
∂ ln M

sM

,

which reveals the same right-hand side as in equation (3).10 Finally, using
the pass-through coefficient ρ we can write the markup as follows11
µ =

∂ ln Q ∂ ln M C
∂ ln M ∂ ln W

sM

.

(6)

The additional term in the numerator reflects that the elasticity of the marginal
costs with respect to the input price can differ from unity. It generalizes
equation (3) to situations where the input price varies with input use, for
example due the market power a firm has on its input markets or due to
nonlinear input prices such as bulk discounting.12
10

When equation (3) is used in practice, the input share is adjusted for idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
11
dP
∂P
C
ln P
We use that ρ = dM
= ∂W
/ ∂M
= ∂∂ ln
∗ MPC / ∂∂lnlnMWC
C
∂W
W
12
See also Appendix D in De Loecker et al. (2012).

28

5.3.2

Interpreting two-step productivity regressions

The pass-through literature has developed independently from the production-side approach to measuring market power. While the two literatures
tend to ask different questions and rely on different data sources, they are
both influenced by the same underlying mechanism how variation in the
cost of production (including variation in efficiency) shows up in variation
in output prices. As production functions are usually estimated using deflated sales and deflated input expenditures, a regression that uses total
factor productivity (TFP) as dependent variable will only in special cases
recover the impact on firm-level efficiency.
To illustrate this, we start from the production function in (7), where
q denotes output and x denotes the vector of inputs, x = {l, m, k} labor,
intermediate inputs and capital, respectively and productivity (ω), and β is
the vector of output elasticities. We rewrite the production function
qit =

X

(7)

βx xit + ωit ,

x

to reflect the practice of using deflated variables in empirical work. The
price variable pit is defined as the difference between the firm-level price
and the average price for the industry at time t. In revenue terms, the production function becomes:
qit + pit =
| {z }
q̃it

X
x

x
βx (xit + wit
) + ωit + pit −

|

{z

x̃it

X

x
βx wit

(8)

x

}
|

{z

T F Pit

}

where wx denotes the similarly deflated input price of input x. Lower case
variables indicate logarithms, except for T F P which represents productivity in logarithms, as usual. For simplicity, we limit ourselves to the constant
P
returns to scale case, i.e. x βx = 1.
As an example, consider a regression that attempts to identify the impact of trade liberalization (measured through lower tariffs (τ ), on productivity. Using ∆ to denote the year-on-year change for firm i, ∆x =
xit − xit−1 , we can specify
∆p = γ0 + γ1 ∆wx + p
ω

∆T F P = α0 + α1 ∆τ +  .

29

(9)
(10)

To focus on the particular mechanism of interest consider a local industry using imported inputs. An example would be a local construction
industry that relies on imported steel. Let the industry only be subject to an
input tariff reduction, which directly translates into an equal change in the
input price of materials, such that ∆τ = ∆wM . Our interest is in the interpretation of the coefficient on the input tariff in the productivity regression:
α1 =

∂E(T F P )
.
∂τ

(11)

In the trade literature this parameter is supposed to measure the productivity effects of a tariff reduction.13 However, under the assumptions
above the estimate α̂1 equals:
∂E(∆ω) ∂E(∆p)
+
− βM .
(12)
∂∆τ
∂∆wM
We can write the difference between the estimate and the true efficiency
effect in terms of the pass-through parameter ρ̃, introduced above,14 as follows:
∂E(∆ω)
α̂1 −
= ρ̃ × sM − βM .
(13)
∂∆τ
α̂1 =

The extent to which we get a biased estimate of the efficiency response
varies by the extent of market power a firm has. Under perfect competition,
ρ̃ = 1 and sM = βM such that the right-hand side is zero and α̂1 correctly
identifies the efficiency effect. Under monopolistic competition and CES
demand it holds that ρ̃ = 1 and βM = sM µ̄, with µ̄ the constant markup.
As a result, the bias equals sM (1 − µ̄) < 0 and α̂1 underestimates the true
efficiency effect. In an oligopolistic industry with downward sloping demand, ρ̃ 6= 1 and βM = sM µ, such that there will be a bias but it cannot be
signed in general.
Using the same equation (10) in a different situation where inputs are
sourced locally, but ∆τ represents a reduction in the output tariff, the estimated response in the productivity regression amounts to:
α̂1 =

∂E(∆ω) ∂E(∆p)
+
.
∂∆τ O
∂∆τ O

(14)

13
See De Loecker (2011) for more details on this so-called two-stage approach in the productivity literature and Pavcnik (2002) for a well-known example.
14
Note that in equation (4) ρ is defined in absolute terms—the change in price with
marginal costs—while we here use the log-change or percentage pass-through ρ̃ (recall that
in our notation p = ln P ).

30

The second term is now a competition effect. As output tariffs fall, all things
equal, domestic firms face a lower residual demand. They might adjust
to this different situation by taking actions to raise their efficiency level,
which will be captured by the first term, but this is likely to take some time.
If firms have any market power they will also adjust their prices. Effects
from equation (9) will thus spillover on the estimates in equation (10). The
extent of price adjustment will depend on the nature of competition and on
the substitutability between foreign and domestic products, as analyzed in
the demand-side literature.
While these effects are illustrated under a variety of simplifying assumptions, the result is general. The estimated effect of increased globalization on productivity will in general be a combination of an actual efficiency response,15 imperfect pass-through of cost changes in prices, and an
impact of competition on output prices.
The setting we used to discuss the different effects is not the dominant
one in the trade literature. Traditionally, the impact of trade liberalization
on TFP is mainly viewed as efficiency-enhancing, for example leading to
a reduction in X-inefficiency. Implicitly, the first terms in equations (12)
and (14) are considered the most important. If all markets were perfectly
competitive, this would be warranted, but absent that assumption there is
little direct evidence for a strong efficiency impact.

6

Concluding remarks

In this chapter we highlighted that standard measures of productivity capture not only physical efficiency, but also market power, and variation in
output and input prices. As this conflation of effects is largely driven by
data constraints which are not likely to be resolved any time soon, we need
to study issues like the impact of trade liberalization in a coherent framework that allows for both efficiency and price (be it output or input) responses to increased competition.
This chapter has presented a somewhat different view on what has been
a long and heavily researched topic in applied economics. Rather than re15

In principle this includes both changes in X-inefficiency and the result of investments
in new technology and better products, but the latter channels further complicate the identification and estimation of productivity—see Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) and De Loecker
(2013) for endogenous productivity processes.

31

viewing the many studies that regress revenue-based measures of TFP on
trade policy or trade intensity variables, we discussed how common empirical approaches in the Industrial Organization literature (on demand estimation and entry) and theoretical models in International Trade can inform
empirical researchers on trade-induced firm-level changes that are likely to
end up in measured productivity. We also discussed a recently developed
framework to estimate markups (and its components marginal cost and
productivity) from micro production data; and how in particular it can be
used to study the impact of increased competition on firm performance,
and thus productivity.
Future research can, and we feel should, further explore the relationship
among the various measures of firm performance in one integrated and
internally consistent framework. The access to micro data covering a panel
of producers across a variety of industries and countries paired with recent
advances in the estimation of production functions and market power can
help accomplish this.
More specifically, a first important avenue for future work would be to
study the role of imported intermediate inputs or the location of economic
activity (i.e. firm entry) as alternative ways in which international competition affects the domestic economy. Some work is already proceeding in this
area, but the interaction between efficiency and market power tends to be
ignored. This is problematic as firms can use higher quality (imported) inputs or favorable locations to differentiate themselves and increase or gain
market power.
Endogenous productivity responses to trade liberalization in the context of imperfectly competitive product and input markets is another topic
that is currently under-researched. Several studies measure the size of the
effect on productivity, but identifying the firm responses that accomplish
the measured change are equally important. Here again, the distinction
between changes in prices and efficiency as alternative ways to improve
price-cost margins is highly relevant.
In the last section we highlighted the potential biases or difficulty in
interpreting point estimates when one regresses revenue-based measures
of productivity on policy variables, such as tariffs. The first two methods, starting from the demand side or the extensive margin, aim to recover
marginal costs directly. Relating these cost estimates to policy variables
avoids conflating efficiency effects of international competition with price
32

effects. Katayama, Lu, and Tybout (2009) highlight that these cost estimates
are quite different from productivity, but it would be useful as well to know
how they have responded to exogenous changes in competition, such as
following trade liberalizations.
A final research avenue we believe to be promising is to study the distinction between local and global competition. Researchers have often used
tariff changes or measures of FDI as exogenous and directly observable
indications of a change in the strength of competition that firms face. It
leaves open the question whether domestic or international competition
has similar effects. Perhaps competition is highly localized and increasing the geographical distance from other firms gradually reduces competitive pressure. However, it is also possible that competition is disrupted by
administrative barriers, such as national borders or free trade zones, and
competitive effects change discretely at that point. Whether the effect of
distance grows continuously or discretely, it is even unclear whether it is
the distance from consumers to the location of production or to the location
of firm headquarters or sales offices that matters most.
We like to end with the observation that market definition has received
less attention that it deserves in the context of international competition.
In many cases, the statistical classification that comes with the data, as developed by statistical agencies also determines the market definition used.
Such ad hoc classification of industries become even more problematic when
the importance of market power is considered explicitly. The production
approach does not suffer from such a data constraint, but instead requires
one to group firms based on similarities in production technology; very
much like the demand approach requires to group the set of products considered part of the relevant market.

33

References
Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007). Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs and productivity: Evidence from Indonesia. American Economic
Review 97(5), 1611–1638.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2015).
The elusive pro-competitive effects of trade. NBER Working Paper
No. 21370, www.nber.org/papers/w21370.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012). New trade
models, same old gains? American Economic Review 102(1), 94–130.
Aw, B. Y., M. J. Roberts, and D. Y. Xu (2011). R&D investment, exporting,
and productivity dynamics. American Economic Review 101(4), 1312–
44.
Berry, S. (1994). Estimating discrete choice models of product differentiation. RAND Journal of Economics 25(2), 242–262.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995). Automobile prices in market
equilibrium. Econometrica 63(4), 841–890.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1999). Voluntary export restraints
on automobiles: Evaluating a strategic trade policy. American Economic Review 89(3), 400–430.
Berry, S. T. and J. Waldfogel (1999). Free entry and social inefficiency in
radio broadcasting. RAND Journal of Economics 30(3), 397–420.
Brambilla, I. (2005). A Customs Union with multinational firms: The automobile market in Argentina and Brazil. NBER Working Paper No.
11745, www.nber.org/papers/w11745.
Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, L. Wang, and Y. Zhang
(2014). The impact of entry into WTO on Chinese enterprise productivity. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9166,
www.cepr.org/active/publications/discussion papers/dp.php?
dpno=9166.
Bresnahan, T. F. (1987). Competition and collusion in the American automobile oligopoly: The 1955 price war. Journal of Industrial Economics 35(4), 457–482.
Bresnahan, T. F. and P. C. Reiss (1990). Entry and competition in concentrated markets. Review of Economic Studies 57(4), 531–553.
34

Bresnahan, T. F. and P. C. Reiss (1991). Entry and competition in concentrated markets. Journal of Political Economy 99(5), 977–1009.
Collard-Wexler, A. and J. De Loecker (2015). Reallocation and technology: Evidence from the us steel industry. American Economic Review 105(1), 131–171.
Corts, K. S. (1999). Conduct parameters and the measurement of market
power. Journal of Econometrics 88, 227–250.
De Loecker, J. (2007). Do exports generate higher productivity? Evidence
from Slovenia. Journal of International Economics 73(1), 69–98.
De Loecker, J. (2011). Product differentiation, multiproduct firms, and
estimating the impact of trade liberalization on productivity. Econometrica 79(5), 1407–1451.
De Loecker, J. (2013). Detecting learning by exporting. American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics 5(3), 1–21.
De Loecker, J., C. Fuss, and J. Van Biesebroeck (2014). International competition and firm performance: Evidence from
Belgium. National Bank of Belgium Working Paper No. 269,
www.nbb.be/doc/ts/publications/wp/wp269en.pdf.
De Loecker, J. and P. K. Goldberg (2014). Firm performance in a global
market. Annual Review of Economics 6(1), 201–227.
De Loecker, J., P. K. Goldberg, A. K. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik (2012).
Prices, markups and trade reform. NBER Working Paper No. 17925,
www.nber.org/papers/w17925.
De Loecker, J. and P. T. Scott (2015). Estimating market power. Evidence
from the US beer industry. mimeo.
De Loecker, J. and F. Warzynski (2012). Markups and firm-level export
status. American Economic Review 102(6), 2437–2471.
Eckel, C. and J. P. Neary (2010). Multi-product firms and flexible manufacturing in the global economy. Review of Economic Studies 77(1),
188–217.
Edmond, C., V. Midrigan, and D. Y. Xu (2015). Competition, markups,
and the gains from international trade. American Economic Review (forthcoming), www.nber.org/papers/w18041.pdf.

35

Eizenberg, A. (2014). Upstream innovation and product variety in the
U.S. home PC market. Review of Economic Studies 81(3), 1003–1045.
Eslava, M., J. Haltiwanger, A. Kugler, and M. Kugler (2004). The effects of structural reforms on productivity and profitability enhancing reallocation: Evidence from Colombia. Journal of Development Economics 75, 333–371.
Fehrstman, C. and N. Gandal (1998). The effect of the Arab boycott on
Israel: The automobile market. RAND Journal of Economics 29(1), 193–
214.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008). Reallocation, firm
turnover, and efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability?
American Economic Review 98(1), 394–425.
Friberg, R. and M. Ganslandt (2006). An empirical assessment of the
welfare effects of reciprocal dumping. Journal of International Economics 70(1), 1–24.
Gao, H., J. Van Biesebroeck, and F. Verboven (2014). Strategic
trade
liberalization.
KU
Leuven
Working
Paper,
https://feb.kuleuven.be/userpagecv/u0073463/STL.pdf.
Garcia Marin, A. and N. Voigtländer (2013). Exporting and plant-level
efficiency gains: It’s in the measure. NBER Working Paper No. 19033,
www.nber.org/papers/w19033.
Genesove, D. and W. P. Mullin (1998). Testing static oligopoly models:
Conduct and cost in the sugar industry, 1890-1914. RAND Journal of
Economics 29(2), 355–377.
Goettler, R. L. and B. R. Gordon (2011). Does AMD spur Intel to innovate
more? Journal of Political Economy 119(6), 1141–1200.
Goldberg, P. K. (1995). Product differentiation and oligopoly in international markets: The case of the U.S. automobile industry. Econometrica 63(4), 891–951.
Goldberg, P. K. and M. M. Knetter (1997). Goods prices and exchange
rates: What have we learned? Journal of Economic Literature 35(3),
1243–1272.
Goldberg, P. K. and F. Verboven (2001). The evolution of price dispersion
in the European car market. Review of Economic Studies 68(4), 811–48.

36

Hashmi, A. R. and J. Van Biesebroeck (2014). The relationship between
market structure and innovation in industry equilibrium: A case
study of the global automobile industry. Review of Economics and
Statistics (forthcoming), .
Holmes, T. J. and J. A. Schmitz (2001). Competition at work: Railroads
vs. monopoly in the U.S. shipping industry. Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis Quarterly Review 25(2), 3–29.
Holmes, T. J. and J. A. Schmitz (2010). Competition and productivity: A
review of evidence. Annual Review of Economics 2, 619–642.
Irwin, D. A. and N. Pavcnik (2004). Airbus versus Boeing revisited: International competition in the aircraft market. Journal of International
Economics 64(2), 223–245.
Katayama, H., S. Lu, and J. R. Tybout (2009). Firm-level productivity
studies: Illusions and a solution. International Journal of Industrial Organization 27(3), 403–413.
Khandelwal, A. (2010). The long and short (of) quality ladders. Review of
Economic Studies 77(4), 1450–1476.
Kitano, T. and H. Ohashi (2009). Did US safeguards resuscitate HarleyDavidson in the 1980s? Journal of International Economics 79(2), 189–
197.
Klette, T. J. and Z. Griliches (1996). The inconsistency of common scale
estimators when output prices are unobserved and endogenous.
Journal of Applied Econometrics 11(4), 343–361.
Konings, J. and H. Vandenbussche (2008). Heterogeneous responses of
firms to trade protection. Journal of International Economics 76(2), 371–
383.
Krugman, P. R. (1979). Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and
international trade. Journal of international Economics 9(4), 469–479.
Lileeva, A. and D. Trefler (2010). Improved access to foreign markets
raises plant-level productivity ... for some plants. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125(3), 1051–1099.
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations
and aggregate industry productivity. Econometrica 71(6), 1695–1725.
Melitz, M. J. and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2008). Market size, trade, and productivity. Review of Economic Studies 75(1), 295–316.
37

Nickell, S. J. (1996). Competition and Corporate Performance. Journal of
Political Economy 104(4), 724–746.
Park, M. and H. Rhee (2014). Effects of FTA provisions on the market
structure of the Korean automobile industry. Review of Industrial Organization 45(1), 39–58.
Pavcnik, N. (2002). Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvement: Evidence from Chilean plants. Review of Economic Studies 69(1),
245–276.
Reynaert, M. and F. Verboven (2014). Improving the performance of random coefficients demand models: The role of optimal instruments.
Journal of Econometrics 179(1), 83–98.
Salvo, A. (2010). Inferring market power under the threat of entry:
The case of the Brazilian cement industry. RAND Journal of Economics 41(2), 326–350.
Schaumans, C. and F. Verboven (2015). Entry and competition in differentiated products markets. Review of Economics and Statistics 97(1),
195–209.
Sheu, G. (2014). Price, quality, and variety: Measuring the gains from
trade in differentiated products. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 6(4), 66–89.
Syverson, C. (2004). Market structure and productivity: A concrete example. Journal of Political Economy 112(6), 1181–1222.
Thomas, C. (2011). Too many products: Decentralized decision making in multinational firms. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3(1), 280–306.
Tovar, J. (2012). Consumers welfare and trade liberalization: Evidence
from the car industry in Colombia. World Development 40(4), 808–820.
Tybout, J. R. and M. D. Westbrook (1995). Trade liberalization and the dimensions of efficiency change in Mexican manufacturing industries.
Journal of International Economics 39, 53–78.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2005). Exporting raises productivity in sub-Saharan
African manufacturing firms. Journal of International Economics 67(2),
373–391.
Verboven, F. (2012). Competition Analysis – Models and Tools.
https://sites.google.com/site/frankverbo/manuscript.
38

