                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM STOCK PRICE REACTIONS TO CHINA’S FIRST
             ANNOUNCEMENT OF ANTI-CORRUPTION REFORMS?

                                           Chen Lin
                                         Randall Morck
                                         Bernard Yeung
                                         Xiaofeng Zhao

                                      Working Paper 22001
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22001


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2016




We are grateful for comments from Sumit Agarwal, Philip H. Dybvig, Raymond Fisman,
Hanming Fang, Ali Hortaçsu, Yongmiao Hong, James Levinsohn, Hongbin Li, and Yingyi Qian.
We also appreciate the comments from the seminar participants at the National Bureau of
Economic Research (NBER) May 2015 Chinese Economy Workshop, the ABFER 2016, the 2nd
China-Europe Conference: Transparency, Economic Institutions and Governance, and The 2016
Greater China Area Finance Conference. We would like to thank researchers from The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Columbia University, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Hong Kong
Monetary Authority, National University of Singapore (NUS) Business School, Lingnan
University, the University of British Columbia, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA)
Anderson School of Management, the University of Chicago, the University of Maryland, and the
University of Philadelphia. Randall Morck would like to thank the Bank of Canada for partial
funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Chen Lin, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung, and Xiaofeng Zhao. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What do we learn from stock price reactions to China’s first announcement of anti-corruption
reforms?
Chen Lin, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung, and Xiaofeng Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 22001
February 2016, Revised August 2020
JEL No. D70,G34,G38,P2

                                          ABSTRACT

China’s markets gained 3.86% around December 4, 2012, when the Party announced anti-
corruption reforms. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) with higher past entertainment and travel
costs (ETC) gained more. NonSOEs gained in more liberalized provinces, especially those with
high past ETC, productivity, growth opportunities, and external financing. NonSOEs lost in the
least liberalized provinces, especially those with high past ETC. These findings support investors’
expect reduced official corruption to create value overall, reduce SOE waste, lower bureaucratic
barriers to efficient resource allocation where markets function, and impede business in
unliberalized provinces, where “getting things done” still requires investment in greasing
bureaucratic gears.

Chen Lin                                         Bernard Yeung
Faculty of Business and Economics                National University of Singapore
The University of Hong Kong                      Mochtar Riady Building
Hong Kong                                        15 Kent Ridge Drive
chenlin1@hku.hk                                  BIZ 1, Level 6, #6-19
                                                 Singapore
Randall Morck                                    bizyeung@nus.edu.sg
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta                            Xiaofeng Zhao
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6                             Lingnan University
CANADA                                           8 Castle Peak Road, Tuen Mun, HK
and NBER                                         x4zhao@ln.edu.hk
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
1.      Introduction

Curtailing official corruption is a public policy priority in China and elsewhere (World Bank,
2015). Corruption is thought to slow long-term economic growth (Krueger, 1974; Murphy et al.,
1993; Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; Mauro, 1995; Fisman and Svensson, 2007; Ayyagari et al., 2014).
Corrupt officials’ diversion of resources into private benefits for themselves, their families, or
members of their patronage networks causes allocative inefficiency within the state sector,
including in state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Corrupt officials’ “tolls,” the artificial legal,
regulatory, and licensing barriers explicitly designed to be waived in return for bribes, result in
allocative inefficiency in the broader economy. Curtailing corruption can lower tolls so that firms
can better respond to market forces, which can then better allocate resources to their highest-value
uses.

        However, curbing corruption may not boost economic growth immediately. If the
institutions that support market forces are ill-developed, firms’ access to business opportunities
can require investment in official connections—that is, bribing officials to grease jammed
bureaucratic gears to “get things done” (Fisman, 2001; Wei, 2001; McMillan and Woodruff, 2002;
Li et al., 2008, Agarwal et al., 2019; Zeume, 2016). Such investments generate returns in the form
of political rents, additional cash flows connected to firms that can “get things done” that
unconnected firms cannot (Krueger 1974). Pervasive corruption can emerge as a second-best
suboptimal equilibrium, stabilized by connected firms protecting the values of their connections
and officials protecting their streams of private benefits. Although this situation can be profoundly
suboptimal (Murphy et al., 1991, 1993), disturbing it necessarily reduces the values of firms’
previous investments in official connections. Indeed, where markets are dysfunctional and
bureaucrats allocate resources, eliminating corruption might slow economic growth by jamming
bureaucratic gears.

        The level of market development thus determines the economic impact of curtailing
corruption. This relationship highlights the need to liberalize markets before, or in conjunction
with, reducing corruption. We empirically explore how prior market liberalization affects the
impact of reducing corruption using event study tests exploiting a natural experiment in China.

        On December 4, 2012, China’s new administration announced a comprehensive anti-


                                                 1
corruption campaign, the Eight-Point Policy. This new Party Policy ordered cadres to forego
conspicuous perks and other obtrusive behavior and explicitly forbade officials and state-owned
enterprise (SOE) top executives, who are all Party cadres, from demanding or accepting
extravagant perks. A prominent member of the State Council–directed Chinese Academy of
Governance, a key institution for training senior and mid-level officials, spelled out the policy’s
intent: “The Politburo took the lead to change work style, it will play a critical role in fighting
corruption at the root.”1

          This policy was unexpected. First, although Xi Jinping had been appointed to succeed the
outgoing Hu Jintao in the 18th National Congress (November 8 to 14, 2012), the distribution of
power across Party factions still appeared to be unsettled. The announcement of a major new Party
Policy only 20 days into a new term was unprecedented. New administrations typically roll out
new policies a year into their terms, in their Central Committees’ Third Plenums, after the
distribution of power across factions is settled and political consensus is attained. Second, the
policy is unusually detailed and free of sloganeering, characteristics interpreted as evidence that
the reforms were genuine. This impression was reinforced when the policy was quickly given
prominence on Party websites and in re-training sessions for cadres. All this suggests investors
would have considered the Eight-Point Policy a genuine anti-corruption initiative.

          The validity of an event study depends on the information content of stock price
movements. In these years, the information environment in China’s stock markets had improved
substantially relative to the 1990s. Using 1995 to 2016 data, Carpenter et al. (2020) report that
“stock prices have become as informative about future profits in China as they are in the US since
2004.” Many credible studies now use Chinese stock prices, particularly event studies (e.g.,
Calomiris et al., 2010; Fisman and Wang 2015; Jia et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; Giannetti et al.,
2015). Our observation window also precedes the high market-volatility episodes of 2015 and
2016. Thus, our window is favorable for testing of information-driven share price movements.

          We find that the shares of the 81 mainland-based firms trading in Hong Kong (H shares)
rose significantly relative to all other Hong Kong listings, by 1.59% and 2.26% in 3- and 5-day
windows, respectively, around the December 4, 2012 announcement date. The portfolio of all


1
    See “Wang Yukai: Central government leads drive to root out corruption” Communist Party of China News Web,
    December 7, 2012.

                                                       2
2,260 firms listed on China’s two mainland exchanges, the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock
Exchanges, rose 2.77% and 3.86% in the same windows and correspond to economically
significant additions of ¥533 billion and ¥742 billion, respectively, to the total valuations of listed
businesses. These findings suggest that investors at the time viewed the Eight-Point Policy as
potentially real, not as empty propaganda or a disguised purge. As the reform evolved over time,
investors might have updated interpretations. However, our event study depends not on the long-
term effectiveness of the reform; it merely captures investors’ immediate expectations of what the
news signaled.

          To further examine the patterns of valuation changes, we focus on the much larger sample
of mainland firms. The stocks of firms located in more liberalized provinces gained more.2 Using
the National Economic Research Institute’s Marketization index (Fan et al. 2011) to measure the
extent of market reforms in each province, we find the portfolio of firms in high-Marketization
(top tercile) provinces gain 3.20% and 4.46% in 3- and 5-day windows, respectively, around
December 4, 2012. In contrast, firms in low-Marketization (bottom tercile) provinces post
insignificant gains of 0.54% and 0.98% in the same windows. This is consistent with investors’
expecting reduced corruption to create more value in up-and-running markets that could move
resources more efficiently once obstructive corrupt officials were out of the way and little or no
value where market forces could not replace bureaucratic resource allocation.

          China’s listed firms consist of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and other firms (nonSOEs).
SOEs in liberalized and unliberalized provinces gain similarly. However, nonSOEs in high-
Marketization provinces gain substantially (3.30% and 4.38% in the 3-day and 5-day windows),
and nonSOEs in low-Marketization provinces actually decline (-2.72% and -3.00%, respectively).
These differences make sense because the anti-corruption reform targeted “leading cadres,” which
includes top officials and SOE executives, but not top nonSOE executives. Reduced corruption
cutting waste at SOEs would boost SOE shares across the board. Reduced official corruption
would free nonSOEs of obstructive tolls where market forces can move resources; but stop
nonSOEs from greasing bureaucratic gears where bureaucrats still control key resources.



2
    We use the term province to refer to all province-level governments, which include 23 provinces, 4 province-level
    cities (Beijing, Chongqing, Shanghai, and Tianjin), and 5 autonomous regions (Inner Mongolia, Guangxi, Ningxia,
    Tibet, and Xinjiang).

                                                          3
          Firm-level regressions further reveal that nonSOEs located in more liberalized provinces
gain even more if the nonSOEs are more competitive (higher total factor productivity, TFP) or in
more dynamic (higher growth opportunities, Q) or more finance dependent (Rajan and Zingales,
1998) sectors. This accords with investors’ expecting reduced corruption to favor nonSOEs better
placed to benefit from market-driven resource allocation once bureaucratic tolls fall away. It also
accords with the reform boosting the relative performance of smaller firms (Giannetti et al., 2017)
and improving nonSOEs’ credit access (Li et al., 2017).3

          Chinese annual reports itemize entertainment and travel costs (ETC). A nonSOE’s past
ETC might include grease payments to corrupt officials to “get things done” where officials
allocate resources (Cai et al. 2011) and toll payments to get corrupt officials to step aside where
market forces can allocate resources. Morck and Nakamura (1999) interpret the analogous item in
Japanese annual reports as proxying for corporate insiders’ private benefits, part of which might
be economically efficient non-monetary compensation. Positing a firm’s ETC to be a proxy for an
unknown mix of all the above allows inferences about the importance of each form of ETC to
different firms in different institutional environments.

          Firm-level regressions show nonSOEs with higher prior ETC losing if located in the least
liberalized provinces and gaining if located elsewhere. These results accord with investors’
expecting reduced corruption to impede nonSOEs’ essential grease payments in the least
liberalized provinces and protect nonSOEs from obstructive officials’ tolls elsewhere. This
suggests nonSOEs’ ETC is more predominantly grease payments in the least liberalized provinces
and more predominantly toll payments elsewhere.

          In contrast, SOEs with higher prior ETC gain regardless of location, consistent with
investors viewing their ETC as capturing corporate insiders’ private benefits, whose curtailment
boosts valuations. However, this ETC-related boost is smaller for SOEs in more liberalized
provinces, which follows if investors interpreted higher ETC as also indicating a worse-governed
SOE, more apt to flounder amid stiffer competition, or as greater-nonmonetary compensation to
SOE top executives, more apt to move to dynamic nonSOEs in those provinces.

          We conclude that investors expected reduced corruption to create value overall in SOEs


3
    SOEs have access to SOE bank loans (Cull and Xu, 2003; Allen et al., 2005) and government concessions (Xu,
    2011), which nonSOEs generally lack.

                                                       4
and nonSOEs, but to create more value in nonSOEs where free-market reforms are further
advanced and destroy value in nonSOEs where bureaucrats alone still allocate key resources.
These findings suggest that policymakers contemplating anti-corruption reforms might enact free-
market reforms first.

       Our findings survive a battery of robustness checks. Additional tests that explore
alternative explanations of these findings all support the interpretation above. Investors might have
expected market reforms to be correlated with other reforms (e.g., enforcement effectiveness) or
province characteristics (e.g., high-quality government, culture, history, education, or foreign
influence) that could also complement anti-corruption reforms. We can reject many such
alternatives (e.g., enforcement effectiveness), but others always remain. We, therefore,
acknowledge that our conclusions, more broadly interpreted, might suggest that investors expect
reduced corruption to add more to firm valuations probably by limiting connection-driven state
intervention and improving resource allocation where market reforms, or other dimensions of
development associated with market reforms, are more advanced and that where those
preconditions are not met, reducing corruption can be expected to raise the cost of doing business.
We welcome further research to explore these distinctions.

2.     Background and Event Description

Since 1978, when market reforms ended state control over most prices, wages, and production
levels, markets have assumed ever greater importance. However, market reforms remain
incomplete and their operation remains subject to Party Policy (Morck and Yeung 2018) and to
different degrees of legal and regulatory control in different provinces (Fan et al., 2011).

2.1    Growing Concern about Corruption in China

China’s system of Market Socialism with Chinese Characteristics relies heavily on the discretion
of Party cadres. The constitution of the People’s Republic of China enshrines a Leading Role for
the Communist Party of China, which gives Party Policy constitutional precedence over all laws
and regulations. The precedence of Policy over laws and regulations empowers Party cadres to
direct judicial verdicts and regulatory decisions to accord with Party Policy (Chen, 2003), which
gives leading cadres in government and in SOEs huge discretion in applying laws and regulations
and in allocating key resources and business opportunities.


                                                  5
         Thus, connections with a pivotal cadre open to corruption can be a high-return investment
(McGregor, 2010). Krueger (1974) calls such investments “political rent-seeking.” In China, the
political rents firms seek can be favors to boost profits (regulatory forbearances, tax breaks,
subsidies, and the like) or private benefits for top corporate insiders (personal favors, positions or
advancements for relatives or associates, and the like). An official supervising greater economic
activity, or exercising greater discretion, can grant favors worth more; and firms seeking those
favors can consequently offer bigger bribes.

         Chinese political rent-seeking is seldom overt, but rather occurs within networks of people
who have established connections, or guanxi. A connection develops after lavish entertainment
and other extravagant gestures between parties to the implicit contract. Exchanges involving favors
and/or money can then occur within these relationships of trust. From 1978, when Deng Xiaoping
launched multiple economic reforms, to 2012, China’s per capita GDP rose from US$156 to
US$6338 (both in 2017 US$). As China’s economy grew, cadres exercised undiminished
discretion over rapidly escalating economic activity, with correspondingly escalating returns to
political rent-seeking firms for firms and officials.

         Despite Party exhortations to cadres, official corruption had become a major issue in China
by the early 21st century. In 2012, Transparency International classified China as a “highly corrupt
country.” Figure 1 summarizes a 2013 PEW Research Centre National Survey of Chinese
respondents’ top concerns reported in Financial Times (November 8, 2013). Corrupt officials come
in second, behind only inflation, and are ahead of inequality, pollution, food safety, and old age
security. A Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (CCDI) official warned that “the
public’s trust in the Party and the government has fallen to a critical level” (Xinhua, November 20,
2012).

         China’s increasingly well-educated and cosmopolitan population appears to have accepted
the Communist Party’s political monopoly in return for delivering economic prosperity. Rising
corruption threatens this acceptance by creating blatant economic injustices that jar with
Communist egalitarian virtues taught in schools and by impeding continued rapid growth.
Sufficiently widespread corruption can slow growth if enough firms find investing in official
connections becomes more profitable than investing in productivity enhancement, so economy-


                                                  6
level growth can lag even as corporate profits climb (Murphy et al., 1991, 1993; Shleifer and
Vishny, 1993; Mauro, 1995; Svensson, 2005; Prichett and Summers, 2014).

          Widespread corruption, however, can form a stable suboptimal political economy
equilibrium that locks countries into a middle-income trap (Morck et al. 2005). Powerful officials
find anti-corruption reforms threatening to their personal interests, even if they recognize the
public good of such reforms. Corrupt officials who are owed favors rationally oppose reforms that
would prevent them from collecting what they deem their due. Corrupt officials who owe favors
rationally oppose reforms that would force them to find other ways of repaying their debts or risk
the consequences of failing to do so. Both fear that anti-corruption reforms would expose them to
whistle-blowing and punishment. All this builds inertia. A political shock to destabilize this
equilibrium then becomes a necessary precursor to effective reform.

2.2       Political Uncertainty in 2012

In 2012, as the end of the previous administration’s term approached, rival factions vied for power
and gain.4 Which faction would win was unclear. The Washington Post wrote that Xi Jinping
“disappeared mysteriously for 2 weeks. He went unseen, unheard, and undiscussed by official
Chinese media,” purportedly after being “hit in the back with a chair hurled during a contentious
meeting of the ‘red second generation.’”5 Regardless of the veracity of this particular report (the
Washington Post writer expressed doubts), whether Xi would emerge on top and what policies a
Xi administration would enact remained unclear.

          The Party’s 18th National Congress, from November 8 to 14, 2012, marked the official
transfer of power. On November 14, 2012, Xi assumed the titles of General Secretary of the
Communist Party and Chairman of the Party Central Military Commission. 6 However, at the
beginning of the National Congress, “former President Jiang Zemin and other party veterans


4
    One faction was allegedly led by Zhou Yongkang, then a member of the Standing Committee, the highest and most-
    powerful CPC committee. He might also have had backing from other established and powerful political grandees.
    Bo Xilai, like Xi Jinping, a politically ambitious princeling (son of a Mao-era revolutionary leader) backed by Zhou
    Yongkang, was dismissed as Chongqing’s Party Secretary on March 15, suspended from the CPC's Central
    Committee and its Politburo a month later, and expelled from the Party on September 28, 2012.
5
    See “The secret story behind Xi Jinping’s disappearance” by Max Fisher, Washington Post, November 1, 2012,
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2012/11/01/the-secret-story-behind-xi-jinpings-
    disappearance-finally-revealed/.
6
    Xi assumed the title of President in March 2013.

                                                            7
returned to centre stage…demonstrating their continued power to shape the country’s future”
(South China Morning Post, November 8, 2012). By the end of the National Congress on
November 14, Hu Jintao, the departing President of China and General Secretary of the Party,
called for deepening reforms to uphold Market Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and then
unexpectedly relinquished all his titles and positions (Telegraph, November 14, 2012). This
unprecedented act was thought to be setting an example for future departing leaders. On November
17, 2012, Hu and Xi jointly urged “the Chinese army to be absolutely loyal and to accomplish
historic missions” (Xinhua, November 17, 2012). On November 19, in a meeting with the Politburo,
Xi made a speech themed “firmly uphold and develop Socialism with Chinese Characteristics”
and urged the Politburo to “promote and implement the spirit of the 18th CPC National Congress,”
(Xinhua, November 20, 2012). No sign of a major policy change was yet evident.

2.3       The Eight-Point Policy

Xi began his anti-corruption campaign on December 4, 2012, with a Policy document by the
Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) entitled the “Eight-
Point Policy (八项规定). Each point is an explicit instruction about how leading cadres are to
behave going forward. The eight points are:7

      1. Leaders must keep in close contact with the grassroots, but without inspection tours or
          formality.
      2. Meetings and major events are to be strictly regulated and efficiently arranged; empty
          grand gestures are to be avoided.
      3. The issuance of official documents must be reduced.
      4. Overseas official visits and related formalities are to be restricted.
      5. Leaders traveling by car must avoid disrupting traffic.
      6. Media stories about official events are to be limited to events with real news value.
      7. Government leaders should not publish self-authored works or congratulatory letters.
      8. Leaders must practice thrift and strictly obey regulations regarding accommodation and
          cars.

          The inter-factional infighting before December 4, 2012, makes it highly likely that the


7
    For details, see http://cpcchina.chinadaily.com.cn/2012-12/05/content_15991171.htm.

                                                         8
Eight-Point Policy surprised investors. A preponderance of evidence also favors investors having
regarded the policy as a serious anti-corruption reform (Yuen, 2014; Giannetti et al., 2017; Li et
al., 2017). First, the announcement came only 20 days into the administration of President Xi
Jinping. This timing was unusual because it preceded the Third Plenum, the traditional forum for
announcing a new Politburo’s policy reforms, by roughly a year. Second, the statement is
unusually concrete in its details and free of slogans. Although it contains some familiar refrains,
the document mainly specifies detailed rules. Third, almost immediately after the initial
announcement, official elaborations made the new administration’s anti-corruption goal clear and
explained that the Eight-Point Policy was the first official policy of a sustained agenda.8

          Xi made cutting corruption his signature policy. Xi assigned a central role in the campaign
to Wang Qishan, who performed manual labor with Xi in Sha’anxi during the Cultural Revolution.
Wang is an experienced senior Party leader with a stellar vitae: Governor of China Construction
Bank (1994-7), Vice-Governor of Guangdong (1997-2002), Party Secretary of Hainan (2002-3),
Mayor of Beijing (2003-7), appointed to the 17th Politburo in 2007, Vice-Premier of the State
Council in charge of finance and economics in 2008, and a member of the CPC Standing
Committee, and the CCDI Secretary. Individual provinces quickly rolled out more detailed rules.
For example, Tibet Autonomous Region released its own Ten Rules on December 5, 2012,
itemizing how officials should reduce waste and extravagance and simplify official functions.

          To verify that the Eight-Point Policy was the only major national news story on or around
December 4, 2012, we use the news function in the WIND Information Database. We search
through a comprehensive collection of news from different sources, including the major financial
media in China, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), People’s Bank of China,
Ministry of Finance, and other government organizations, and covering different areas, such as
finance, business, government policy, law, and regulations. We augment this by searching major
news media and internet records. These exercises reveal no other major policy announcements and
confirm that the Eight-Point Policy was the only major news event in the window period.

          The Policy gained immediate and widespread attention. Panel A of Figure 2 graphs internet



8
    Some saw the policy as ordering corrupt cadres to be less ostentatious or as cover for a purge (Broadhurst and
    Wang, 2014). Consistent with this view, although each of the points can be interpreted as a directive limiting
    corruption, the word “corruption” actually appears in none.

                                                           9
searches using Baidu, the Chinese analog of Google, using the terms “Eight-Point Policy” (八项
规定) and “anti-corruption” (反腐), both normalized by the maximum of the former within the
window. The figure shows both search volumes rising sharply on Tuesday, December 4, the event
date, with “Eight-Point Policy” searches peaking two 2 days later (Thursday, December 6) and
“anti-corruption searches” peaking 3 days later (Friday, December 7).9

           Panel B plots search volumes for terms relating to possible confounding news: “economic
development” (经济发展), “economic growth” (经济增长), and “economic reform” (经济改革)
alongside “Eight-Point Policy” searches, with all four normalized by the latter’s maximum. The
numbers of searches for all three alternative news terms remain low, and magnifying them reveals
no evidence of other news-related economic policy changes in or near the event windows. We
return to these issues in Section 4, which presents additional robustness checks. The Eight-Point
Policy was the major standout event in this period.

           The Party’s subsequent actions also suggest that “the policy had teeth.” Xi Jinping
remarked at a plenary meeting of the CCDI in January 2013 (Xinhua, January 22, 2013) that the
administration should crack down on “tigers” and “flies” in rooting out corrupt politicians,
eliminating illegal activities, and curbing gift-giving and conspicuous consumption to change the
general behavior of officials and renew the Party. The CCDI subsequently launched a website on
which whistleblowers could report cadres’ violations of the policy.10 Other statistics reinforce the
veracity of the Party’s commitment to enforcing the Eight-Point Policy. Sales of cigarettes, alcohol,
shark fins, edible swallows, Gucci bags, and Ferraris all dropped abruptly in 2013 (Ke et al., 2016).

           The above discussion validates the feasibility of an event study of the December 4, 2012


9
     On November 20, 2012, searches for “anticorruption” increase slightly before the event day. This date corresponds
     to a Xinhua report on a CCDI submission to the 18 th National Congress about the need to eliminate corruption,
     mentioning that one of Xi’s close allies now headed the CCDI.
10
     In 2013, the CCDI reported having disciplined 182,000 officials for corruption or abuse of power and 30,420 cadres
     specifically for violating the Eight-Point Policy. Of the latter, 227 were province-level or higher. In 2014, a series
     of heavyweight cadres stood convicted of corruption. These included former Politburo member Zhou Yongkang,
     former Central Military Commission Vice-Chairman General Xu Caihou, People’s Liberation Army General and
     Logistics Department Deputy Leader Gu Junshan, and even retired President Hu Jintao’s Personal Secretary, Ling
     Jihua. While all this is consistent with a serious anticorruption effort, it could also be consistent with a political
     power struggle. In 2014, Premier Li Keqiang continued the pledge to fight corruption promising “zero tolerance to
     corrupt officials” and “to seriously punish any breach of the Eight-Point anti-bureaucracy and extravagance-busting
     guidelines          as        announced          by        the         central        authorities.”               See
     http://english.www.gov.cn/premier/news/2014/08/23/content_281474983008883.htm

                                                             10
announcement. The event date corresponds to no other confounding major news release of
potentially economically important news. Stock returns around the event, therefore, plausibly
reflect investors’ initial expectations about what the new Policy announcement signaled.



3.     Methods and Data

3.1    Advantages of the Event Study Methodology in This Context

Pervasive corruption both arises from and affects a country’s institutions, broadly interpreted to
include the mindsets and cultural norms of government officials, business leaders, and people in
general as well as laws and regulations. This feedback probably plays out over many years, making
identification challenging in firm-level or national income account data.

       An event study is useful in this situation. If investors interpreted the December 4, 2012
news as a genuine suppression of corruption from that date on, stock price changes around that
date reveal how investors at that time expected reduced corruption to affect different firms’
prospects. To the extent that investors enfolded the impact of this whole chain of future feedback
effects into their revisions of stock prices, the revisions are free of endogeneity bias.

       The standard caveat to all event studies applies. Much research shows investors can be
wrong, so the stock price changes we study must be interpreted as reflecting only changes in
investors’ expectations at the time, not how the future actually unfolds. We argued that the reform
was initially widely thought to herald a major crackdown on corruption. Even if it later became
something else, such as a tool for purging old guard cadres or punishing disloyalty, stock price
changes when news of the reform first became public can still reflect changes in investors’
expectations at that time. This caveat thus becomes an advantage in our tests.



3.2    Sample and Description of Key Variables

3.2.1 Sample

We begin with the population of all 2336 firms listed on China’s two mainland stock exchanges,
the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. Stock returns and financial data
are from the China Stock Market and Accounting Research (CSMAR) database. We manually

                                                  11
check whether there are corporate events in the 5-day event window surrounding December 4,
2012. We drop all firms with material corporate events, such as stock or cash dividends, stock
splits or reverse-splits, new share or debt issuances, and announcements regarding mergers,
restructurings, related-party transactions, or CEO turnover. This leaves 2,260 useable firms. Due
to missing data, our final sample for regressions has 2024 firms.

        In exploring how different stocks might react differently to the Eight-Point Policy
announcement, we consider their institutional environments (the extent of market reforms in their
provinces), status as an SOE or nonSOE; past spending associated with building official
connections; competitiveness, growth opportunities, and external finance dependence.

3.2.2 Extent of Market Reforms

Whether corrupt officials primarily obstruct market forces by charging firms tolls or by charging
firms for greasing bureaucratic gears to let firms “get things done” depends on the state of ambient
market institutions. Where market forces are up and running, bureaucratic resource allocation is
unnecessary, and bribes to corrupt officials are likely to be predominantly tolls that firms must pay
to get the officials out of the way. Where markets function poorly, bureaucratic resource allocation
is the only available method of accessing resources, which we call the second-best suboptimal
situation.

        In 2012, different provinces had implemented market reforms to different extents. More
liberalized provinces had moved farther away from administered wages and prices and the
command-and-control allocation of business opportunities. Their more developed market
institutions were more up to the task of allocating capital, labor, and goods. Firms in these
provinces thus could better rely on market forces to obtain resources. Regardless of the extent of
market reforms, China’s officials retained broad discretion in interpreting and implementing laws
and regulations. This discretion created opportunities for corrupt officials to block firms from
responding efficiently to market forces and to demand bribes for removing those blocks. Reducing
corruption in more liberalized provinces then amounts to removing corrupt officials’ tollbooths so
firms can respond toll-free to markets. Anti-corruption reforms would thus let firms better adapt
to changing market conditions, which would increase investors’ valuations of firms overall.

        Where market reforms were less far along, officials allocated critical resources and
“greasing” bureaucratic gears could be essential to access key resources. With utility-maximizing

                                                 12
officials preferring inaction to action (Wilson, 1989), ungreased bureaucratic gears could jam. In
this setting, reforms that impede bribe paying could actually make doing business harder, not easier.

       Of course, a province’s progress towards market reforms may well correlate with other
indicators of development, such as human capital or infrastructure development, which might
ultimately reflect the quality of its government. A province’s capacity to implement such reforms
might also turn on historical factors, such as its previous exposure to commerce, entrepreneurship,
and foreign ideas. We consider such alternative interpretations of our results below.

       To measure the extent of market reforms, we use the province-level Marketization index
produced by the National Economic Research Institute (NERI) (Fan et al., 2011). The
Marketization index is based on official statistics and enterprise and household surveys. The index
rises as the private sector shares of output, investment, and employment rise; price controls and
trade barriers fall; factor markets (labor, finance, and investment) are liberalized; and the legal
environment improves. The index is scaled to range from zero to ten in the base year 2001, with
higher scores indicating more progress toward a market economy. It can exceed ten or fall below
zero in subsequent years to reflect a province’s progress or retrogression over time. This index is
widely regarded as a meaningful measure of the progress of pro-market reforms (Wang et al., 2008;
Fan et al., 2011).

       Table I reports the 2011 Marketization index for each province. The five most
economically liberalized province-level economies are Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shanghai, Guangdong,
and Beijing; the least liberalized are Tibet, Qinghai, Gansu, Xinjiang, and Guizhou.



3.2.3 Firm Type: SOEs and nonSOEs

China has two broadly defined classes of listed firms, state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and non-
state-owned firms (nonSOEs). SOEs enjoy favorable official treatments, such as preferential
access to bank loans, which are the dominant form of financing in China (Cull and Xu, 2003; Allen
et al., 2005). Some SOEs have state-enforced monopolies in key sectors, including natural
resources, civil aviation, communications, and finance (Chen et al., 2011), or other government
concessions (Xu, 2011). The Party, via its human-resources arm, the Organization Department,
determines the careers of SOE top managers, who have formal and typically high ranks as both


                                                13
Party cadres and civil servants. Their career paths typically move them from one SOE to another
and in and out of government every 3 or 4 years, with moves to better positions depending on their
faithful implementation of Party Policy and directives, as well as on the performance of the SOE
or state organ under their charge (Wu et al., 2014; Deng et al., 2015).

       This arrangement has three implications. First, SOE top managers, as leading cadres and
civil servants, are directly subject to the Eight-Point Policy. Second, SOEs depend less than
nonSOEs on connections to “get things done” and are less vulnerable to toll extraction because
SOE top executives and the officials who regulate SOEs are all ultimately under the common and
control of the Party. Third, SOEs might well still spend money on connections, but this spending
is more apt to be designed to advance their top managers’ careers than to benefit their shareholders;
thus, it falls under the heading of private benefits.

       NonSOE top executives, in contrast, often have substantial equity ownership stakes in their
firms and have careers tied to their firms’ prospects (Conyon and Lerong, 2011). NonSOEs, not
intrinsically connected to the civil service, cannot rely on the Party’s command-and-control
mechanisms to align government officials’ interests with their own. Indeed, government officials
may even erect artificial regulatory barriers in the paths of nonSOEs as tollbooths to extract bribes
(Cull and Xu, 2005). Moreover, nonSOEs have less access than SOEs to state-owned bank loans,
capital markets (e.g., initial public offerings) (Cull and Xu, 2003; Allen et al., 2005; Firth et al.,
2009; Piotroski and Zhang, 2014), and official licenses to enter new lines of business. Park and
Luo (2001) note, “It is not surprising to find that private firms were often left out of business
opportunities due to a lack of materials even if their products were popular in the market.” Thus,
nonSOEs must contend with more (and more severe) bureaucratic obstacles, many of which may
exist primarily for bribe extraction, than SOEs confront.

       These considerations suggest that genuinely reducing corruption would affect SOEs and
nonSOEs differently in different provinces in the following ways.

       Where markets function well, reducing corruption bars officials from charging tolls for
removing artificial roadblocks that obstruct nonSOEs’ responses to market forces. Where
resources are still allocated by command and control, reducing corruption bars officials from
accepting the bribes nonSOEs’ must pay to get bureaucratic gears moving to get things done. This
reasoning suggests that investors, interpreting the Eight-Point Policy as reducing corruption,

                                                  14
would assign higher valuations to nonSOEs in more liberalized provinces and lower valuations to
nonSOEs in less liberalized provinces.

       The above reasoning pertains to nonSOEs. SOEs are charged with implementing Party
goals and the leading cadres in both SOEs and government are both subject to Organization Bureau
discipline should they impede Party goals. The Eight-Point Policy applies directly to SOE top
managers, barring them from paying or accepting bribes and from using their SOE’s resources to
advance their private interests. If investors viewed the Eight-Point Policy announcement as
reducing SOE top cadres’ wasteful private benefits, they might value SOEs more highly.
Alternatively, if those private benefits were incentives to attract talent to SOEs, investors might
attach lower valuations to SOEs likely to suffer an exodus of talent.

       To classify firms as SOEs or nonSOEs, we begin with all firms with 2011 data in the China
Listed Private Enterprise Research Database (CLPERD), which contains firms that CSMAR
classifies as “private enterprises.” This list includes all firms so classified in any year between
2003 (the beginning year of the database) and 2011. We crosscheck this list against 2011 data on
controlling shareholders from the China Listed Firm’s Shareholders Research Database
(GTA_HLD), which identifies major equity blockholders and their control and cash flow rights,
following La Porta et al. (1999). We double-check these data by manually collecting 2011
ownership    structure   data   for    all   listed        firms   from   the   Sina   Finance   database
(http://finance.sina.com.cn), paying special attention to conflicts between two prior approaches.
These steps give us a tentative roster of nonSOEs in 2011 and information about all listed firms’
major direct shareholders that year.

       To identify ultimate controlling shareholders, we construct control chains as follows. First,
we identify other listed firms’ stakes in each listed firm, which allows us to build control chains
from each listed firm to an ultimate controlling entity that is unlisted. We say an ultimate
controlling shareholder controls a firm if the minimum control block, what La Porta et al. (1999)
call the weakest link, in the control chain connecting them is at least 30%. This threshold accords
with CSRC guidelines, issued on December 16, 1997, for inferring control, and it aligns with the
definition in CSMAR data. We then use company websites and Baidu searches to classify these
ultimate controlling shareholders as either state (state or Party organs) or non-state (all other)
entities. In many cases, this requires identifying the ultimate controlling shareholders of unlisted


                                                      15
holding companies or other investment vehicles. State entities include central, provincial, city, or
municipal-level governments, state-controlled institutions, and state-controlled investment
vehicles, such as State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commissions (SASACs).
We say a firm is an SOE if it is ultimately controlled by a state entity, so defined, and as a nonSOE
otherwise. These manual searches lead us to reclassify 87 firms as SOEs.

       Our approach likely understates state control, as many nonSOEs are indirectly state-
controlled via ostensibly nonSOE holding companies run by officials. Moreover, all firms of any
note have Party Committees and Party Secretaries to assist their boards and CEOs. Nonetheless,
the SOE designation plausibly reflects a more direct Party role in governance, a closer alignment
of top executives’ interests with those of cadres in the civil service, and the preferential treatment
by government officials and the major banks, all of which are SOEs.

3.2.4 Investment in Connections

Prior work suggests that reducing corruption diminishes the value of a firm’s prior investment in
connections (Fisman, 2001). To investigate this, we take listed firms’ reported Entertainment and
Travel Costs (ETC) as a proxy for firms’ corruption-related expenditures. We interpret this
variable as an unknown combination of legitimate expenses, investment in connections to grease
bureaucratic gears where bureaucrats allocate resources, toll payments to officials where
bureaucrats obstruct market forces and private benefits for the firms’ top insiders. By reducing
expected future corruption, the Eight-Point Policy would affect different firms differently
according to the composition of their ETC.

       We posit that the ETC of nonSOEs in less liberalized provinces, where bureaucrats move
resources, plausibly has a larger bureaucratic gear greasing component, whereas the ETC of
nonSOEs in more liberalized provinces, where markets can move resources but for bureaucrats’
toll barriers, plausibly has a larger toll component. If so, investors would view reduced expected
future corruption as more detrimental to high-ETC nonSOEs in less liberalized provinces (firms
that had to spend more greasing gears), but more beneficial to high-ETC nonSOEs in more
liberalized provinces (firms that had to spend more on bureaucratic tolls). If so, share price changes
around the announcement of the Eight-Point Policy would correlate negatively with prior ETC for
nonSOEs in less liberalized provinces and positively with prior ETC for nonSOEs in more


                                                 16
liberalized provinces.

       We posit that neither grease payments nor tolls likely loom large in SOEs’ ETC because the
Party assigns SOEs policy goals, such as elevating GDP growth, and Communist Party
compensates and promotes officials for their harmonious advancement of Party policies.
Rationally corrupt bureaucrats who readily demand tolls or grease payments from nonSOEs would
avoid the career risk of so treating SOEs and being found to have impeded a Party policy. This
leaves private benefits to top executives the plausibly most prominent component of SOE ETC.
NonSOE ETC might also include private benefits to executives, but the Eight-Point Policy directly
affects private benefits top of SOE top executives because they are leading Party cadres. SOE
executives’ private benefits can be direct (perks or nepotism) or indirect (using SOE resources to
bribe others to provide perks or nepotism). This overall line of reasoning suggests that an SOE’s
shares would rise in proportion to its prior ETC if investors viewed thee private benefits as waste.
However, if investors viewed top SOE executives’ private benefits as perks to attract talent, SOE
shares might fall in anticipation of a talent flight.

        We construct our ETC variable using data manually collected from Chinese listed firms’
annual reports. Under Chinese accounting principles, entertainment costs (EC) and travel costs
(TC) are secondary accounting items reported for each fiscal year in notes to the Income Statement
lines for Management Expenses or Sales Costs (or both). An annual report can include up to four
such notes. Chinese accounting principles allow substantial leeway about which costs go under
which notes. Moreover, different firms sometimes use different Chinese terms for these costs (e.g.,
accommodation costs, business trip costs) and disclose them in different formats. Finally, some
firms report neither EC nor TC.

        Inspection of annual reports shows firms reporting EC or TC or both and doing so under
Management Expenses, Sales Costs, or both. In some cases, a firm may report under different
headings in different years, with none at all reported in some years. To allow for variation in
reporting practices, we construct our primary ETC measure as follows: We first take ETC as the
sum of all (i.e., under either Management Expenses or Sales Costs) EC and TC in 2011. In 28 cases,
the firm reports neither EC nor TC in 2011, but reports one or both in 2010, and we take its ETC
to be the sum of all EC and TC in 2010. ETC for the remaining firms is treated as missing.

        This approach is necessarily ad hoc, so we construct alternative measures of ETC in a range

                                                   17
of ways. One alternative is not to fill in the 28 cases with missing 2011 data using 2010 data, but
just treat these as missing. Another presumes that firms reporting neither EC nor TC in 2011
actually do have zero ETC in 2011. Still another sets ETC to zero if a firm reporting neither EC
nor TC in 2011 and the three prior years, but treats ETC as missing if the firm reports either in any
of those prior years. The results in the tables are preserved using these alternative ETC measures,
and are occasionally significant in places where our primary ETC measure is not.



4.     Empirical Findings

4.1.   The Reaction of the Market

We first examine stock price reaction to the anti-corruption policy using the 81 mainland stock
listings in Hong Kong. We then turn to the larger sample of stocks trading in the two mainland
stock exchanges – Shenzhen and Shanghai.

       Figure 3 shows the cumulative return of the portfolio of the 81 mainland stocks rising
abruptly relative to the portfolio of all other Hong Kong stocks around the event date. These gains
are not quickly reversed and are therefore unlikely to be driven by trading pressure (temporary
imbalances between supply and demand). The 3-day cumulative return of the portfolio of Hong
Kong-listed mainland shares is a significantly positive 1.89% (p < 1%); the 5-day cumulative
return of the portfolio is also significantly positive: 2.83% (p < 5%). This contrasts with the
insignificant +0.40% and +0.57 3- and 5-day cumulative returns, respectively, for the portfolio of
all other Hong Kong stocks. The difference-in-differences of 1.59% and 2.26% for the 3- and 5-
day windows, respectively, are highly significant (p < 0.001 for both).

       Because foreign investors have unrestricted access to the Hong Kong market, listed
mainland companies’ share prices can be interpreted as gauging Hong Kong and international
investors’ expectations about the reforms. These results are consistent with these investors viewing
the Eight-Point Policy announcement on December 4, 2012, as positive economic news for
mainland firms. The sample of 81 Hong Kong-listed Chinese firms is very small, only 3.6% the
size of the full sample of mainland stocks, and too small to allow meaningful cross-sectional




                                                 18
comparisons.11

         Table II summarizes the share price reactions of Chinese firms listed on the mainland
exchanges in two windows: a 3-day window [-1, +1], from the trading day before the December
4, 2012 announcement to the trading day after, and a 5-day window [-2, +2], beginning two trading
days before the announcement date and ending two trading days after. The market portfolio gains
2.77% in the 3-day window and 3.86% in the 5-day window, and both figures are statistically
significant.12 Both are also economically significant, representing ¥533 billion and ¥742 billion
increases, respectively, in investors’ valuations of corporate assets. These findings accord with
investors viewing the Eight-Point Policy as important and, on the net, value-creating across all
listed firms. These findings also suggest that investors did not view the policy as merely signaling
a factional power struggle.

         These returns are not reversed. Instead, the event date emerges as an inflection point for
the market return: the end of a bear market and the onset of a bull market. This is evident in Figure
4, which presents a value-weighted cumulative total (adjusted to include dividends and account
for splits) market return. An equal-weighted cumulative total market return similarly shows that
the event-date portfolio-valuation changes persist.

         Table II further shows that the Eight-Point Policy announcement increased the share prices
of firms in more liberalized provinces. The second and third rows of Table II show the returns of
portfolios of firms in provinces at different stages of liberalization. The 3-day window cumulative
return on the portfolio of firms in the highest-tercile Marketization provinces is 3.20% and
statistically significant. In the 5-day window, the same portfolio rises by a statistically significant
4.46%. In contrast, the cumulative 3-day window return of the portfolio of firms in the lowest-
tercile Marketization provinces is a statistically insignificant +0.54%. In the 5-day window, this
portfolio registers an insignificant increase of +0.98%. The differences between the portfolios of
firms in the highest- versus lowest-tercile Marketization provinces in the 3- and 5-day windows
are 2.66% and 3.49%, respectively; both are highly statistically significant. The finding of more


11
   They also may not be representative of mainland-listed stocks (Hung et al., 2012). Furthermore, most of these shares
   are not cross-listed on mainland exchanges, and Hong Kong accounting rules do not mandate disclosure of
   entertainment and travel costs.
12
   In testing the significance of all these portfolio’s returns, we use the estimated historical standard deviation using
   data from 210 to 11 trading days before the event date.

                                                           19
positive share price moves for firms in more liberalized provinces is consistent with investors
having viewed reduced future corruption more as clearing away toll-collecting officials in more
liberalized provinces.

        The divergence in the valuations of the portfolio of firms in high- versus low-Marketization
provinces is not ephemeral. The cumulative return from a hedge position, going long in high-
Marketization province stocks and shorting low-Marketization province stocks, is substantial and
is not quickly reversed, as it would be were temporary price pressure magnifying the divergence.
Depending on when the position is closed, the gain ranges from just below zero to just above 3%.
Closing the positions on an average day in the two trading weeks (ten event days) after the end of
the 5-day event window nets a statistically and economically significant 1.76% (p = 0.06). Closing
the positions on an average day between the end of the 5-day event window and 30 trading days
after the event date likewise nets 1.50% (p = 0.04). These reactions are consistent with investors
taking the December 4, 2012 event as economically significant and expecting the announced
reforms to reduce future corruption.



4.2     Market Development, SOEs, and nonSOEs

Section 3.2.3 argues that the anti-corruption reform would affect SOEs and nonSOEs differently.
Panels A and B of Table II compare the cumulative returns over 3- and 5-day event windows,
respectively, centered on December 4, 2012, of the portfolios of SOEs versus nonSOEs and of the
sub-portfolios of SOEs and nonSOEs in the highest- versus the lowest-tercile Marketization
provinces.

        The portfolio returns accord with this argument. First, consistent with investors expecting
the Eight-Point Policy to cut wasteful private benefits at SOEs, the portfolio of all SOEs and the
sub-portfolios of SOEs in provinces with high- and low-Marketization indexes all have positive
and statistically significant returns.

        Second, consistent with investors expecting the Eight-Point Policy to keep nonSOEs from
making grease payments to unjam bureaucratic gears where inaction-prone officials (Wilson, 1989)
allocate resources, nonSOEs in the lowest-tercile Marketization provinces have cumulative losses;
those in the 3-day window are significant. In contrast, the portfolio of nonSOEs in the highest-


                                                20
tercile Marketization provinces gain significantly.

           Third, the portfolio of SOEs outpaces that of nonSOEs by a wider margin in the bottom-
than in the top-tercile Marketization provinces. Specifically, within the 3-day window, in low-
Marketization provinces the portfolio of SOEs gains a statistically significant 5.99% more than
does the portfolio of nonSOEs. In high-Marketization provinces, the SOE and nonSOE portfolios
have statistically indistinguishable returns, and the point estimates put the SOE portfolio gain only
0.25% above that of the nonSOE portfolio. In the 5-day window, the corresponding numbers are
a statistically significant 7.38% and an insignificant 0.13%, respectively. These results are
consistent with investors expecting reduced corruption to add more value to nonSOEs where
market institutions were better developed and where bribing officials more predominantly meant
paying bureaucratic tolls. To further investigate these issues, we turn to firm-level regression
analyses.



4.3        Firm-Level Regressions

We next explore how the individual stocks that compose these portfolios move by regressing stock
price reactions to the anti-corruption reform on firm and industry characteristics and their
interactions with the Marketization index of the firm’s province. These characteristics include
firm-level Total Factor Productivity (TFP), estimated as in Levinsohn and Petrin (2003); Growth
Potential (Q), defined as industry-average Tobin's q (market-to-book ratio); and External Finance
Dependence (EFD), defined as industry-average capital expenditures minus cash flow from
operations over capital expenditures (Rajan and Zingales, 1998).13 If investors expected the anti-
corruption reform to raise allocative efficiency more in more liberalized provinces, larger gains
should be evident in the stocks of more competitive firms, firms in industries with more growth
opportunities, and firms in industries needing more external financing in those provinces. Thus,
the regressions include interactions of the Marketization index with each of these variables. The
regressions also include firm-level ETC, which, as explained in Section 3.2.4, reflects some
combination of a firm’s past spending on connections useful for “getting things done,” tolls
extracted by obstructive officials, private benefits for corporate insiders, and non-monetary


13
     Both Growth Potential and External Finance Dependence are defined as simple industry-averages. A robustness
     check using value-weighted industry averages generates similar results.

                                                        21
compensation, each depending on the level of Marketization.

       The regressions explore these empirical propositions by including cross-terms of
Marketization with ETC, TFP, EFD, and Q. The regressions also include explanatory variables
Marketization, ETC, and TFP main effects; industry fixed-effects subsume those of EFD and Q.

       The regressions control for measures of the province-level business environments:
provincial GDP Growth, log(GDP per capita), and Education Spending as a fraction of GDP.
These controls capture a location’s generic economic development. The regressions also control
for Firm Leverage (total liabilities over total assets), which mechanically amplifies equity
valuation changes associated with changes to asset valuations, as well as Firm Size (log of total
assets) and Research and Development Spending (R&D/sales) to allow for shares of small firms
and firms with more intangible assets moving systematically differently. Industry fixed effects
remove common reactions across industries. Clustering is bidirectional, by both industry and
province. All explanatory variables are lagged 1 year; they are 2011 data. Table III reports their
means and standard deviations in the full sample and in the sub-samples of SOEs and nonSOEs
used for the regressions.

       Given the very different patterns of results for the portfolios of SOEs and nonSOEs
revealed in Table II, we run separate regressions for the two categories of firms. Table IV reports
the results, with the regressions in Panels A and B explaining 3-day and 5-day firm-level
cumulative returns, respectively. Industry fixed effects essentially leave the Table IV regressions
explaining cumulative abnormal returns, defined as returns minus industry mean returns.



4.3.1 Market Institutions, Firm Characteristics, and Stock Price Reactions

In both panels of Table IV, Marketization attracts highly statistically significant positive
coefficients in regressions (1). The analogous coefficients in (3) are negative, and that in panel A
is statistically significant (p = 10%). NonSOEs in more liberalized provinces thus gain more in
reaction to the Eight-Point Policy; while SOEs in more liberalized provinces gain less (or lose
more). Like patterns emerge for Education Spending, another indicator of provincial development,
although this variable is insignificant in the SOE regressions.

       Focusing on Marketization and using regressions (1) and (3) in Panel A to illustrate, a one

                                                 22
standard deviation increase in Marketization is associated with a 0.37% 3-day gain for nonSOEs,
but a 0.35% 3-day decline for SOEs. Pooling the data and running a regression containing an SOE
dummy and interactions reveals the differences to be statistically significant. Thus, investors
expect reduced corruption to be more beneficial for nonSOEs where more liberalized markets can
better guide resource allocation. In contrast, investors expect reduced corruption to be less helpful
(or more harmful) to SOEs where market reforms are more advanced, perhaps because they expect
the reform to unfetter market forces for which previously cossetted SOEs are ill-prepared.

       Regressions (2) and (4) elaborate on these findings by including interactions of
Marketization with the firm and industry characteristics described above: the industry-level
variables Growth Potential (Q) and External Finance Dependence (EFD) and the firm-level
variables Total Factor Productivity (TFP) and Entertainment and Travel Costs (ETC). The highly
significant joint F-tests of the Marketization main effect and its interactions with these variables,
shown near the bottom of each panel, justify exploring the economic significance of the individual
interaction terms.

       In regression (2) of Panel A, where the dependent variable is the 3-day window cumulative
returns of nonSOEs, the province-level Marketization main-effect becomes insignificant (p = 0.58);
however, its interactions with firm-level TFP, industry-level Q, and industry-level EFD are all
positive and significant, both individually and jointly. The same pattern emerges in the 5-day
window regression (2) in Panel B. These results are consistent with investors expecting nonSOEs
in more liberalized provinces to gain more from reduced corruption if they are also more
productive or in sectors with more growth opportunities or more need for external capital.

       More generally, these findings are consistent with investors expecting the Eight-Point
Policy to reduce future corruption, with this removing bureaucratic obstacles to market forces and
adding value to nonSOEs in provinces with better-developed markets, and with the added value
greater for nonSOEs better positioned to benefit from stronger market forces. Being better
positioned here means being more competitive and in more dynamic or more external finance-
dependent sectors. This set of results is consistent with investors expecting reduced corruption to
lower bureaucratic tolls, unleash market forces, and improve allocative efficiency.

       Regressions (4), explaining SOE cumulative returns, show intermittent significance in the
cross-terms of Marketization with Growth Potential (positive and insignificant in Panel A, but

                                                 23
significant in Panel B), External Finance Dependence (negative and insignificant in Panel A, but
significant in Panel B), and Total Factor Productivity (negative and significant in Panel A, but
insignificant in Panel B). This instability in the interaction coefficients leaves us reluctant to draw
economic inferences.

       Table IV also links past ETC to event window returns after controlling for firm-, industry-,
and macro-level characteristics. Regression (1) in Panel A shows nonSOEs with higher past ETC
gaining less. Regression (2) in Panel A elaborates, showing ETC’s main-effect term to be a
negatively significant -0.136 and its interaction with Marketization to be a positively significant
0.029. These coefficients imply that, where Marketization is above 4.69 (all provinces except
Qinghai and Tibet), a nonSOE’s stock gain more if its ETC is higher. The corresponding regression
results in Panel B yields the same conclusion. Thus, the regressions show ETC negatively related
to a nonSOE’.’ cumulative returns only in the two least liberalized provinces. Elsewhere, the
relationship is positive and increasingly so in more liberalized provinces.

       These results are consistent with investors expecting the Eight-Point Policy to curtail
corruption and viewing nonSOE ETC as more predominantly toll fees in more liberalized
provinces and more predominantly greasing bureaucratic gears in the least liberalized provinces.

       SOEs’ ETC shows a starkly different pattern. In both panels, SOEs with higher ETC gain
insignificantly in regression (3), though the coefficient is significant at 10% in a one-tail test in
Panel B. In both panels, regression (4) show the ETC main effect to be positive and significant
while ETC’s interaction with Marketization is negative and significant. Repeating the arithmetic
above for SOEs shows that ETC correlates positively with SOEs’ stock price gains only in Tibet,
the least economically liberalized province. Elsewhere the correlation is negative, and more
negative in higher Marketization provinces.

       These results are consistent with investors expecting the Eight-Point Policy to increase
SOEs’ valuations by reducing their ETC spending on private benefits, but also expecting SOEs
with high prior ETC spending to be less able to cope with stiffened market pressure in more
liberalized provinces as bureaucratic tolls restraining nonSOEs fall away. Higher-ETC SOEs might
confront greater problems in more liberalized provinces for several reasons. Higher ETC might
proxy for lower quality SOE management, which investors expect to be a bigger problem after
reduced corruption unleashes stronger market forces. Alternatively, higher ETC might be a perk

                                                  24
to attract higher quality management to an SOE, which investors expect reduced to eliminate, again
leaving high-ETC SOEs with lower quality top management to contend with stronger market
forces. 14 All of these considerations combine to explain why investors would expect reduced
corruption to more adversely affect less well managed SOEs where market forces are stronger.



4.4         Important Potential Alternative Interpretations

One of our key results is that the anti-corruption reform boosts nonSOE share prices more in more
liberalized provinces. A province’s Marketization is taken as gauging its progress in implementing
market reforms. Hence, our result is consistent with anti-corruption reforms unleashing latent
market forces, which disproportionately helps more competitive nonSOEs in provinces with more
complete market reforms. Importantly, this interpretation links the positive effects of the anti-
corruption reform to the strength of market forces.

           However, some alternative interpretations merit consideration. These turn on whether the
Eight-Point Policy event signals reduced future corruption or something else, such as a broader
commitment to further market reforms, and on whether the Marketization index gauges the
development of market institutions or something else, such as better quality government. The
following discussion explores these alternative interpretations in detail.



4.4.1 Economic Reforms versus Anti-corruption Reforms

We interpret event window stock returns as reflecting investors’ reactions to news that future
corruption would be reduced, rather than news about policy stability, that is, that economic reforms
would continue. Although the Eight-Point Policy was unambiguously an anti-corruption measure,
discussion about further economic reforms was ongoing. For example, the World Bank’s “China
2030” study, urging continued reforms, circulated after February 2012 and was formally published
on March 23, 2013. Moreover, economic and anti-corruption reforms are not unrelated, so our
interpretation must be justified.




14
     Top managers have lower monetary compensation, but more job security and power, in SOEs than in nonSOEs.

                                                        25
        Our primary justification is the Internet search graphs in Figure 2. Consistent with the
Eight-Point Policy announcement causing investors to expect reduced corruption, rather than
renewed general economic reform, Internet searches for anti-corruption spiked around news of the
Eight-Point Policy, whereas searches for economic reform did not.

        In addition, many of our results are most readily explained if investors viewed the Eight-
Point Policy as heralding reduced corruption, rather than renewed general economic reforms. If
investors presumed that further general economic reforms would disproportionately benefit firms
in provinces whose market reforms were already further along, some of our results might follow.
This is possible, but not a priori obvious because a central reinvigoration of the economic reform
process might have the greatest impact where reforms had stalled. Provinces whose market reforms
were already well along might have less left to do.

        Moreover, some of our findings are difficult to explain if investors did not expect the Eight-
Point Policy to curtail corruption. One such finding is that SOE shares rise with ETC. If they
interpreted the Eight-Point Policy as signaling more reforms to come, this pattern suggests
investors expected such reforms to include restraints on SOE top executives’ private benefits –
that is to curtail a form of corruption.

        Another is nonSOE shares dropping with ETC in less liberalized provinces, but rising with
ETC in more liberalized provinces, which is not obviously explicable if the Eight Point Policy
merely signaled deeper economic reform to come, but is readily explained by reduced corruption
impeding nonSOEs from making essential grease payments in lower Marketization provinces and
impeding corrupt officials from charging obstructive tolls in higher Marketization provinces.



4.4.2 Market Machinery versus Enforcement

Provinces with more advanced market reforms might be better run generally, and investors might
expect better-run provinces to enforce the anti-corruption reform better. Better-enforced reforms
could boost share prices more in those provinces. Furthermore, better enforcement might also
explain the larger gains by nonSOEs with higher past ETC in higher Marketization provinces. This
result would follow if investors viewed nonSOE ETC more as toll payments in more liberalized
provinces and expected better enforcement of the anti-corruption reform to more thoroughly


                                                 26
eradicate tolls in those provinces. However, although investors may indeed have expected more
effective enforcement in higher Marketization provinces, several lines of reasoning weigh against
the Marketization index primarily proxying for effective enforcement and in favor of it reflecting
progress in market reforms.

       First, if the reform were well enforced in high Marketization provinces and ill-enforced in
low Marketization provinces, Table II would show more positive returns for the high-
Marketization portfolios and less positive or insignificant returns for low-Marketization portfolios.
In fact, the low-Marketization nonSOE portfolio has large significantly negative returns in the 3-
day window. This would result if investors expected the reforms to be well enforced in those
provinces, disabling ways of greasing bureaucratic wheels and raising the cost of doing business.
Indeed, the Party discipline is plausibly stronger, not weaker, in less reformed provinces, so Party
policies are likely to be more rigorously enforced in less liberalized provinces. For instance,
China’s least liberalized province-level jurisdiction, Tibet, was the first to show support of the
Eight-Point Policy by releasing its own Ten Rules on December 5, 2012, itemizing how cadres in
Tibet should reduce waste and extravagance and simplify official functions.

       Furthermore, the arithmetic calculations presented above in connection with the Table IV
regressions show nonSOEs’ share price reactions around news about the Eight-Point Policy to be
negatively related to ETC for firms in Tibet and Qinghai, the two lowest Marketization provinces.
The negative ETC combined effect in these provinces is inconsistent with enforcement being
ineffective in those provinces, but is readily explicable if the anti-corruption policy is well
enforced, but markets work poorly in those provinces. Moreover, bigger gains for SOEs with
higher prior ETC in low Marketization provinces accords with investors viewing ETC as private
benefits, which they expect reduced corruption to curtail.



4.4.3 Marketization and a Stronger Developmental Response

Provinces with stronger market machinery might also have better quality governments, which
better promote market institutions, which improve resource allocation. These provinces might also
have larger pools of well-educated potential top executives better able to boost firm productivity.
Both SOEs and nonSOEs might react to a less corrupt business environment by replacing old top
managers, whose expertise is connection-building, with new ones whose expertise is increasing

                                                 27
productivity. If investors expected this shift to be more complete in more liberalized provinces,
our results might follow.

       More generally, we accept that different forms of institutional development overlap and
interact. The Marketization index might reflect other province-level institutional characteristics
such as a culture more supportive of entrepreneurship, a history of commercial activity, greater
openness to foreign ideas, or any other latent factor that, when intervention by corrupt officials is
blocked, promotes better resource allocation. Such characteristics might reinforce any positive
impact investors expect reduced future corruption to have on a firm’s future prospects. We take
the Marketization index as its formulators present it, as a measure of each province’s progress
towards free markets; but accept that it might proxy for any of the aforementioned other
institutional characteristics. We welcome further research exploring alternative explanations of
our findings.



4.5    Robustness Discussion

The first robustness issue is the newsworthiness of our event. Information leakage is a potential
concern in event studies. Figure 2 shows internet searches for anti-corruption” (反腐) rising
slightly shortly before a much larger spike on and immediately after our event date. Checking news
reports revealed a November 20, 2012, Xinhua article describing a CCDI submission to the 18th
National Congress on the need to eliminate corruption immediately. The date was just after the
handover of power from the old to the new administration and might be an alternative event date
if investors viewed the CCDI submission as marking a genuine crackdown on corruption, rather
than a reiteration of Politburo rhetoric condemning corruption.

       To explore this possibility, we examine stock returns around November 20, 2012. In
contrast to the significant positive reactions evident around the event date of December 4, 2012,
the market return in a 3-day window around November 20, 2012, is an insignificant 0.82%. The
5-day cumulative return is -0.54% and insignificant. This exercise supports the validity of the news
on December 4, 2012, as a surprise, which fits our event framework for exploring the economic
implications of investors’ expectations of decreased corruption.




                                                 28
        Another possible confounding event occurred on December 7, 2012, when Xi visited
Shenzhen. The event is widely hailed as Xi signaling that the economic reforms launched by Deng
Xiaoping in December 1992 would continue under his administration and also that Xi himself was
practicing the principles laid out in the Eight-Point Policy.15 This news received much less media
coverage than the Eight-Point Policy announcement. Nevertheless, we rerun our tests using a (-1,
+4) window, which stretches from December 3 to December 8, 2012. The results are similar to
those in the tables, though in the analog of Table 4 SOE regressions, the cross-term results and
main effect of ETC become insignificant.

        Second, our findings survive a battery of standard robustness checks. Where a robustness
check generates a pattern of signs and statistical significance identical to that in the tables, and
point estimates roughly concordant to those in the tables, we say qualitatively similar results ensue.
Where qualitatively similar results do not ensue, we explain the discrepancies in detail.

        To ensure that our results are not driven by outliers, we winsorize firm-level cumulative
returns at 1% before running the regressions in Table IV. The regression results are qualitatively
similar if we do not winsorize the returns. A more conservative approach repeats the regressions,
excluding observations whose estimated residuals exceed ±2.5 times the standard deviations of the
residuals. Qualitatively similar results ensue.

        To ensure that our results are not driven by unusual provinces, we first exclude firms
located in Tibet, whose cultural, social, political, and economic characteristics differ substantially
from those of other provinces. This generates qualitatively similar results. We next exclude firms
based in Beijing and Shanghai because these are China’s most developed province-level
jurisdictions and because firms with nationwide operations tend to be headquartered in them.16
This also generates qualitatively similar results. Finally, we drop firms based in Beijing, Shanghai,
and Tibet to ensure that the results do not depend on the contrast between China’s most and least
developed provinces. This generates qualitatively similar results.

        Financial and real estate firms are regulated differently from other firms, and listed firms


15
   “Echoes of Deng Xiaoping as Xi Jinping heads to Shenzhen on first inspection trip,” South China Morning Post,
   December 7, 2012, describes Xi sending “a signal of commitment to deepening reform,” projecting a “low profile,”
   and “banning empty talk by officials and excessive pomp for tours.” See
16
   Firms in Beijing are plausibly subject to the lowest cost monitoring and strongest control by the central
   government (Huang et al. 2017).

                                                        29
in these sectors have national operations. Dropping firms in finance, real estate, and both sectors
all yield qualitatively similar results.

        The ETC variable is missing for 12% (264 of 2260) of all firms for which all other data are
available and that had no confounding news during the event window. We substitute 2010 ETC
for missing 2011 data to fill in 11% (28 of 264) of these firms to obtain our sample for the ETC
regressions in Table IV. Thus, 88% of firms that reported no ETC in 2011 also reported none in
2010. One possible concern is that these firms might either genuinely have insubstantial ETC in
some years or systematically manipulate their reporting to avoid disclosing ETC. Our results are
robust to setting ETC to zero where it is missing in 2011, to setting ETC to zero where it is missing
in both 2010 and 2011, and to dropping observations with missing ETC in 2011.

        Likewise, our results in Table II, where we tabulate comparisons of returns on the market
portfolio, SOE and nonSOE portfolios as well as their sub-portfolios grouped by top and bottom
terciles of provinces by Marketization, are obtained using the full sample including firms with
missing ETC observations. The patterns in terms of magnitude and statistical significance are
qualitatively identical if we drop observations with missing ETC, and regardless of whether or not
we winsorize the returns at 1%.

        We use total assets to measure firm size and scale R&D and ETC by total sales. Re-running
our tests using total assets to scale R&D and ETC yields qualitatively similar results.

        The explained variable in the Table IV regressions is the event window cumulative total
return of each stock. Because the regressions include industry fixed-effects, the operational
explained variable is the firm’s cumulative abnormal return, defined as the stock return minus the
mean return of all stocks in its industry, a widely used event study methodology. Using simulations,
Thompson (1988) shows that cumulative abnormal returns calculated in this way generate results
imperceptibly different from cumulative abnormal returns generated from standard asset pricing
models. Furthermore, a serious campaign against corruption may well change the risk environment,
and, therefore firms’ risk factor loadings. Putting these issues aside, we repeat the Table IV
regressions using 3- and 5-day event window cumulative abnormal returns. They are calculated as
cumulative returns minus cumulative estimated market model returns, using the contemporaneous
market return and market model parameters estimated using data from trading day –210 to day –
11, where day 0 is the event date of December 4, 2012. The coefficients of primary interest are

                                                 30
those of Marketization, ETC, and the interactions of Marketization with industry Q and External
Finance Dependence and with firm-level Total Factor Productivity and ETC. All are qualitatively
similar to Table VI, save that the interaction of Marketization with Q loses significance in the SOE
regression (4) analogous to Panel B of Table VI.

       The firm-level tests cluster separately by industry and province (two-way clustering).
Rerunning the tests clustering by industry only, province only, or industry-province cell all
generate identical signs and point estimates to those in the tables; however, they have higher t-
ratios in many cases. Therefore, we present two-way clustering results as the most conservative.



5.     Conclusions

Mitigating corruption can unleash market forces and immediately improve resource allocation (e.g.,
Murphy et al., 1993; Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; Mauro, 1995; Fisman and Svensson, 2007).; yet,
can have a short term negative economic impact where bribery is essential to bureaucratic gears
where markets work poorly and bureaucrats control key resources (e.g., Fisman, 2001; Wei, 2001;
McMillan and Woodruff, 2002; Li et al., 2008.).

       On December 4, 2012, the Communist Party of China unexpectedly announced its Eight-
Point Policy, initially widely perceived as an order to curtail official corruption by banning leading
cadres, including officials and SOE top executives, from providing or accepting extravagant
private benefits. This event provided a natural experimental setting for testing investors’ views on
the impact of reduced corruption on firms with different characteristics and in provinces with
different degrees of free-market reforms. We find that market development determines which view
is most relevant in different Chinese provinces. Our empirical findings and their implications are:

1.     On December 4, 2012, when the Eight-Point Policy was announced, the shares of mainland
       Chinese companies trading in Hong Kong posted abnormal returns economically and
       statistically significant positive abnormal returns relative to other Hong Kong stocks, and
       stocks trading on the mainland exchanges posted economically and statistically significant
       gains overall.

       These findings are consistent with investors expecting the policy to curtail official
corruption and this to create value overall. They support prior work arguing that curtailing

                                                 31
corruption has economy-level benefits (Krueger, 1974; Murphy et al., 1991, 1993; Shleifer and
Vishny, 1993; Mauro, 1995).

       Regardless of whether or not these expectations turned out to be correct over subsequent
years, the pattern of stock price movements in narrow windows around December 4, 2012, contains
information about how investors expected curtailed corruption to play out across the Chinese
economy. Specifically,

2.     Investors expected curtailed official corruption to deter SOE top executives from providing
       private benefits to themselves and this to increase SOE values. However, investors also
       expected these increases to be more strongly counterbalanced by SOEs’ challenges in
       contending with stronger market forces in more liberalized provinces. Investors further
       expected these challenges to be greater for SOEs with higher past spending on
       entertainment and travel.

       The last of this set of findings could follow high private benefits spending reflects poor
governance, using perks to keep talented managers, or both. In either case, higher private benefits
spending indicates SOE less apt to prosper amid lower corruption environment and strengthened
market forces. Our results suggest that governments entertaining SOE reforms might wish to focus
initially on improving SOE governance and the quality of SOE top executives. Cutting SOE top
management compensation (e.g., the April 2016 decision to cut SOE bank CEOs’ pay by half)
does not contribute to attracting and retaining the talent SOEs need to survive market competition.

3.     Investors expected curtailed official corruption to deter officials from accepting private
       benefits in return for favors, expected this to unleash market forces, and expected stronger
       market forces to have a greater real impact on nonSOEs in more liberalized provinces, in
       which markets were more fully up and running.

Investors could also have expected the Eight-Point Policy to presage further reforms in the longer
run, perhaps more so in more liberalized provinces, better able to implement such reforms

4.     Investors expected curtailed official corruption to adversely affect nonSOEs in the least
       liberalized provinces, where markets functioned poorly, and bureaucrats allocated key
       resources. NonSOEs in these provinces lost more value if they had previously spent more
       on entertainment and travel.


                                                32
This set of findings suggests that nonSOEs must “grease bureaucratic gears” to access resources
in the least liberalized provinces; and that investors expected reduced corruption to more adversely
affect nonSOEs in these provinces that had invested more in such grease payments.

5.      Investors expected curtailed official corruption to bring about greater improvements in
        allocative efficiency and competitive pressure in more liberalized provinces. Specifically,
        more productive nonSOEs in industries with greater growth potential and more need for
        external financing gained more in provinces whose market reforms were more advanced.
        Moreover, these gains were larger for nonSOEs that had previously spent more on
        entertainment and travel.

This set of findings argues that corruption in more liberalized provinces is more predominantly
nonSOEs paying corrupt officials to lift toll barriers. Curtailing corruption, by lifting these barriers,
creates value. This final set of results also reinforces the view that corruption renders resource
allocation suboptimal (Krueger, 1974; Murphy et al., 1993; Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; Mauro,
1995; Fisman and Svensson, 2007; Ayyagari et al., 2014).

        The fourth and fifth sets of findings are consistent with market liberalization
complementing reforms that reduce corruption. If markets are up and running, corruption more
predominantly takes the form of officials erecting artificial barriers in the paths of firms responding
to market forces and charging those firms tolls to remove the barriers. Under these conditions,
corruption becomes a fee for doing business, and curtailing it creates value by eliminating these
unnecessary fees so market forces can better allocate resources and eliminate waste.

        If markets are not up and running, and bureaucrats allocate resources, corruption more
predominantly takes the form of otherwise inaction-prone officials taking bribes to let firms access
needed resources. Under these conditions, corruption becomes a routine and economically
necessary business practice and curtailing corruption harms firms by preventing them from paying
officials to grease jammed bureaucratic gears.

        That corruption can become an essential business practice in such environments may
explain why anti-corruption reforms often fail (see, Fjeldstad and Isaksen 2008; Johnston 2005;
Lawson 2009; Meagher 2005; Svensson 2005; and Persson, Rothstein and Teorell, 2013). Our
findings suggest an important vulnerability in such systems of entrenched corruption. More
extensive market liberalization moves corrupt officials out of the role of providing essential gear-

                                                   33
greasing services and into the role of charging obstructive tolls. Reforms that eliminate obstructive
tolls are apt to encounter less insurmountable opposition than would reforms that impede essential
services.

      Our results point to market liberalization as the critical determinant of whether corruption
is more predominantly tolls or gear-greasing. However, provinces that are further along in
establishing markets may well be further along in other dimensions of institutional development.
If so, the extent of market development might also be proxying for other aspects of institutional
development such as government quality, education, or even social behavioral norms. We find the
Marketization measure uniquely empirically powerful. None of a range of alternative institutional
development measures shows similar explanatory power, and including these alongside the
Marketization index leaves the basic results above unchanged. However, distinguishing highly
correlated variables subject to different or unknown measurement error problems is
econometrically problematic, especially here where interaction coefficients are of critical interest
(Leamer 1978, pp. 170-81). We consequently cannot preclude future research showing other
dimensions of institutional development to be important. However, the findings enumerated above
readily fit together if market development is a critical factor.

       Finally, stock markets are not strong form efficient. However, even if shareholders’
expectations prove incorrect, an event study can accurately measures shareholders’ expectations –
in this case, about the impact of reduced future corruption across firms and provinces. Substantial
evidence shows that the Eight-Point Policy was initially perceived as a broad-based attack on
corruption. Despite increasing suspicion that the policy has become something other than that, the
event study results remain economically useful as evidence of what investors expected to happen
following a general drop in corruption.




                                                  34
References
Agarwal, S., Qian W., Seru A., and Zhang J., 2019. Disguised corruption: Evidence from consumer
        credit in China. Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Alesina, A., and Angeletos, G.M., 2005. Corruption, inequality, and fairness. Journal of Monetary
        Economics 52(7), 1227-1244.
Allen, F., Qian, J., Qian, M., 2005. Law, finance, and economic growth in China. Journal of
        Financial Economics 77, 57-116.
Ayyagari, M., Demirguc-Kunt, A., and Maksimovic, V., 2014. Bribe payments and innovation in
        developing countries: Are innovating firms disproportionately affected? Journal of
        Financial and Quantitative Analysis 49(01), 51-75.
Broadhurst, R., and Wang, P., 2014. After the Bo Xilai trial: Does corruption threaten China's
        future? Survival: Global Politics and Strategy 56, 157-178.
Cai, H., Fang, H., and Xu, L.C., 2011. Eat, drink, firms and government: An investigation of
        corruption from entertainment and travel costs of Chinese firms. Journal of Law and
        Economics 54, 55-78.
Calomiris, C.W., Fisman, R., and Wang, Y., 2010. Profiting from government stakes in a command
        economy: Evidence from Chinese asset sales. Journal of Financial Economics 96, 399-
        412.
Carpenter, J.N., Lu, F., and Whitelaw, R., 2020. The real value of China's stock market. Journal
        of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Chen, S., Sun, Z., Tang, S., and Wu, D., 2011. Government intervention and investment efficiency:
        Evidence from China. Journal of Corporate Finance 17, 259-271.
Chen, T., and Kung, J.K.S., 2019. Busting the “Princelings”: The campaign against corruption in
        China’s primary land market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1), 185-226.
Chen, Z., 2003. Capital markets and legal development: The China case. China Economic Review
        14, 451-472.
Conyon, M., and Lerong, H., 2011. Executive compensation and corporate governance in China.
        Journal of Corporate Finance 17, 1158-75.
Cull, R., and Xu, L.C., 2003. Who gets credit? The behavior of bureaucrats and state banks in
        allocating credit to Chinese state-owned enterprises. Journal of Development Economics
        71, 533-559.
Cull, R., and Xu, L.C., 2005. Institutions, ownership, and finance: The determinants of profit
        reinvestment among Chinese firms. Journal of Financial Economics 77(1), 117-146.
Deng, Y., Wu, J., Morck R., and Yeung B., 2015. China’s pseudo monetary policy (previously
        titled: Monetary and fiscal stimuli, ownership structure and China's housing market),
        Review of Finance 19, 55-93.
Fan, G., Wang, X., and Zhu, H., 2011. NERI index of Marketization of China’s provinces: 2011
        report (in Chinese). Economic Science Press, Beijing.
Firth, M., Lin, C., Liu, P., Wong, S.M.L., 2009. Inside the black box: Bank credit allocation in
        China’s private sector. Journal of Banking & Finance 33, 1144-1155.
Fisman, R, 2001. Estimating the value of political connections. American Economic Review 91(4),
         1095-1102.
Fisman, R., and Miguel, E., 2007. Corruption, norms, and legal enforcement: Evidence from
         diplomatic parking tickets. Journal of Political Economy 115, 1020-1048.
Fisman, R., and Svensson, J., 2007. Are corruption and taxation really harmful to growth? Firm
         level evidence. Journal of Development Economics 83, 63-75.
Fisman, R., and Wang, Y., 2015. Corruption in Chinese privatizations. The Journal of Law,
         Economics, & Organization 31(1), 1-29.
Fisman, R., Shi, J., Wang, Y., and Xu, R., 2018. Social ties and favoritism in Chinese science.
         Journal of Political Economy 126(3), 1134-1171.
Fjeldstad, O.-H., and Isaksen, J., 2008. Anti-corruption reforms: Challenges, effects and limits of
         World Bank support. World Bank Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) Report, World
         Bank External Series Working Paper No. 7.
Giannetti, M., Liao G., You, J., and Yu X., 2017. The externalities of corruption: Evidence from
         entrepreneurial activity in China. Working paper.
Giannetti, M., Liao, G., and Yu, X., 2015. The brain gain of corporate boards: Evidence from
         China. The Journal of Finance 70(4), 1629-1682.
Huang, Z., Li, L., Ma, G., and Xu, L.C., 2017. Hayek, local information, and commanding heights:
         Decentralizing state-owned enterprises. American Economic Review 107(8), 2455-2478.
Hung, M., Wong, T., and Zhang, T., 2012. Political considerations in the decision of Chinese SOEs
         to list in Hong Kong. Journal of Accounting and Economics 53, 435-449.
Jia, C., Wang, Y., and Xiong, W., 2017. Market segmentation and differential reactions of local
         and foreign investors to analyst recommendations. The Review of Financial Studies 30(9),
         2972-3008.
Johnston, M., 2005. Syndromes of Corruption: Wealth, Power, and Democracy. Cambridge, UK:
         Cambridge University Press.
Ke, B., Liu, N., and Tang, S., 2016. The effect of anti-corruption campaign on shareholder value
         in a weak institutional environment: Evidence from China. Working paper presented in
         Asia Bureau of Finance and Economic Research.
Krueger, A.O., 1974. The political economy of the rent-seeking society. The American Economic
         Review 64, 291-303.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A., 1999. Corporate ownership around the world.
         Journal of Finance 54 (2), 471-517.
Lawson, L., 2009. The politics of anti‐corruption reform in Africa. Journal of Modern African
         Studies 47 (1)73-100.
Leamer, E.E., 1978. Specification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference with Nonexperimental Data (Vol.
         53) : John Wiley & Sons Incorporated.
Levinsohn, J., and Petrin, A., 2003. Estimating production functions using inputs to control for
         unobservables. Review of Economic Studies 70, 317-341.



                                                36
Li, B., Wang Z., and Zhou, H., 2017. China’s anti-corruption campaign and credit reallocation
        from SOEs to non-SOEs. PBCSF-NIFR Research Paper, Tsinghua University.
Li, H., Meng, L., Wang, Q., and Zhou, L.-A., 2008. Political connections, financing and firm
        performance: Evidence from Chinese private firms. Journal of Development Economics 87,
        283-299.
Liu, L.X., Shu, H., and Wei, K.J., 2017. The impacts of political uncertainty on asset prices:
        Evidence from the Bo scandal in China. Journal of Financial Economics 125(2), 286-310.
Mauro, P., 1995. Corruption and growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (3), 681-712.
McGregor, R., 2010. The Party: The Secret World of China's Communist Rulers. Penguin UK.
McMillan, J., and Woodruff, C., 2002. The central role of entrepreneurs in transition economies.
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 16, 153-170.
Meagher, P., 2005. Anti‐corruption agencies: Rhetoric versus reality. The Journal of Policy
        Reform 8(1), 69-103.
Morck, R., and Yeung, B., 2018. East Asian financial and economic development. In Handbook
        of Finance and Development, eds. Ross Levine and Thorsten Beck. Edward Elgar.
Morck, R., Nakamura, M., 1999. Banks and corporate control in Japan. Journal of Finance 54,
        319-339.
Morck, R., Sepanski, J., and Yeung, B., 2001. Habitual and non-habitual lobbyists in the US steel
        industry: An EM algorithm approach. Economic Inquiry 39 (3), 365-378.
Morck, R., Wolfenzon, D., and Yeung, B., 2005. Corporate governance, economic entrenchment
        and growth. Journal of Economic Literature 43, 657-722.
Murphy, K.M., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R.W., 1991. The allocation of talent: Implications for
        growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 503-30.
Murphy, K.M., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R.W., 1993. Why is rent-seeking so costly to growth?
        American Economic Review 83, 409-414.
Park, S.H., and Luo, Y., 2001. Guanxi and organizational dynamics: Organizational networking
        in Chinese firms. Strategic Management Journal 22, 455-477.
Persson, A., Rothstein, B., and Teorell, J., 2013. Why anticorruption reforms fail—systemic
        corruption as a collective action problem. Governance 26(3), 449-471.
Piotroski, J.D., and Zhang, T., 2014. Politicians and the IPO decision: The impact of impending
        political promotions on IPO activity in China. Journal of Financial Economics 111, 111-
        136.
Pritchett, L., and Summers L.H., 2014. Asiaphoria meet regression to the mean. Harvard Kennedy
        School M-RCBG working paper, 2014-04.
Rajan, R.G., and Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic
        Review 88, 559-587.
Rajan, R.G., and Zingales, L., 2003a. The great reversals: The politics of financial development in
        the twentieth century, Journal of Financial Economics 69 (1), 5-50.




                                               37
Rajan, R. G., and Zingales, L. 2003b. Saving capitalism from the capitalists: Unleashing the power
        of financial markets to create wealth and spread opportunity, Crown Business, ISBN 978-
        0-609-61070-1.
Schwert, G.W., 1981. Using financial data to measure effects of regulation. Journal of Law and
        Economics 24, 121-158.
Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R., 1993. Corruption. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 599-617.
Svensson, J., 2005. Eight questions about corruption. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 19,
        19-42.
Thompson, J. E., 1988. More methods that make little difference in event studies. Journal of
        Business Finance and Accounting 15, 77–86.
Wang, Q., Wong, T.-J., and Xia, L., 2008. State ownership, the institutional environment, and
        auditor choice: Evidence from China. Journal of Accounting and Economics 46, 112-134.
Wei, S.-J., 2001. Corruption in economic transition and development: Grease or sand? United
        Nations Economic Commission for Europe, Geneva.
Wilson, J. Q., 1989. Bureaucracy: What government agencies do and why they do it. Basic Books.
Woo, W.T., 2012. A new economic growth engine for China: Escaping the middle-income trap by
        not doing more of the same. World Scientific.
World Bank, 2015. World Bank Group Integrity Vice-presidency Annual Report. Washington:
        World Bank Group.
Wu, J., Deng Y., Huang, J., Morck, R., and Yeung, B., 2014. Incentives and outcomes: China’s
        environmental policy. Capitalism and Society 9(1), 2. (NBER WP18754)
Xu, C., 2011. The fundamental institutions of China’s reforms and development. Journal of
        Economic Literature 49, 1076-1151.
Yuen, S., 2014. Disciplining the party. Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign and its limits. China
        Perspectives, 41-47.
Zeume, S., 2017. Bribes and firm value. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (5), 1457-1489.
Zhao, M., Fogel, K., Morck, R., and Yeung, B., 2011. Trade liberalization and institutional reform.
        Asia Economic Paper 9 (2), 44-71.




                                                38
Figure 1: Fraction of Chinese Respondents Viewing Issues as a “Big Problem”


                   Rising Prices

               Corrupt Officials

                 Rich-Poor Gap

                   Air Pollution

               Water Pollution

                   Food Safety

 Quality of Manufactured Goods

             Old Age Insurance

           Safety of Medicines

       Corrupt Business People

               Unemployment

                     Education

                         Crime

                   Health Care

            Worker Conditions

                         Traffic

           Electricity Shortages

                                   0   10          20       30        40         50        60


Source: PEW Survey Research Center, Spring 2013 PEW Research Center Survey, reported in
the November 8, 2013, Financial Times article, “Inflation, corruption, inequality top list of
Chinese public’s concerns.” The horizontal axis measures percentage of Chinese respondents
who found the issue to be a “very big problem.”




                                              39
Figure 2: Online Attention to the Eight-Point Policy

Panel A: Daily Baidu internet search volume for ‘Eight-Point Policy’ (in Chinese, 八项规定), indicated by the solid
line, and for “anti-corruption” (反腐), indicated by the dashed line. The event date, Tuesday, December 4, 2012, is
indicated by the dark gray band. The medium and light gray bands mark the 3- and 5-trading day windows, respectively,
around it. The last spans a weekend. Search volumes are scaled by the maximum for ‘Eight-Point Policy’ searches,
which occurred on Thursday, December 6, 2012.




                                                        40
Figure 2. Online Attention to the Eight-Point Policy (Continued)

Panel B. Daily Baidu internet search volume for ‘Eight-Point Policy’ (in Chinese, 八项规定), indicated by the solid
line, and for “economic development” (经济发展), “economic growth” (经济增长), and “economic reform” (经济改
革), indicated by successively finer dashed lines.. The event date, Tuesday, December 4, 2012, is indicated by the
dark gray band. The medium and light gray bands mark the 3- and 5-trading day windows, respectively, around it.
The last spans a weekend. Search volumes are scaled by the maximum for ‘Eight-Point Policy’ searches, which
occurred on Thursday, December 6, 2012.




                                                       41
Figure 3. Mainland Chinese Firms Listed in Hong Kong versus Other Hong Kong Firms
The cumulative total return indexes of all mainland firms (H shares) listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange and all
other stocks listed there, plotted before and after the event date, December 4, 2012, on which the Party adopted the
Eight-Point Policy to curtail corruption in the Party’s ranks of leading cadres. Both indexes are normalized to 100%
at the beginning of the five5-trading day event window surrounding the event date.


                                         111
                                                                                        event
                                         110                                           window

                                         109

                                         108
 Portfolio Value (Nov. 30 2012 = 100%)




                                         107

                                         106

                                         105

                                         104

                                         103

                                         102

                                         101

                                         100

                                         99                                                            Portfolio of all H shares

                                         98
                                                                                                       Hong Kong Market
                                         97
                                                                                                       Portfolio excluding H-
                                                                                                       shares
                                         96

                                         95
                                               1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27
                                                                            November December




                                                                                 42
Figure 4. Chinese Market Index before and after the Initiation of the Eight-Point Policy
The cumulative return of a value-weighted portfolio of all listed shares on China’s two mainland stock exchanges, the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen
Stock Exchange. Successively darker gray bands indicate 5-and 3-trading day event windows and the event date, December 4, 2012, when the Party adopted the
Eight-Point Policy to curtail corruption in the Party’s ranks of leading cadres.

                                                     20%



                                                     15%
Cummulative Value-weighted Market Portfolio Return




                                                     10%



                                                      5%



                                                      0%



                                                     -5%



                                                     -10%



                                                     -15%



                                                     -20%
                                                            -50   -45   -40   -35   -30   -25   -20   -15    -10     -5        0   5      10     15     20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                                                                      Event time in trading days (Dec 4 2012 = day 0)



                                                                                                                          43
                                                 Table I
                          Marketization Index by Province-level Jurisdiction
A higher Marketization index indicates more progress toward implementing market reforms. Province-
level jurisdictions include provinces, province-level cities and autonomous regions. Indexes and sub-
indexes are described in detail in Appendix I.

Province                   Marketization       Province                    Marketization
1. Zhejiang                    11.8             17. Hebei                        7.3
2. Jiangsu                     11.5             18. Jilin                        7.1
3. Shanghai                    11.0             19. Hainan                       6.4
4. Guangdong                   10.4             20. Inner Mongolia               6.3
5. Beijing                      9.9             21. Guangxi                      6.2
6. Tianjin                      9.4             22. Shanxi                       6.1
7. Fujian                       9.0             23. Heilongjiang                 6.1
8. Shandong                     8.9             24. Yunnan                       6.1
9. Liaoning                     8.8             25. Ningxia                      5.9
10. Chongqing                   8.1             26. Shaanxi                      5.7
11. Henan                       8.0             27. Guizhou                      5.6
12. Anhui                       7.9             28. Xinjiang                     5.1
13. Jiangxi                     7.7             29. Gansu                        5.0
14. Hubei                       7.7             30. Qinghai                      3.3
15. Sichuan                     7.6             31. Tibet                        0.4
16. Hunan                       7.4
Source: National Economic Research Institute (NERI) data, as reported by Fan et al. (2011)




                                                 44
                                                   Table II
                       Stock Market Reaction and Differentiated by Marketization
This table reports value-weighted cumulative stock returns of market portfolios around the announcement
of the Eight Point Policy on Dec. 4, 2012. Portfolios contain all firms, non-state-owned enterprises
(nonSOEs) only, or state-owned enterprises (SOEs) only; firms in all provinces, low-Marketization (bottom
tercile) provinces or high-Marketization (top tercile) provinces, and all combinations thereof. Marketization
gauges provinces’ progress in implementing market reforms. Differences between nonSOEs and SOEs and
between stocks in high- versus low-Marketization provinces are also computed. Panel A uses a 3-day event
window. The standard deviation used to test whether CR(-1, 1) differs significantly from zero is the square
root of 3 times the variance of daily stock returns from day -211 to day -11. Panel B uses a 5-day window.
The standard deviation used to test whether CR(-2, 2) differs significantly from zero is the square root of 5
times the variance of daily stock returns from day -211 to day -11. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

Panel A. Mean 3-day cumulative returns, CR(-1, 1)
                                                                                                 nonSOE
                                                All firms       nonSOEs           SOEs
                                                                                               minus SOE
              All provinces                    2.77*            2.44            2.94**          -0.51***
      Low Marketization provinces              0.54            -2.72*           3.27*           -5.99***
      High Marketization provinces             3.20**           3.03*           3.28**          -0.25
High minus low Marketization provinces         2.66***          5.75***         0.01


Panel B. Mean 5-day cumulative raw returns, CR(-2, 2)
                                                                                                 nonSOE
                                                All firms       nonSOEs           SOEs
                                                                                               minus SOE
              All provinces                    3.86**           3.55*           4.01**          -0.46**
      Low-Marketization provinces              0.98            -3.00            4.30*           -7.30***
      High-Marketization provinces             4.46**           4.38*           4.50**          -0.13
High- minus low-Marketization provinces        3.49***          7.38***         0.20




                                                   45
                                               Table III
                                  Summary Statistics for Main Variables
Variable definitions and descriptions are provided in Appendix I.
                 Samples                           All firms            nonSOEs             SOEs
                     N                                 2,024              1,173              851
                                                Mean           Std.   Mean        Std.   Mean      Std.
3-day cumulative return CR(-1, 1), %            2.54         3.43     2.41    3.25       2.71      3.67
5-day cumulative return CR(-2, 2), %            3.77         4.65     3.55    4.43       4.09      4.92
Entertainment and travel costs (ETC)            1.46         1.98     1.75    2.18       1.06      1.58
Marketization                                   9.15         2.07     9.56    2.00       8.59      2.05
Growth Potential (Q)                            2.94         2.43     3.18    2.64       2.60      2.06
External Finance Dependence (EFD)               -0.59        2.95     -0.44   2.71       -0.79     3.25
Total Factor Productivity (TFP)                 2.84         5.49     3.02    5.49       2.60      5.49
GDP Growth, %                                   11.75        1.88     11.56   1.75       12.02     2.02
Log(GDP per capita)                             10.59        0.45     10.63   0.41       10.52     0.49
Education Spending/GDP, %                       2.69         1.16     2.52    1.10       2.92      1.21
Firm Size (log of Total Assets)                 21.67        1.31     21.24   1.06       22.26     1.40
Leverage (Liabilities/Total Assets)             0.46         0.62     0.40    0.76       0.55      0.31
Research and Development
                                                0.02         0.03     0.02    0.03       0.01      0.02
(R&D/sales)




                                                        46
                                                 Table IV
                        Regression Analyses of Firm-level Cumulative Returns
Regressions explain 3-day (Panel A) and 5-day (Panel B) cumulative returns, relative to industry fixed
effects. Explanatory variables include the market reform index (Marketization), Entertainment and
Travel Costs (ETC), and Total Factor Productivity, provincial GDP Growth, Log(per capita GDP),
Education Spending/GDP, and firm-level controls (Firm Size, Leverage, and R&D). Regressions also
include interactions of Marketization with External Finance Dependence (industry fixed effects subsume
External Finance Dependence main effects), Growth Potential (industry fixed effects subsume Growth
Potential main effects), and ETC and Total Factor Productivity. Appendix I presents detailed definitions
of all the variables. P-values are in parentheses. Significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels indicated by *,
**, and ***, respectively.

Panel A: Explained variable is 3-day cumulative raw return CR(-1,1)
Subsamples                                    nonSOEs                                 SOEs
                                          (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)
Marketization                            0.181***         0.047           -0.169*         -0.135
                                        (0.00)           (0.58)           (0.09)          (0.26)
   × Growth Potential                                     0.037***                         0.007
                                                         (0.00)                           (0.60)
   × External Finance Dependence                          0.019***                        -0.011
                                                         (0.00)                           (0.34)
   × Total Factor Productivity                            0.029**                         -0.027*
                                                         (0.02)                           (0.08)
   × ETC                                                  0.029**                         -0.040*
                                                         (0.03)                           (0.05)
Total Factor Productivity                0.040**          0.030            0.021           0.030
                                        (0.03)           (0.12)           (0.60)          (0.45)
ETC                                     -0.111***        -0.136***         0.044          0.099**
                                        (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.40)          (0.04)
GDP Growth                               0.208***         0.213***        -0.044          -0.041
                                        (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.35)          (0.41)
Log(GDP per capita)                      0.208*           0.223           -0.073          -0.097
                                        (0.06)           (0.29)           (0.72)          (0.63)
Education Spending/GDP                   0.238***         0.227*          -0.194          -0.166
                                        (0.00)           (0.06)           (0.239)         (0.31)
P-value of Marketization and
                                                          0.04                             0.06
its cross-terms joint F-test
Controls & Industry fixed-effects         Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
Bidirectional clustering by             Prov, Ind        Prov, Ind        Prov, Ind       Prov, Ind
Observations                             1,173            1,173             851              851
Adjusted R-squared                       0.057            0.062            0.075           0.078

                                                    47
Panel B: Explained variable is 5-day cumulative raw return CR(-2,2)
Subsamples                                    nonSOEs                             SOEs
                                       (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
Marketization                         0.266**         0.128           -0.138        -0.155
                                     (0.02)          (0.35)           (0.17)        (0.21)
   × Growth Potential                                 0.029***                       0.034**
                                                     (0.00)                         (0.02)
   × External Finance Dependence                      0.035***                      -0.016**
                                                     (0.00)                         (0.02)
   × Total Factor Productivity                        0.026*                        -0.023
                                                     (0.05)                         (0.23)
   × ETC                                              0.059***                      -0.062**
                                                     (0.00)                         (0.03)
Total Factor Productivity            0.071***         0.060***         0.085         0.092
                                    (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.21)        (0.15)
ETC                                 -0.199***        -0.249***         0.076         0.158**
                                     (0.00)          (0000)           (0.17)        (0.02)
GDP Growth                           0.287***         0.284**         -0.098        -0.089
                                    (0.00)           (0.01)           (0.24)        (0.32)
Log(GDP per capita)                  0.172            0.223           -0.453**      -0.499**
                                    (0.50)           (0.50)           (0.034        (0.02)
Education Spending/GDP               0.375**          0.354*          -0.176        -0.139
                                    (0.05)           (0.09)           (0.41)        (0.51)
P-value of Marketization and
                                                     0.04                            0.03
its cross-terms joint F-test
Controls & Industry fixed-effects     Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes
Bidirectional clustering by         Prov, Ind        Prov, Ind        Prov, Ind     Prov, Ind
Observations                         1,173            1,173            851               851
Adjusted R-squared                   0.099            0.105            0.090         0.093




                                                48
                                             Appendix I
                                        Variable Descriptions
Variables                                                  Descriptions
CR(-1, 1)                     Three-trading-day cumulative stock return around the initiation of the
                              Eight-Point Policy on December 4, 2102, in percent.

CR(-2, 2)                     Five-trading-day cumulative stock return around the December 4, 2012
                              initiation of the Eight-Point Policy, in percent.

ETC                           Entertainment and travel costs as percent of sales in 2011.

SOEs                          Indicator variable set to one if the firm is ultimately controlled by the
                              state or state organs and to zero otherwise, using a 30% “weakest link in
                              the control chain” rule as per the guidelines by China Stock Market and
                              Accounting Research (CSMAR) and the China Securities Regulatory
                              Commission (CSRC).

Marketization                 A summary index measuring progress in implementing market reforms
                              for each of China's province-level jurisdictions (provinces, province-
                              level cities, and autonomous regions). A higher index means more
                              complete market reforms. Source: Fan et al. (2011).
Growth Potential              Industry-average market value over book value of equity.

External Finance              Industry-average of capital expenditures less cash flow from operations,
Dependence (EFD)              all divided by capital expenditures.

Total Factor Productivity     Total factor productivity, estimated for each firm using the methodology
(TFP)                         developed by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003).

GDP Growth, %                 Province real GDP growth, averaged over 2009 to 2011.

Log(GDP per capita)           Log of province real GDP per capita, averaged over 2009 to 2011.

Education                     Province education expenditures over GDP, averaged over 2009 to 2011.
Spending/GDP, %

Firm Size Log(total assets)   The logarithm of firm total assets.

Leverage Liabilities/total    Firm total liabilities over total assets.
assets

Research and Development      Firm research and development expenses over total sales, set to zero for
(R&D/sales)                   firms not reporting research and development spending.




                                                    49
