NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JUDGES, JUVENILES AND IN-GROUP BIAS
Briggs Depew
Ozkan Eren
Naci Mocan
Working Paper 22003
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22003
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

We thank Orley Ashenfelter, Katherine Barnes, Jeff Butler, David Card, Price Fishback, Bill Horace,
Leyla Mocan, Ron Oaxaca, Anne Morrison Piehl, Michael Price, Todd Sorensen and the participants
of the 2015 University of Arizona Conference in Recognition of Ron Oaxaca. The data used in this
study are provided by the Louisiana Office of Juvenile Justice. We thank the Office of Social Service
Research and Development (OSSRD) in the College of Human Sciences and Education at Louisiana
State University for guidance with the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Briggs Depew, Ozkan Eren, and Naci Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Judges, Juveniles and In-group Bias
Briggs Depew, Ozkan Eren, and Naci Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 22003
February 2016
JEL No. D03,J15,K4,K41
ABSTRACT
We investigate the existence of in-group bias (preferential treatment of one’s own group) in court decisions.
Using the universe of juvenile court cases in a U.S. state between 1996 and 2012 and exploiting random
assignment of juvenile defendants to judges, we find evidence for negative racial in-group bias in judicial
decisions. All else the same, black (white) juveniles who are randomly assigned to black (white)
judges are more likely to get incarcerated (as opposed to being placed on probation), and they receive
longer sentences. Although observed in experimental settings, this is the first empirical evidence of
negative in-group bias, based on a randomization design outside of the lab. Explanations for this finding
are provided.
Briggs Depew
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2312 BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
bdepew@lsu.edu
Ozkan Eren
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2305 Business Education Complex
Baton Rouge, LA, 70803
oeren@lsu.edu

Naci Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
3039 BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu

Judges, Juveniles and In-group Bias

1 Introduction
This paper makes contributions to two areas of investigation: the analysis of differential
treatment of minorities in the justice system, and the investigation of how group membership
(group identity) impacts individual behavior. Over the last few decades a large body of research
has emerged investigating unequal treatment of minorities by law enforcement authorities, and in
the judicial system. Prominent examples of this line of inquiry include research on whether
racial and ethnic minorities are treated differently by the police (Grogger and Ridgeway 2006,
Persico et al. 2001), and the extent to which the probability of a guilty verdict and the severity of
a sentence are related to the attributes of the defendants, judges and jurors. The overarching
question is whether the judicial process is unbiased (Alesina and La Ferrara 2015, Rehavi and
Starr 2014, Abrams et. al 2012, Argys and Mocan 2004).
In order to guard against any capricious and discriminatory behavior of the courts towards
minorities, some scholars have suggested that racial and gender diversity of the courts could be a
mechanism through which different voices and perspectives can be introduced into the judicial
decision-making process (Ifill 2000). Specifically, it has been argued that changing the racial
and gender composition of judges may impact the substantive outcomes of cases pertaining to
minority groups because minority judges bring their own perspectives to the bench. The implicit
assumption of this argument is that the outcome of the case would be impacted if a judge shares
similar identity attributes with the defendant or the plaintiff.
Yet, judges are bound by institutional constraints and they are expected to apply the law
blindly, in an unbiased manner. Thus, whether or not in-group bias (preferential treatment of the
1

members of one’s own group) exists in judicial decision-making is an important question with
implications beyond the criminal justice system.1
The influential paper of Akerlof and Kranton (2000) highlighted the importance of group
identity in economic behavior. Laboratory experiments have shown that when subjects are
matched with others who are labeled as members of an in-group, they are more likely to reward
those in-group members for good behavior (Chan and Li 2009). Goette, Huffman and Meier
(2012) show that in-group effect is stronger when in-group members have social ties (as opposed
to just having been labeled as belonging to the same group), and they argue for the existence of
heightened empathy toward group members.
On the other hand, evidence is less clear regarding punishment of in-group members.
While some papers reported experimental evidence that people impose weaker punishment on ingroup members when those in-group members violate a social norm of cooperation (Mussweiler
and Ockenfels 2013, Boyd et al. 2006), other research has found that in-group members may be
punished more severely when they defect (Mendoza et al. 2014, Goette et la. 2006). In a
different vein, it has been reported that minority donors are less generous towards minority
solicitors who seek to raise funds for charity (see List and Price 2009 and the literature they cite).
Thus, the outcome of in-group matching is unclear when members of the in-group visibly
violate a social norm, or if there is mistrust (founded or unfounded) towards them. Furthermore,
it is unclear whether in-group favoritism or prejudice is driven by beliefs or preferences. While
preferences refer to predispositions, beliefs are based on expectations of future behavior (see
Everett, Faber and Crockett 2015 for a summary). Put differently, any reaction to an in-group
For example, the impact on test scores and other student outcomes of teacher-student matching by race
or gender has received attention (Fairlie, Hoffman and Oreopoulos, forthcoming, Hoffman and
Oreopoulos 2009, Dee 2005), although it is difficult to determine whether the effects are due to in-group
bias or role-modeling. Another example of in-group bias in a different domain is the investigation of the
impact of caseworker-unemployed worker matching by social class (Behncke et al. 2010)

1

2

member’s actions (especially bad behavior) may represent opinions about that member’s
behavior in the future. This point is particularly relevant in analyses that seek to explain the
behavior of judges in reaction to delinquent behavior of individuals who can be classified as ingroup members of judges, defined by race or ethnicity.
As an investigation of the existence of in-group bias in the courts, Shayo and Zussman
(2011) analyzed data from Israeli small claims courts where the assignment of a case to an Israeli
or Arab judge is random. They found evidence that a claim was more likely to be accepted if
assigned to a judge who was of the same ethnicity as the plaintiff, and that this effect was
associated with terrorism intensity in the area surrounding the court, preceding the judicial
decision. Similarly, Gazal-Ayal and Sulitzeanu-Kenan (2010) found in-group bias in Israeli
Arab and Jewish judges’ decisions on criminal cases.
The existence and the extent of in-group bias in courts, however, could be culture- and
context-specific. The variation in the setting (e.g. criminal vs. civil cases, state vs., federal
courts), and the nature of the judicial decision (low-stakes vs. high-stakes) could matter, along
with the historical background in which the judicial system operates. This suggests that the ingroup bias reported in a particular country (e.g. Israel), with a given history of ethnic and civil
conflict and minority disenfranchisement, may have little validity in some other country, such as
the United States.
Evidence is mixed regarding in-group bias in the U.S. courts. Boyd, Epstein and Martin
(2010) found that a judge’s gender makes a difference in the outcomes of sex discrimination
cases. Gruhl, Spohn and Welsh (1981) analyzed convicting and sentencing behavior of male and
female judges in felony cases. While they could not find evidence for differences in convicting,

3

they reported that female judges imposed longer sentences on female defendants.2 Much of the
existing work, however, is based on small samples, or makes inference using data from one city,
or a few districts. Consequently, as Schanzenbach (2005) wrote “the literature on judging has
not produced consistent findings regarding the impact of a judge’s race on his or her decisions.”3
In this paper we employ the universe of juvenile court decisions in the state of Louisiana
between 1996 and 2012. Exploiting the fact that cases are randomly assigned to judges, and
making use of the racial diversity of judges, we investigate the extent of racial in-group bias in
juvenile courts. Our identification strategy relies on a stream of juvenile defenders, who are
apprehended in the same parish (county) for the same offense, and are randomly assigned to a
given judge in a particular jurisdiction. Variation in treatment severity between observationally
identical black and white defenders who faced the same judge (who is black or white) allows us
to determine the extent of in-group bias.4
We find evidence for negative racial in-group bias in sentencing. Put differently, all else
the same, black (white) juveniles who are randomly assigned to black (white) judges are more
likely to get incarcerated (as opposed to being placed on probation), and they receive longer
sentences. Although this finding may be surprising at first sight, as described above, it is
consistent with recent experimental evidence indicating that members of the in-group are treated
more harshly when they violate a social norm. There are a number of reasons for unfavorable
treatment of juveniles by judges who are members of the same racial group. First, given that
2

In a related paper Glynn and Sen (2015) analyzed whether having a daughter motivates judges to vote
more favorably towards women on gender issues.

3

Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson (2012) analyzed the impact of the racial composition of juries in
Florida, and found that all-white juries are more likely to convict black defendants.
4

Random assignment of judges has been used recently as an identification strategy to determine the
impact of sentence severity (based on judges’ incarceration tendencies) on recidivism and high school
completion (Aizer and Doyle 2015, Di Tella and Schargrodsky 2013, Green et al. 2010)

4

there is substantial race-matching between crime victims and their perpetrators, a juvenile
offender is likely to have caused harm (physical, or property) to someone of the same race.5 If
judges have an in-group bias regarding the well-being of their own race, they are expected to
punish perpetrators who exerted harm on that in-group, who in this case is also someone of that
same group. Second, being a member of an in-group may provide useful inside information
about future behavior of another member of the group. For example, in India, having an ingroup match (based on religion and caste) between a loan officer and the borrower is shown to
increase the performance of the loan, presumably because the loan officer can evaluate better the
soft information that can be extracted from an in-group member (Fisman et al. 2015). This
argument, which is consistent with the model proposed by Cornell and Welch (1996), implies
that judges can assess the subtle clues better and they can extract soft information more
effectively from a member of their in-group, and that harsher treatment of judges targeted to their
own race could be efficient. Even though we cannot determine the particular reason(s) for the
emergence of this result, it is nevertheless important to highlight that this is the first paper, that
we know of, to provide evidence on negative in-group bias outside of an experimental setting, in
naturally occurring data.
Section 2 describes the institutional setting of the juvenile court system. Section 3
describes the data used in the study and provides the details of the random assignment of judges.
Section 4 presents the details of the empirical implementation, section 5 discusses the results and
section 6 concludes.

5

For example, 56 percent of white victims had white offenders, and 62 percent of black victims had black
offenders (BJS, NCVS 2012-13).

5

2 Institutional Setting
Intake, the first step in the juvenile justice process, is initiated through a formal complaint
filed on a juvenile by a citizen, parent, school administrator, or by the arresting police officer.
After a formal complaint or an arrest, a report is submitted to the District Attorney's office for
review. The District Attorney (DA) proceeds by either dismissing the case, referring the case to
Families in Needs of Services (FINS), proceeding informally by referring the case to a diversion
program or entering into an Informal Adjustment Agreement with the juvenile (Ch.C. Art 839),
or formally pursing the case by filing a petition with the Clerk of the Court's Office.6

7

Cases that are pursued by the DA, through the filing of a petition, are brought before a
judge at a petition hearing. The judge at the petition hearing is randomly assigned to the case
unless the youth has been found guilty in a previous episode in the juvenile justice system. In
such instances, the judge who handled the juvenile's initial case is re-assigned. These cases are
excluded from the analyses. That is, we focus on cases where a juvenile interacts with a judge
for the first time.
Under the provisions of the Louisiana juvenile justice system, within each court, a
random allotment system is implemented by the Clerk's office for all cases filed.8 The judge who

6

Cases referred to FINS typically involve conduct that would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
Common examples include truancy, breaking school rules, runaway behavior, and violation of a law for a
child under the age of 10. The FINS program works with troubled youth and his/her family to help rectify
the issues causing the complaint.
Cases are assigned to diversion programs which are designed to discourage juveniles from committing
additional offenses. Youth that successfully complete the diversion program have their charges
dismissed. Like being assigned to a diversion program, an IAA is not considered adjudication. The
agreement outlines the terms and conditions of the youth’s supervision. Youth that violate the terms of
their IAA are referred back to the DA and the case proceeds to an adjudication hearing. If the terms of the
agreement are met by the youth, then the case may be closed (Ch.C. Art. 841).

7

(Rules for Louisiana District Courts, Chapter 14, Appendix 14.0A, various years). This is similar to the
process in Cook County, Illinois; see Abrams et al. (2012) for a similar discussion.

8

6

is randomly assigned to the case continues to steward all hearings (petition, adjudication and
disposition). Prior to the petition hearing, the court appoints an attorney to discuss the case and to
offer advice to the youth. The youth, however, may proceed without the assistance of a lawyer if
agreed upon by the parents. At the petition hearing the youth may admit to the offense, deny the
offense, or enter a response of nolo contendere (no contest) (CHC 856). If the youth admits to
the offense or pleads no contest, the court may render an adjudication (delinquency verdict) at
that time. If the youth denies the allegations of the petition, the court shall set the matter for an
adjudication hearing that will occur at a later date (CHC 856).
For juveniles who deny the allegations of the petition, the timing between the petition
hearing and the adjudication hearing can vary. Depending on the alleged crime and whether the
juvenile is being held in custody, the length between the hearings could be as long as 90 days,
and the court may extend the period even further for "good cause" (CHC 877).9
At the adjudication hearing, the sequence of events follow standard procedures, in which
both parties are able present evidence and examine and cross-examine witnesses (CHC 878-881).
The hearing is held before the court without a jury. Thus, the judge has the sole responsibility of
declaring whether the evidence warrants an adjudication that the child is delinquent. Youth not
found to be delinquent are released and charges of the case are dropped. In this situation, the case
does not enter the OJJ data base. If the judge finds the youth to be delinquent, the judge then sets
a disposition (i.e. sentencing) hearing for a later date.

In preparation for the adjudication hearing, there is a discovery process that follows the order of the
Louisiana Criminal Court. The youth may receive an exam by a physician, optometrist, audiologist,
psychologist, or psychiatrist. This exam shall not occur until five days after the clerk of the court notifies
all parties of the examination order. Findings of the examinations are to be submitted within 30 days from
the time it is ordered (CHC 867). During the pre-adjudication time period, the DA and defense attorney
prepare for the case gathering evidence, including witnesses.
9

7

At the disposition hearing, the judge determines the type and the duration of the sentence
rendered to the delinquent youth. Disposed youth are either incarcerated or released to the
supervision of a parent or guardian under probation. The most severe type of incarceration is
when the youth is assigned to the custody of the Department of Public Safety and Corrections to
be confined in secure placement. Less severe incarceration consists of the delinquent youth being
removed from their home and being placed in a non-secure residential placement or treatment
facility, like a group home. Non-incarcerated dispositions consist of the delinquent youth being
placed on formal probation for a specified period of time with rules and regulations that must be
met.10
The judge determines the disposition by the guidelines set by the Louisiana Children's
Code. The code requires that crimes of first degree murder, second degree murder, aggravated or
first degree rape and aggravated kidnapping receive a disposition of secure custody until the age
of twenty-one years without the benefit of parole, probation, suspension of imposition or
execution of sentence, or modification of sentence (CHC 897.1).11 We exclude these cases from
the analysis. For other offenses, the children's code provides only general guidelines (see CHC
901).12 Thus, the judge has discretion on both the sentence type and the sentence length.

One other non-custody option available to the judge is to enter into a deferred disposition agreement,
rather than follow a formal disposition. Under a deferred disposition agreement, the child must comply
with the conditions set by the court (i.e., counseling, curfews, school attendance).

10

Similarly, armed robbery committed by youth 14 years of age and older at the commission of the
offense are also required to receive a disposition of secure custody without benefit of parole, probation,
suspension of imposition or execution of sentence, or modification of sentence.

11

In general, the code suggests, "the court shall not remove a child from the custody of his parents unless
his welfare or the safety and protection of the public cannot, in the opinion of the court, be adequately
safeguarded without such removal." And that "the court should impose the least restrictive disposition …
which the court finds is consistent with the circumstances of the case, the needs of the child, and the best
interest of society" (CHC 901).

12

8

In this paper we investigate the two decisions made by judges at the disposition stage:
whether the juvenile should be incarcerated (as opposed to being placed on probation), and the
length of the sentence.

3 Random Assignment of Judges and the Data
3.1 Random Assignment of Judges
In section 2 we highlighted that the defendants in the Louisiana juvenile justice system
are randomly assigned to judges. One obstacle in our analysis, however, is that we only observe
the juveniles who are delinquent. That is, the OJJ data contain records only of those who are
determined by a judge to be guilty, those who admitted to the charges in the petition hearing, or
those who answered “no contest” in the petition hearing. This is potentially problematic because
the judge who is randomly assigned to the case is the same judge who presided all hearings. Put
differently, the judge who makes the determination of guilt/innocence also determines the length
of the sentence and whether the juvenile is incarcerated. As such, our sample is likely
contaminated with non-random selection of juvenile defendants to the extent that judges’
decisions at the adjudication hearings are correlated with their decisions at disposition. For
example, if judges discriminate against a certain group of juveniles (e.g. minorities) during the
adjudication process by being more or less lenient towards that group, then racial differences in
sentence type and sentence length may be driven by differences between the types of juveniles
who are filtered out during the adjudication process.
To circumvent this issue, we focus on juveniles who pleaded guilty or answered no
contest to the charges filed against them. These individuals bypassed the adjudication hearing
without being exposed to the judge at that stage. In these cases, the sole responsibility of the

9

judge is to determine the disposition outcome for the juvenile by setting the disposition type
(custody or probation) and the disposition length. In the data, we cannot distinguish between the
juveniles who were actually adjudicated delinquent through a hearing, the ones who pleaded
guilty, and the ones who did not contest the charge. Consequently, in an effort to ensure that we
focus only on those defendants who were not seen by a judge before the disposition hearing (who
were not found to be delinquent by a judge), we consider only those individuals for whom the
date of the petition hearing and the date of adjudication are the same. As described earlier,
juveniles who enter a plea of not guilty in the petition hearing will have a separate adjudication
hearing at a later date. Thus, if the petition and disposition dates are the same, this implies that
the judge has not made a guilty/not guilty decision; instead, the juvenile has pleaded guilty or no
contest to the charge filed. Put differently, the defendants who admitted to, or did not contest the
charge, received an adjudication of delinquency without an adjudication hearing. These
defendants went straight to the disposition stage, where the judge decided on the type and the
length of disposition. This is the core sample of juveniles that will be analyzed in the paper.

3.1 Data
The data for this study come from the Louisiana Department of Public Safety and
Corrections, Youth Services, Office of Juvenile Justice (OJJ) and include the universe of case
records from 1996 to 2012 in which juveniles were found to be delinquent.13 Therefore, the data
set does not contain information of individuals who were not found to be delinquent. Nor does it
contain information on formal complaints and arrests that were not pursued through a petition by
the DA (i.e. diversion programs, FINS, and dropped cases).
Adjudicated through a formal adjudication hearing or admission to or a response of no contest to the
allegations in the petition.
13

10

For each observed case record, we have information on both the juvenile defendant and
the case itself. The defendant data include information on race, gender and age of the juvenile,
parish (country) of residence, parish of offense committed, the exact statute offense committed,
and a unique individual identifier. The case data include information on the dates of the petition
hearing, adjudication hearing, and disposition hearing, the judge's disposition type (custody
versus probation) and the disposition length, the court in which the hearings are held and the
name of the judge. By using the names of the judges, we can gather information on them: the
most critical one, for the purposes of this paper, being the race of the judge.
We consider two outcomes of interest: (i) the type of disposition rendered to the youth
(custody confinement or probation), and (ii) the disposition length. In order to circumvent any
potential confounding that may arise from multiple offenses and/or prior criminal history of the
juvenile, we limit our attention to the first time delinquents ages 10 to 17 who are either black or
white and who were convicted for only one statute offense.14 We drop all cases in which the
offense is first degree murder, second degree murder, aggravated or first degree rape, aggravated
kidnapping or armed robbery since the judge is not supposed to deviate from the sentencing
guidelines.15 Because the central element of the analysis is to exploit the random assignment of
the race of the judge within a court, we drop all courts that do not have at least one black judge

14

The vast majority of cases consist of charges of only one statute offense. In the data 90.4% of cases
consist of one offense, 9.5% of cases consist of two offenses, and 0.1% of cases consist of 3 or more
offenses. It is worth noting that for children accused of committing a delinquent act, the juvenile justice
system in Louisiana has jurisdiction over cases of youth aged 10 through 17. However, if the juvenile is
age 17 at the time of offense, the case is moved to adult court (CHC 801; 804).

15

This only amounts to 243 cases being dropped.

11

and one white judge. Having imposed these sample restrictions, we end up with a sample of
12,800 case records (juveniles) from a total of 105 judges.16
Columns (1)-(6) of Table 1 present descriptive statistics for adjudicated juveniles in the
data. The first two columns pertain to all juveniles. Columns (3) and (4) display information on
juveniles who have the same petition and adjudication dates. As described in the previous
section, this sub-sample of juveniles is plausibly free of sample selection issues. Columns (5) and
(6) pertain to juveniles who have different petition and adjudication dates. This means that this
particular group is a selected sample, because they have been in front of the same judge
sequentially. Therefore the adjudication decision of the judge may be impacted by the first-stage
decision (decision on the petition) made by the same judge. The weighted average of columns (1)
and (2) suggest that around 33 percent of the juveniles are incarcerated (i.e. placed under secure
or non-secure custody).17 The sample contains approximately three times more males than
females and almost five times as many black youth as white youth. The average age for first time
delinquency is around 15 years, and crimes that are considered felonies account for
approximately 44 percent of all offenses.
Figure 1 displays the distribution of the disposition lengths rendered by judges. There is
considerable bunching around half-year thresholds. In fact, we observe that 50% of the
disposition lengths are within 2 days of a half-year multiple (half-year, one-year, one and a halfyear, etc.). The spikes in disposition length are driven by judges commonly choosing disposition
lengths at half-year multiples and not from mandatory sentencing guidelines. It should be noted,

The main results, described in section 5 below, are similar to those obtained from the sample that
includes courts with no variation in the race of the judge.

16

17

This is higher than the national average incarceration rate (e.g., 25 percent in 2011) among all
adjudicated cases (Hockenberry and Puzzanchera 2014) and the average incarceration rate (23 percent)
reported in Aizer and Doyle (2013) in Cook County, Illinois from 1991 to 2006.

12

once again, that there is no mandatory sentencing, and judges exercise considerable discretion in
sentencing. Figure 2 shows that for the four most frequent juvenile offenses in the data
(possession, manufacturing, and distribution of drugs; ungovernable; theft of goods; and simple
burglary) we observe a similar bunching at half-year intervals. However, within each offense
there is significant variation in disposition length. For example, the average disposition length of
possession, manufacturing, and distribution of drugs is 606 days, with a standard deviation of
423 days.
Of the 12,800 cases in the data (displayed in columns 1 and 2 of Table 1) 5,142 have
common petition and adjudication dates. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1 present the descriptive
statistics for these juveniles; and columns (5) and (6) of Table 1 present the descriptive statistics
for juveniles with different petition and adjudication dates. It is interesting to note that although
we don't observe substantial differences across disposition lengths and incarceration rates
between the two subsamples, the felony offense rate is higher for youth who have different
petition and adjudication dates. This is consistent with the supposition that youth facing more
serious allegations are more likely to go to trial (adjudication hearing), while youth of less
serious allegations are more likely to admit or not contest the charge.
From a total of 105 judges that are in the effective sample, 76 percent are white (80 of
105 judges) and 30 percent (31 of 105) are female. In the analysis, we rely on judge fixed effects
to control for judge-specific time-invariant unobservables that may impact judges’ sentencing
tendencies.

13

4 Empirical Implementation
4.1 Randomness of the Judge Assignment
To formally investigate the extent to which juvenile defendants are in fact randomly
assigned to judges, we test whether characteristics of the juvenile or the case are correlated with
the race of the assigned judge. We run a regression of a black judge indicator on juvenile and
case characteristics, controlling for any variables on which the randomization was conditioned
(e.g. court-by-year fixed effects). More specifically, we estimate

where

is an indicator that takes the value one if judge in court-by-year cell , who is faced

by juvenile defendant , is black; and zero otherwise.

is an indicator representing a particular

attribute of the juvenile or the case. Four specifications are estimated, where each specification
includes a different attribute (an indicator for black defendant, female defendant, above median
age, i.e. ages 15-17, and felony offense).

is the set of court-by-year fixed effects and

is an

unobserved component.
Columns (1)-(3) of Table 2 display the results from the randomization tests using data
from all delinquent youth. Columns (4)-(6) present the results pertaining to delinquent youth
with the same petition and adjudication dates; and columns (7)-(9) show the results for the
sample of youth who have different petition and adjudication dates. Each point estimate and the
corresponding standard error (in parenthesis) pertain to a separate OLS regression. Standard
errors are clustered at the court level. Columns (1), (4), and (7) include court-by-year fixed
effects. To further test the sensitivity of randomization tests we add in fixed effects for the
parish the offense was committed and the parish of residence of the juvenile (displayed in

14

columns (2), (5), and (8)) and fixed effects for the offense (displayed in columns (3), (6), and
(9)).18
For the sample of juveniles who have the same petition and adjudication date, the
coefficient estimates in Table 2 (columns 4, 5 and 6) are all very small in magnitude and none of
them is statistically different from zero. Adding parish of residence fixed effects, parish of
offense committed fixed effects, and offense fixed effects does not significantly alter the
estimates. It is worth noting that the sample of juveniles who have different petition and
adjudication dates (columns 7, 8, and 9) does not produce consistently insignificant point
estimates. Rather, both gender and felony offenses are both statistically significant indicators of
the judge’s race, suggesting that the sample of juveniles with different petition and adjudication
dates may in fact be effected by the judge’s decision in the adjudication hearing. Recall that this
is the sample of juveniles who faced the same judge previously. Overall, the results in Table 2
provide additional assurance that the randomization of judges is carried out in practice and that
focusing on youth who have the same petition and adjudication dates circumvents biases in the
adjudication hearing that may be carried over from the petition hearing.

4.2 The Impact of Racial in-Group Bias
In order to isolate any potential racial disparity in disposition outcomes by the race of
judges we estimate the following regression model
(
where

)

is the outcome of interest. We analyze two outcomes for juvenile facing

judge in court-by-year cell : disposition type (an indicator for incarceration), and disposition
18

We observe 165 different offenses in the data.

15

length (log of the sentence length).

is an indicator that takes the value of one if judge who

was assigned to youth in court-by-year cell
youth is black.

is black. Similarly,

is the set of court-by-year fixed effects,

takes the value of one if

stands for judge fixed effect, and

is an unobserved error term.
Under random assignment, the coefficient estimate of

provides an unbiased estimate

of the effect of same race assignment (of the judge and juvenile) on the outcome of interest. For
example, in the analysis of disposition length (sentence length),

reflects the average change

in the disposition length for black juveniles, relative to white juveniles, that stems from
assignment to a black judge as opposed to a white judge. Conversely,

is the average change in

the outcome for white juveniles, relative to blacks, from having been assigned to a white judge.
As such, this particular identification strategy does not allow us to isolate whether the estimated
effect is driven by white judges, black judges, white juveniles, or black juveniles.
To emphasize this point, consider the following
|

̃|

|

̃|
̃|

|

̃|

|

Equation (3a) displays the expected value of the disposition outcome when both the judge and
the juvenile defendant are white. Equation (3b) shows the expected value of the outcome when
the judge is black but the defendant is white. ̃ |
judge fixed effect on the outcome

in equation (3a) is the weighted average

from the set of white judges, and ̃ |

16

in Equation (3b) is

the weighted average judge fixed effect on

from the set of black judges, conditional on court-

by-year fixed effects.
In this framework, the expected difference between being assigned to a black judge
is equal to ̃ |

instead of a white judge for a white juvenile

̃|

, and the

expected difference between being assigned to a black judge instead of a white judge for a black
juvenile

̃|

is equal to (

differences
value of

̃|

is simply,

. The important takeaway is that the expected

, which can be written as
|

is simply,
|

(
Hence, the estimate of

). Therefore, the expected difference in the

|

|

)

is the effect of a youth being disposed by a judge of the same race

(averaged between white and black juvenile-judge pairs) relative to a youth being disposed by a
judge of a different race (averaged between non-matched race juvenile-judge pairs). This
particular specification we employ to identify the in-group effect is the same specification used
by Hoffman and Oreopoulos (2009).
It is worth clarifying that black and white juveniles are pooled together to estimate causal
effects. We cannot control for judge fixed effects if the analysis is based on samples partitioned
by race of the juvenile because a judge fixed effect would remove all variation from the regressor
of interest: the race of the judge. Even though judges are randomly assigned to cases, the
inclusion of controls for the race of the judge in a pooled analysis, or more generally judge fixed
effects, are important. To see this point more clearly, consider two races, A and B, and two
types of judges, low-standard (L) and high-standard (H). Let L and H type judges have different
sentencing behaviors. Now suppose race A judges are more likely to be L-type and race B judges
17

are more likely to be H-type. An analysis of the impact of judge race A on disposition outcome
for a sample of juveniles that consist only of type A will endogenously capture both the effects
from race and the effects from type, differences in L and H. As such, an analysis using
partitioned samples does not allow us to fully disentangle race effects from “type” effects. This
may occur, if courts in jurisdictions where whites are a majority may attract high-standard white
judges, but only low-standard black judges. Similarly, white judges in predominantly black areas
may be of low-standard. Other potential non-random selection of judges by race to courts would
cause similar issues. Hence, the inclusion of judge fixed effects allows us to adjust for such
potential “type” effects.
We report the standard errors clustered at the judge level for all remaining
analysis (105 clusters). The results of the paper remain intact if we instead cluster the standard
errors at the court or parish level. To evaluate the sensitivity of the estimates we present the main
results of Equation 2 using three different specifications that include various controls and fixed
effects. In some specifications we also included the age and gender of the juvenile.

5. Results
5.1 Main Results
Table 3 presents the estimate of

from Equation (2). Panel A displays the results where

the outcome is the logarithm of disposition length. Panel B reports the results from linear
probability models where the dependent variable takes the value of one if the juvenile was
incarcerated, and zero if he/she was placed on probation. In the regressions of Table 3 we
employ the entire sample of delinquent juveniles (12,800 observations) even though the results
obtained from this sample may be confounded with selection. Specifically, in Table 3 we use all

18

juveniles who went through a disposition hearing, regardless of whether they pleaded guilty or
not guilty in the petition hearing (see the discussion on potential sample selection in Section 3).
The estimate of interest,

, measures the impact of same-race assignment (the juvenile being

assigned to a judge of the same race). Column (1) of Table 3 reports the results of the model that
includes judge fixed effects and court-by-year fixed effects. Column (2) adds parish of residency
and parish of offense fixed effects. The model behind column (3) is the same as that of column
(2), but it also includes observable characteristics of the juvenile, which include age and its
square (at time of admittance of delinquency) and an indicator for gender.
The results in Panel A of Table 3 show that when the entire sample is considered, there is
no statistically significant association between same-race juvenile-judge assignment and
disposition length. However, the point estimates are positive suggesting that same race matching
may be positively correlated with disposition length. Panel B of Table 3 provides a similar
result. In this sample of all juvenile defendants, same-race juvenile-judge assignment has no
statistically significant impact on the probability of being incarcerated (vs. being placed on
probation). These estimates, however, may not reflect the causal impact of race-matching. This
is because, as discussed earlier, the decision of judges at the adjudication hearing may have
generated non-random selection of juveniles who then moved to the disposition hearing (thus
being part or the sample of Table 3), and faced the same judge to receive their sentence on the
type and the disposition length. Any biased decision of judges at the adjudication hearing would
render unreliable the estimates reported in Table 3 regarding the disposition outcomes.
The sample of juveniles used in the regressions reported in Table 4 helps us avoid the
potential sample selection bias. These are the juveniles who have the same petition and
adjudication dates. As such, the judge has made one decision on them, rather than two

19

consecutive decisions. Panel A of Table 4 shows that same-race juvenile-judge assignment has a
positive and statistically significant effect on sentence length. The most extensive specification,
presented column (3), suggests that same-race juvenile-judge assignment increases the initial
disposition length rendered at the disposition hearing by 13.9 percent. This corresponds to an 87day longer sentence length for a juvenile assigned to a judge of the same race, relative to the
disposition length of a juvenile assigned to a judge of a different race, even though these
defendants have the same attributes (such as age, gender type of offense committed, and the
parish of the offense). It is worth noting that the point estimates on disposition length are very
stable across the three specifications, ranging from 13.94 percent to 14.62 percent.
The effect of same-race juvenile-judge match on the probability of incarceration is
reported in Panel B of Table 4. The results across the three specifications show an effect of
roughly 4.5 to 5.4 percentage points. This implies that all else the same, if a juvenile defendant
is assigned to a judge of the same race, the defendant is nearly 20 percent more likely to receive
incarceration (instead of being placed on probation).

5.2 Robustness Checks
We implement a number of sensitivity analyses to examine the robustness of our results.
Table 5 presents estimates from the models that include various fixed effects. Column (1) reports
the effect on disposition length and column (2) presents the effect on incarceration probability.
The first row of Table 5 displays estimates that include separate fixed effects for court and judge,
instead of controlling for court-by-year fixed effects. The second row adds in court specific
linear trends. The third row adds in offense fixed effects to the specification presented in

20

Equation 2. The fourth row includes judge-by-year fixed effect and the last row includes courtby-year-by-month fixed effects.
The point estimates reported in Table 5 are very similar to those presented in Table 4,
although the precision of the estimates goes down in some instances. The stability of the
estimated coefficients across the various specifications support the finding that juveniles who are
matched (randomly) with the same race judge receive longer disposition lengths and are more
likely to be incarcerated in custody confinement.
As an additional robustness check we consider whether one outlying judge is driving the
estimated effects. To do so, we estimate Equation 2 controlling juvenile characteristics, judge
fixed effects, and offense fixed effects but, but we drop from the sample all cases handled by one
particular judge. We repeat this process 105 times so that each judge is omitted one-at-a-time.
We graphically display this analysis in Figures 3 and 4 for the 25 black judges in the sample. As
shown in the figures, removal of any one particular black judge from the analysis does not alter
the impact of same-race matching on either the disposition length (Figure 3) or the disposition
type (Figure 4), indicating that the results are not driven by a particular black judge. Repeating
the same exercise for the 80 white judges provided the same conclusion: the results are not
driven by the behavior of a particular white judge.

6. Discussion and Conclusion
This paper aims to contribute to two research areas: the investigation of unequal treatment
of minorities in the justice system, and the analysis of in-group bias (preferential treatment of
one’s own group). In the former area, it is well-documented that there exist disparities between
whites and minorities and between males and females in the application of the law. In response,

21

some scholars have argued for generating racial and gender diversity in the courts to introduce
the perspectives of minorities and females to the decision-making process of judges (Ifill 2000).
This argument is related to our latter area of investigation: in-group bias, or preferential
treatment of the group with which one identifies herself. Group identity is expected to cause
individuals to be more generous towards the members of their in-group. Thus, creating racial,
ethnic and gender diversity in the courts is assumed to counteract the inherent in-group bias that
emerges because of the homogeneity of judges. There is experimental evidence to support the
hypothesis of preferential treatment of members of the in-group (Chen and Li 2009, Goette,
Huffman and Meier 2012), and in-group bias is reported in Israeli courts, where a claim of the
plaintiff is more likely to be accepted if the randomly-assigned judge is of the same ethnicity as
the plaintiff (Shayo and Zussman 2011). On the other hand, it has also been reported that ingroup members are punished more severely when they violate a social norm (Mendoza et al.
2014, Goette et la. 2006).
In this paper we use the universe of juvenile court decisions in the state of Louisiana
between 1996 and 2012. The data include the case records which contain detailed information
on the defendants and the charges, as well as the details of adjudication and disposition including
the guilty/not guilty verdict, the sentence type and sentence length. Also known is the particular
judge who was in charge. A key aspect of our analysis is the fact that defendants are randomly
assigned to judges.
We investigate the existence of racial in-group bias in sentencing of juvenile defendants.
Our identification strategy relies on a stream of juvenile defenders, who are apprehended in the
same parish (county) for the same offense, and randomly assigned to a given judge in a particular
jurisdiction. We find evidence for negative racial in-group bias in sentencing. Black (white)

22

juveniles who are randomly assigned to black (white) judges are 20 percent more likely to get
incarcerated (as opposed to being placed on probation), and they receive sentences that are about
14 percent longer. This negative in-group bias is the first result reported in a non-experimental
setting.
There could be a number of mechanisms that can generate this result. For example, given
that there is substantial race-matching between crime victims and their perpetrators, if judges
belong to the same in-group as the perpetrator, it is likely that the victim is a member of the ingroup as well. Thus, judges may be expected to punish perpetrators who exerted harm on the ingroup.19 Second, being a member of an in-group may provide useful inside information about
future behavior of another member of the group. To the extent that judges can better evaluate the
difficult-to-observe attributes of the same-race defendants, harsher treatment of judges targeted
to their own race could be efficient (Cornell and Welch 1996, Fisman et al. 2015). Along the
same lines, judges may have inside information on the impact of longer incarceration on
recidivism and labor market outcomes. If judges believe that a stricter punishment of the
juvenile would reduce recidivism and would improve the juvenile’s future outcomes, in-group
bias of judges would generate harsher punishment of the juvenile defendants of the same race.20
19

We test this conjecture by implementing our analysis for two subsets of juveniles in our effective
sample: crimes with victims (2,733 observations) and victimless crimes (2,397 observations). Although
the point estimates across the partitioned samples were not statistically different from one another, the
results were informative. If the crime involved a victim, the effect of same race match increased
disposition length by 15.8 percent versus 1.8 percent if the crime was victimless and increased
incarceration by 6.3 percentage points versus 2.8 percentage points if the crime was victimless. That the
estimated effects are larger for juveniles whose crime involved victims (in comparison to those who
committed victimless crimes) arguably provides support for this conjecture.

20

Note that the impact of punishment on future outcomes is still debated. For example, Landersø (2015)
uses register data from Denmark and finds that longer incarceration spells generates lower unemployment
rates and higher earnings, possible due to rehabilitation. Similarly, Kling (2006) reported a small positive
impact of incarceration on employment. On the other hand, Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2013) found a
positive impact of imprisonment on recidivism in Argentina, where the prison conditions are far from
ideal.

23

A similar, but more nuanced explanation is the possibility that the punishment meted out by
judges to defendants of their own race is optimal, but that sentences assigned to defendants of the
opposite race are lenient. This could be the case if judges are concerned about creating the
impression of being prejudiced towards the defendants who are of the opposite race.
The finding of the paper suggests that the in-group bias detected here could be the result
of the beliefs, but not preferences. This is because racial in-group bias driven by preferences
would have produced more lenient punishment for juveniles who are of the same race as the
judge. On the other hand, as described above, there are potential mechanisms through which
judges’ beliefs about future behavior of the juvenile can be impacted, which can translate into the
negative in-group bias reported in the paper. Even though the specific reason for the negative ingroup bias cannot be identified, our results underline the handicap faced by juvenile defendants
in courts when these juveniles face a judge of their own race.

24

Figure 1
Distribution of Disposition Length

25

Figure 2
Distribution of Disposition Length by Offence Type

26

Figure 3
Estimates of Same-race Judge on log Disposition Length
(Excluding one Black Judge at a time)

27

Figure 4
Estimates of Same-race Judge on Incarceration
(Excluding one Black Judge at a time)

28

Table 1
Summary Statistics of Delinquent Juveniles

All Juveniles
(N=12,800)

Disposition length
Incarceration
Female juvenile
Juvenile’s age in years
Felony Offense
N

Black
(1)
605.48
(441.43)
0.34
(0.47)
0.23
(0.42)
15.22
(1.45)
0.44
(0.50)
10,583

White
(2)
578.81
(390.46)
0.30
(0.46)
0.24
(0.43)
15.41
(1.40)
0.46
(0.50)
2,217

Juveniles with the
Same Petition and
Adjudication Dates
(N=5,142)

Black
(3)
652.08
(460.12)
0.23
(0.42)
0.25
(0.43)
15.16
(1.52)
0.41
(0.49)
3,880

White
(4)
652.08
(354.62)
0.21
(0.41)
0.25
(0.43)
15.41
(1.39)
0.42
(0.49)
1,262

Juveniles with
Different Petition and
Adjudication Dates
(N=7,658)

Black
(5)
578.51
(427.97)
0.40
(0.49)
0.22
(0.42)
15.26
(1.41)
0.47
(0.50)
6,703

White
(6)
601.64
(432.43)
0.42
(0.49)
0.23
(0.42)
15.40
(1.40)
0.50
(0.50)
955

Standard deviations are in parentheses. Data are from the Louisiana Office of Juvenile Justice (19962012). Incarceration takes the value of one if a juvenile receives a disposition that requires his or her
initial placement to be in a secure custody or non-secure custody facility, and zero if he/she is placed
on probation.

29

Table 2
Tests for Random Assignment of Judges: Estimated Effect of Juvenile Characteristics on Black Judge Assignment
(Dependent Variable = 1 if the Judge is Black)
All Juveniles

Same Petition and Adjudication
Different Petition and Adjudication
Dates
Dates
(N=12,800)
(N=5,142)
(N=7,658)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Black Juvenile
0.010
0.013
0.015
0.004
0.017
0.009
0.017
0.014
0.023
(0.021)
(0.020)
(0.017)
(0.029)
(0.024)
(0.022)
(0.026)
(0.023)
(0.023)
Female Juvenile
0.016*
0.017*
0.011
-0.003
-0.001
-0.007
0.030**
0.031**
0.021
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.017)
Age 15 or Older
0.007
0.005
0.009
0.007
0.003
0.002
0.006
0.005
0.008
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.013)
Felony Offense
-0.014
-0.015
0.002
-0.001
-0.029*
-0.028*
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.016)
Court-Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Parish of Crime
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Parish of Residence
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Offense FE
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Each point estimate and the corresponding standard error (in parenthesis) is estimated from a separate OLS regression. Standard errors are
clustered on the court level. *: significant at 0.10, **: significant at 0.05, ***: significant at 0.01 level.

30

Table 3
The Impact of Juvenile Defendant-Judge Race Matching on log Disposition
Length and Incarceration (all Juveniles)
(2)
(3)
(1)
Panel A
Log Disposition Length
0.1008
0.0950
Same Race (Judge-Juvenile)
0.0963
(0.0628)
(0.0591)
(0.0601)
Panel B
Incarceration
0.0183
0.0165
Same Race (Judge-Juvenile)
0.0154
(0.0248)
(0.0248)
(0.0242)
Yes
Yes
Judge FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Court-Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Parish FE
No
No
Yes
Juvenile Controls
No
12,800
12,800
N
12,800
FE stands for fixed-effects. Juvenile Controls: age indicators, gender, county of
residence, county where the crime was committed. Standard errors, clustered on the
judge, are reported in parentheses.

31

Table 4
The Impact of Juvenile Defendant-Judge Race Matching on
log Disposition Length and Incarceration
(Juveniles who have the same Petition Hearing and Adjudication Dates)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A
Log Disposition Length
Same Race (Judge-Juvenile)
0.1402**
0.1462**
0.1394**
(0.0613)
(0.0693)
(0.0686)
Panel B
Incarceration
Same Race (Judge-Juvenile)
0.0543**
0.0473*
0.0447*
(0.0240)
(0.0243)
(0.0246)
Judge FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Court-Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Parish FE
No
Yes
Yes
Juvenile Controls
No
No
Yes
N
5,142
5,142
5,142
FE stands for fixed-effects. Juvenile Controls: age indicators, gender, county of
residence, county where the crime was committed. Standard errors, clustered on the
judge, are reported in parentheses. *: significant at 0.10, **: significant at 0.05, ***:
significant at 0.01 level.

32

Table 5
The Impact of Juvenile Defendant-Judge Race Matching
using Alternative Specifications
Log Disposition
Incarceration
Length
(1)
(2)
Court FE and Year FE
0.1255*
0.0443*
(0.0641)
(0.0257)
Court FE, Year FE, Court-Trend
0.1226*
0.0492**
(0.0625)
(0.0246)
Court-Year FE and Offense FE
0.1441**
0.0537**
(0.0593)
(0.0258)
Judge-Year FE
0.1195**
0.0489**
(0.0584)
(0.0245)
Court-Year-Month FE
0.1477*
0.0312
(0.0797)
(0.0319)
FE stands for fixed-effects. Each estimate is from a separate regression. Each
set of estimates is from the base sample of 5,142 observations. Standard
errors, clustered on the judge, are reported in parentheses*: significant at
0.10, **: significant at 0.05, ***: significant at 0.01 level.

33

References
Abrams, David, Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan. "Do Judges Vary in Their
Treatment of Race?" Journal of Legal Studies 41.2 (2012): 347-383.
Aizer, Anna and Joseph Doyle. “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital and Future
Crime: Evidence from randomly Assigned Judges.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
130.2 (2015): 759-803.
Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton. "Economics and identity." Quarterly Journal
of Economics 115.3 (2000): 715-753.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. "A Test of Racial Bias in Capital Sentencing."
The American Economic Review 104.11 (2014): 3397-3433.
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer and Randi Hjalmarsson. “The Impact of Jury Race in
Criminal Trials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 172.2 (2012): 1-39.
Argys, Laura M., and H. Naci Mocan. "Who Shall Live and Who Shall Die? An Analysis
of Prisoners on Death Row in the United States." Journal of Legal Studies 33.2 (2004):
255-282
Behncke, Stefanie, Markus Frölich, and Michael Lechner. "Unemployed and their
caseworkers: should they be friends or foes?." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series A (Statistics in Society) 173.1 (2010): 67-92.
Bonczar, Thomas P., National Corrections Reporting Program: Sentence Length Of State
Prisoners, By Offense, Admission Type, Sex, And Race. Bureau of Justice Statistics.
National Corrections Reporting Program Series. May 5, 2011.
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2056
Boyd, Christina L., Lee Epstein, and Andrew D. Martin. "Untangling the causal effects of
sex on judging." American journal of political science 54.2 (2010): 389-411.
Chen, Yan, and Sherry Xin Li. "Group identity and social preferences." The American
Economic Review 99.1 (2009): 431-457.
Cornell, Bradford, and Ivo Welch. "Culture, information, and screening discrimination."
Journal of Political Economy 104.3 (1996): 542-571.
Dee, Thomas S. "A teacher like me: Does race, ethnicity, or gender matter?." American
Economic Review 95.2 (2005): 158-165.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. "Criminal recidivism after prison and
electronic monitoring." Journal of Political Economy 121.1 (2013): 28-73.
34

Everett, Jim AC, Nadira S. Faber, and Molly Crockett. "Preferences and beliefs in
ingroup favoritism." Frontiers in behavioral neuroscience 9.15 (2015).
Fairlie, Robert W., Florian Hoffmann, and Philip Oreopoulos. A community college
instructor like me: Race and ethnicity interactions in the classroom. No. w17381.
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
Fisman, Raymond, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikrant Vig. Cultural proximity and loan
outcomes. No. w18096. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
Gazal-Ayal, Oren, and Raanan Sulitzeanu Kenan. "Let My People Go: Ethnic In‐ Group
Bias in Judicial Decisions—Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment." Journal
of Empirical Legal Studies 7.3 (2010): 403-428.
Glynn, Adam N., and Maya Sen. "Identifying Judicial Empathy: Does Having Daughters
Cause Judges to Rule for Women's Issues?" American Journal of Political Science 59.1
(2015): 37-54.
Goette, Lorenz, David Huffman, and Stephan Meier. "The impact of group membership
on cooperation and norm enforcement: Evidence using random assignment to real social
groups." The American Economic Review 96.2 (2006): 212-216.
Goette, Lorenz, David Huffman, and Stephan Meier. "The impact of social ties on group
interactions: Evidence from minimal groups and randomly assigned real groups."
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 4.1 (2012): 101-115.
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Greg Ridgeway. "Testing for racial profiling in traffic stops from
behind a veil of darkness." Journal of the American Statistical Association 101.475
(2006): 878-887.
Green, Donald and Daniel Winik. “Using Random Judge Assignment to Estimate the
effects of Incarceration and Probation on recidivism among Drug Offenders.”
Criminology 48.2 (2010): 357-387.
Gruhl, John, Cassia Spohn, and Susan Welch. "Women as policymakers: The case of trial
judges." American Journal of Political Science (1981): 308-322.
Hockenberry, Sarah and Charles Puzzanchera. 2014. "Juvenile Court Statistics 2011.
National Center for Juvenile Justice. http://ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/njcda/pdf/jcs2011.pdf
Hoffmann, Florian, and Philip Oreopoulos. "A professor like me the influence of
instructor gender on college achievement." Journal of Human Resources 44.2 (2009):
479-494.
Kastellec, Jonathan P. "Racial diversity and judicial influence on appellate courts."
American Journal of Political Science 57.1 (2013): 167-183.
35

Kling, Jeffrey R. Incarceration length, employment, and earnings. No. w12003. National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.
Landersø, Rasmus. "Does Incarceration Length Affect Labor Market Outcomes?."
Journal of Law and Economics 58.1 (2015): 205-234.
List, John A., and Michael K. Price. "The role of social connections in charitable
fundraising: Evidence from a natural field experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 69.2 (2009): 160-169.
Mendoza, Saaid A., Sean P. Lane, and David M. Amodio. "For members only ingroup
punishment of fairness norm violations in the ultimatum game." Social Psychological and
Personality Science 5.6 (2014): 662-670.
Mussweiler, Thomas, and Axel Ockenfels. "Similarity increases altruistic punishment in
humans." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110.48 (2013): 1931819323.
Persico, Nicola, John Knowles and Petra Todd. 2001. "Racial Bias in Motor-Vehicle
Searches: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Political Economy. 109(1): 203-29.
Rehavi, M. Marit, and Sonja B. Starr. "Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences."
Journal of Political Economy 122.6 (2014): 1320-1354.
Shayo, Moses, and Asaf Zussman. "Judicial ingroup bias in the shadow of terrorism."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126.3 (2011): 1447-1484.
Schanzenbach, Max. "Racial and sex disparities in prison sentences: The effect of district
level judicial demographics." The Journal of Legal Studies 34.1 (2005): 57-92.

36

