                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WHAT DRIVES RACIAL AND ETHNIC DIFFERENCES IN HIGH COST MORTGAGES?
                   THE ROLE OF HIGH RISK LENDERS

                                             Patrick Bayer
                                           Fernando Ferreira
                                            Stephen L. Ross

                                         Working Paper 22004
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22004


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016




The analysis presented in this NBER Working Paper substantially extends that reported in our earlier
NBER WP #20762, “Race, Ethnicity and High-Cost Mortgage Lending,” which should be considered
superseded by this paper. Gordon MacDonald, Kyle Mangum, Yuan Wang and Ailing Zhang provided
outstanding research assistance. The analyses presented in this paper uses information provided by
a major credit repository. However, the substantive content of the paper is the responsibility of the
authors and does not reflects the specific views of any credit reporting agencies. This work was supported
by Ford Foundation, Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton,
and the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University of Connecticut for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22004.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Drives Racial and Ethnic Differences in High Cost Mortgages? The Role of High Risk
Lenders
Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 22004
February 2016
JEL No. G21,I28,J15,J71,R21

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines racial and ethnic differences in high cost mortgage lending in seven diverse metropolitan
areas from 2004-2007. Even after controlling for credit score and other key risk factors, African-American
and Hispanic home buyers are 105 and 78 percent more likely to have high cost mortgages for home
purchases. The increased incidence of high cost mortgages is attributable to both sorting across lenders
(60-65 percent) and differential treatment of equally qualified borrowers by lenders (35-40 percent).
The vast majority of the racial and ethnic differences across lender can be explained by a single measure
of the lender’s foreclosure risk and most of the within-lender differences are concentrated at high-risk
lenders. Thus, differential exposure to high-risk lenders combined with the differential treatment by
these lenders explains almost all of the racial and ethnic differences in high cost mortgage borrowing.


Patrick Bayer                                         Stephen L. Ross
Department of Economics                               University of Connecticut
Duke University                                       Department of Economics
213 Social Sciences                                   341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Durham, NC 27708                                      Storrs, CT 06269-1063
and NBER                                              stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
patrick.bayer@duke.edu

Fernando Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

             Whether African-American and Hispanic mortgage borrowers face a higher cost of credit

than comparable white borrowers has been a long-standing question in academic and policy

debates about inequities in financial markets. Interest in this question is motivated by several

related issues. First, a large literature has studied racial discrimination in mortgage lending.

While historically focused on discrimination in mortgage underwriting and redlining against

minority neighborhoods, attention has increasingly turned to differences in the price of mortgage

credit, which has also been the focus of several high profile U.S. Department of Justice cases in

the wake of the recent financial crisis.1 Second, higher credit costs create an obvious barrier to

African-American and Hispanic homeownership, which has historically lagged that of white

households by large margins.2 Finally, the last housing cycle was characterized by a growing

subprime sector (Mian and Sufi 2009). African-American and Hispanic borrowers were more

likely to receive subprime loans at higher costs, possibly contributing to especially high

foreclosure rates for these borrowers.3

             In this study, we examine racial and ethnic differences in the incidence of high cost

mortgage loans in a market-wide sample covering several large U.S. metropolitan areas or

regions. While some previous studies ask the question of whether similar borrowers receive

different prices from the same lender (e.g., disparate treatment discrimination), 4 our use of

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
!!Munnell, Tootell, Browne and McEneaney (1996) and Ross and Yinger (2002) examine mortgage underwriting,
Holmes and Horvath (1994) and Tootell (1996) examine redlining, and Ross (2005) and Chan, Haughwout and
Tracy (In Press) study racial price differences. Recent cases have been filed or settled against National City Bank,
Wells Fargo, GFI Mortgage Bankers and Bank of America based on the past actions of Countrywide Mortgage.!
"!See Quercia, McCarthy and Wachter (2003), Belsky, Retsinas and Duda (2005), and Herbert, Haurin, Rosenthal

and Duda (2005) for a detailed discussion of racial and ethnic differences in homeownership.!
#!See Gerardi and Willen (2009), Reid and Laderman (2009) and Edminston (2009).!
4
  For example, see Courchane and Nickerson (1997), Black, Boehm and DeGennaro (2003), Nelson (2005), and
Courchane (2007). These studies have found very small, if any, within-lender differences between white and
minority borrowers in the incidence of high cost mortgage credit.


                                                           !"
"
market-wide data shifts the question to whether unexplained racial and ethnic differences exist in

market outcomes, a phenomenon that Heckman (1998) described as market discrimination. 5

Significant market level differences in the price of credit may have important consequences for

the dynamics of racial and ethnic inequality in homeownership, wealth, and credit worthiness,

even if only small differences exist at the lender level.

          To build the database for our analysis, we first linked the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act

(HMDA) data on home purchases and refinance mortgages from 2004 and 2007 to public records

data on housing transactions and liens in seven distinct metropolitan housing markets. 6 The

public records data contain information on all liens, as well as the name and address of the

individual purchasing the housing unit or refinancing their mortgage and in many cases the name

of the individual’s spouse. HMDA contains a rate spread variable that allows us to create an

indicator for the loan, which is equal to one when the Annual Percentage Rate (APR) exceeds the

interest rate on treasury securities of comparable maturity by at least 3 percentage points. Loans

that exceed this threshold are often described as rate spread loans, and this threshold is typically

used to identify high cost loans.7 We drew a sample of matched mortgages that were originated

between May and August of each year and provided the names and addresses from this sample to

one of the major credit reporting agencies. The credit reporting agency used the name and
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
$!Other  studies documenting market wide differences in the prevalence of high cost loans include Bhutta and Ringo
(2013) using HMDA and credit repository data and Courchane (2007), Haughwout, Mayer and Tracy (2009) and
Ghent, Hernandez-Murillo and Owyang (In Press) using proprietary loan data. Studies using proprietary data have
typically been restricted to samples that represent a subset of the market, usually emphasizing loans that are
securitized privately or lenders that operate primarily in the subprime sector.
6
  The data also includes a sample of 2008 originations, which we do not include in our analysis in order to focus on
lending prior to the financial crisis that began to accelerate with the failure of Bear-Stearns during the fall of 2007
and winter of 2008. See Harding and Ross (2010) for a discussion of the timing of the on-set of the broad financial
crisis. All results are robust to including 2008 originations.
%!The Annual Percentage Rate (APR) estimates cost of credit including interest rate and closing costs. These high

cost or rate spread loans are sometimes referred to as subprime loans, but other authors study the subprime market
based on a list of top subprime lenders, e.g. Ferreira and Gyourko (2015), based on borrowers who have a low credit
score, e.g. Mian and Sufi (2009), or private label securitized loans, e.g. Ghent, Hernandez-Murillo and Owyang (In
Press).


                                                          #"
"
address to match borrowers to archival credit reporting data from March 31 in the year preceding

the mortgage origination and from March 31 for every subsequent year through 2009, providing

in each year a vantage credit score plus detailed credit line information from each individual’s

report.

             With these linked data on housing transactions, mortgage originations and credit

information, we estimate models that relate the presence of a high cost loan to race, ethnicity and

other common risk factors. We find significant unexplained racial and ethnic differences in the

incidence of high cost mortgage credit. These differences persist after controlling for detailed

measures of borrower and loan characteristics including credit score, loan to value ratio, the

presence of subordinate liens, and housing and debt expenses relative to income. Relative to a

model based on only the control variables available in HMDA, the inclusion of these additional

controls erodes about half of the racial and ethnic differences in mortgage pricing. Still, the

remaining differences are sizable: African-American and Hispanic borrowers have a 9.1 and 6.8

percentage point higher likelihood of a rate spread or high cost loan, respectively, in the home

purchase market relative to an incidence of 8.7 for white borrowers. Significant loan-pricing

differences exist across all of the metropolitan housing markets in the study, including not only

faster-growing markets in California and Florida that experienced especially sharp housing

booms and busts in the 2000s, but also slower-growing Eastern and Midwestern housing markets.

Similar, but more modest results, arise for refinance mortgages.

             The inclusion of lender fixed effects in the model substantially reduces the unexplained

differences for African-American and Hispanic borrowers by 60 and 65 percent, respectively.8

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
&!Avery, Canner and Cooke (2005) and Avery, Brevoort and Canner (2007) using HMDA data and Bhutta and
Ringo (2014) using HMDA data matched to a 1 percent sample of credit reports also find that lender fixed effects
explain a substantial fraction of racial differences in the cost of credit. Also see Ross and Yinger (2002) for
"
                                                           $"
"
These findings imply that sorting across (or differential access to) lenders plays a significant role

in creating market wide differences in mortgage pricing, even after controlling for detailed

borrower and loan attributes.

             To better understand the role of lenders we examine a series of models that replace lender

fixed effects with characteristics of the lender. More specifically, we focus on a measure of

lender foreclosure risk. The intuition is that certain lenders can be extremely aggressive in their

mortgage underwriting, increasing market shares by issuing high cost mortgages to a group of

individuals negatively selected on the basis of unobservables (individuals more likely to face

future negative income and health shocks, less likely to keep up with mortgage payments, etc.).

We provide a novel way of identifying these high risk lenders by directly estimating their

underlying risk of foreclosure from actual foreclosure data. 9 This ex-post foreclosure risk

measure emerges as the key explanatory variable, accounting for 75-90 percent of the racial and

ethnic differences explained by lender fixed effects. Qualitatively similar results hold regardless

of whether this measure of foreclosure risk is based on the full sample of a loans or only loans to

white borrowers and regardless of whether lender risk is based on foreclosure or 30 day

delinquencies. Conditioning the measure of lender foreclosure risk on whether an individual

loan is high cost results in only modest reductions in the ability of lender risk to explain racial

and ethnic differences in high cost lending.

             In additional analyses, we examine which borrowers are more likely to be served by these

high-risk lenders and explore heterogeneity in the magnitude of racial and ethnic differences


"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
evidence of significantly larger market level differences in mortgage underwriting than the differences observed at
the lender level. !
'!"#! #$%&'()! *+#! ,-).*/0,*(-)! -1! *+(.! 2#'.0/#! ()! 3#*'(&! ()! .#,*(-)! 45! 6/(#1&78! 9#! #.*(2'*#! &#)3#/! 1($#3! #11#,*!

2-3#&.!-1!#:#/!/#,#(:();!'!1-/#,&-.0/#!)-*(,#8!')3!,-)*/-&!1-/!*+#!1($#3!#11#,*!#.*(2'*#!()!*+#!+(;+!,-.*!&#)3();!
2-3#&!0.();!'!.%&(*<.'2%&#!().*/02#)*'&!:'/('=&#.!.*/'*#;7!>?'.#!')3!@+(&&#/!ABCBD!E);/(.*!')3!F/0#;#/!ABBGH5!


                                                                                       %"
"
across borrowers related to individual demographic and risk factors, loan attributes,

neighborhood attributes, and ex-post lender foreclosure risk. Race, ethnicity, credit score and

high loan to value ratios stand out as the most important factors for explaining borrower

allocation to high risk lenders. The modest effects of income and neighborhood poverty suggest

that minority status plays an especially important role in the sorting of borrowers across lenders,

but the large effects for credit score and loan to value ratio suggest that there is substantial

sorting across lenders based on risk factors. Finally, most of the within lender racial and ethnic

differences in high cost lending arise for borrowers with loans at high risk lenders.

       Taken as a whole, the results of our analysis imply that the substantial market-wide racial

and ethnic differences in the incidence of high cost mortgages arise because African-American

and Hispanic borrowers tend to be more concentrated at high-risk lenders. Strikingly, this

pattern holds for all borrowers even those with relatively unblemished credit records and low-

risk loans. High-risk lenders are not only more likely to provide high cost loans overall, but are

especially likely to do so for African-American and Hispanic borrowers. In fact, these lenders

are largely responsible for the differential treatment of equally qualified borrowers; minimal

racial and ethnic differences exist among lenders that serve less risky segments of the market.

       The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents our data in detail. Section 3 presents

the baseline estimates. Section 4 examines the role of high-risk lenders, and Section 5 examines

heterogeneity in racial and ethnic differences. Section 6 provides a brief conclusion.



2. Data

       Our data are based on public Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data between

2004 and 2007 and proprietary housing transaction/lien and assessor’s databases purchased from



                                                 &"
"
Dataquick Inc. We begin with a convenience sample of seven major housing markets where

Dataquick has information on refinance mortgages going back to at least 2004: Chicago IL

CMSA, Cleveland OH MSA, Denver CO MSA, Los-Angeles CA CMSA, Miami-Palm Beach

Corridor, all Maryland Counties excluding Baltimore City, and San Francisco CA CMSA.10 We

restrict our HMDA data to home purchase or refinance mortgages on owner-occupied, 1-4 family

properties. In the Dataquick sample, we eliminate non-arm’s length transactions, transactions

where the name field contains the name of a church, trust, or where the first name is missing, and

transactions where the address could not be matched to a 2000 Census tract or the zip code was

missing. This eliminates very few records due to the high quality of the name and address

records in the assessor files. The HMDA and Dataquick data are then merged based on year,

loan amount, name of lender, state, county and census tract. We obtain high quality matches for

approximately 50% of our HMDA sample.11

             We use the HMDA rate spread variable to create a dummy variable that is one whenever

the APR on the mortgage is at least 3 percentage points above the interest rate on treasury

securities. This threshold was chosen by federal regulators based on Government Sponsored

Enterprise data in order to capture the high interest rates often seen in the subprime sector in the

early 2000’s.                 Naturally, this outcome variable provides somewhat limited information on

interest rates due to its discrete nature. Further, the share of rate spread loans is sensitive to the

yield curve over bond maturities because APR is compared to treasury rates of comparable

maturity to the term of the mortgage and mortgages are often pre-paid, see Avery, Brevoort, and

Canner (2007). Our core results are robust to analyses that adjust the high cost loan threshold by

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
!(!Also see Bayer, Ferreira and Ross (2016) on the data.!
11
  The key factor limiting the match rate is the lender name because the lender of record in the local assessor’s data
often differs from HMDA respondent. Less restrictive match criteria can yield a match rate closer to 80 percent.


                                                           '"
"
year in order to keep the share of high cost loans constant over time, anchored to 2004 which had

the lowest share.

             Next, we draw a sample of mortgages to provide to a credit reporting agency. These

mortgages were sampled from May through August so that the March 31st archival credit report

for the year of the mortgage provides appropriate information on the borrowers’ credit quality

prior to obtaining the mortgage. We oversample mortgages to minority borrowers, mortgages to

white borrowers in minority or low-income neighborhoods, and high cost mortgages as

designated in HMDA as rate spread loans. In order to maximize the number of minority loans

given the likelihood of sample saturation, we first draw the following oversamples based on race

and ethnicity: 500 in each site, year and group (400 for 2004) selected randomly from mortgages

to African-American borrowers, mortgages to Hispanic borrowers, and mortgages to white

borrowers in minority or low-income neighborhoods. We then split the remaining sample into

rate spread and non-rate spread loans drawing 1000 borrowers associated with rate spread loans

in each year and site (800 for 2004) and 2714 borrowers (2286 for 2004) from the non-rate

spread sample in each year and site. Weights are developed based on the probability of

selection,12 and initialized so that each site receives equal weight in the pooled sample.

             This sample is provided to Experian who matches the name and address of each borrower

and co-borrower to archival credit report data from the March 31st preceding the mortgage

transaction and March 31st for every year that follows this transaction through 2009. Our match

rate for the pre-mortgage archive is 81.4 and 84.5 percent in the home purchase and refinance

samples, respectively.                        For years following the mortgage, the match rate rises by 4 to 5

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
12
  The sampling is explicitly based on 8 strata for each site: African-American borrowers, Hispanic borrowers, white
borrowers in minority or low-income neighborhoods and all other borrowers divided into rate spread and non-rate
spread loans. All loans from the same strata and year receive equal weight.


                                                                  ("
"
percentage points. In many cases, these individuals also may not have had sufficient information

on record when the lender requested a report for the credit reporting agency to provide a credit

score, in which case lack of a score matches the information that the lender would have had

when approving and pricing the loan, but lenders can enter by hand additional information that is

not available to us such as social security number or previous addresses. Bayer, Ross and

Ferreira (2016) show that the final weighted sample composition is quite comparable to the

population of HMDA data for these sites, except for a moderate decline in share white and

moderate increase in loan amount arising from the difficulty of matching lender names between

HMDA and the Dataquick provided assessor files, see Appendix Table 1.

          Table 1 shows the weighted means for our final home purchase and refinance subsamples

that were successfully merged to pre-mortgage credit report data.13 The first two columns show

the mean and standard deviation for our sample of home purchase mortgages, and the last two

columns show these values for refinance mortgages. The first set of rows present the full set of

demographic, loan and census tract variables that are available in HMDA and that we use in our

regressions.     From the match with transaction data, we observe the presence and size of

subordinate liens, whether the liens are fixed or variable rate mortgages, the loan to value ratio

based on sales price for home purchase mortgages and on an estimated value based on either

previous sales price and county level price indices or assessed value when a previous sale is

unobserved for refinance mortgages, and detailed property attributes including whether a single

family home, a condominium, and number of units on the property. Notably, information on

subordinate liens is typically not available in other studies because only individual loans are

tracked in most mortgage samples, not entire housing-mortgage transactions. The borrowers’ (or
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
!#!@ome small lenders could not be identified based on the reporting restrictions. If the lender was not identified, the
observation is dropped from the regression sample. Similar results are observed using the full sample.


                                                          )*"
"
if unavailable co-borrower’s) Vantage score is drawn from the credit report data from the March

31st prior to the mortgage origination. The Vantage Score is a proprietary credit score developed

by the credit reporting agencies as an alternative to the traditional FICO index of credit score.

The credit report observation following the year of the mortgage is used to obtain monthly

mortgage payment, which when combined with HMDA income is used to calculate the mortgage

payment to income ratio. The monthly mortgage payment is combined with debt payments from

the pre-mortgage credit data and HMDA income to calculate the debt payment to income ratio.

Finally, age, which has not typically been available in studies of mortgage lending, is observed

for many borrowers and co-borrowers in the credit history files.



3. Rate Spread Models

             Table 2 presents the rate spread regression results for the pooled MSA samples. The first

four specifications reported in Table 2 can be characterized by the following equation:



(1)             !!" ! "#! " $!"



where y indicates the presence of a high cost loan (i.e., a HMDA rate spread loan) and X

represent characteristics of the borrower i or loan. The table only shows the estimates for the

following race and ethnicity categories: Asian, African-American and Hispanic.                           The

econometric model omits the dummy for Whites, so all estimates should be interpreted as

relative to a White borrower.14


""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
!)!"#!1-,0.!-)!*+#!&()#'/!%/-='=(&(*7!2-3#&!30#!*-!,-),#/).!'=-0*!*+#!=('.!'/(.();!1/-2!#.*(2'*();!)-)<&()#'/!

2-3#&.!9(*+!1($#3!#11#,*!#.*(2'*#.!='.#3!-)!.2'&&!,#&&!.(I#.5!!"#!,-)1(/2!*+'*!*+#!2';)(*03#!')3!.(;)(1(,'),#!
"
                                                           ))"
"
             For comparison with results in the previous literature, the first column presents the model

with just the standard HMDA controls including the demographic variables, family income, a

jumbo loan dummy amount, the census tract attributes, and year-by-site fixed effects. The

second column includes additional controls made available by merging the HMDA data with

Dataquick housing transaction data including combined loan to value ratio, whether the primary

lien is an adjustable rate mortgage, number of subordinate liens, and year-by-week fixed effects.

The combined loan to value ratio is included in the model as a series of dummy variables

associated with LTV falling below 0.6, 0.6 to 0.8, 0.8 to 0.85, 0.85 to 0.90, 0.90 to 0.95, 0.95 to

1.00, 1.00 to 1.05, and 1.05 and above. The third column adds dummy variables for credit score

in 20 point bins, housing expense to income ratio in bins as small as 0.02 around the traditional

secondary market criteria of 0.28, and total debt expense to income ratio categories with bins as

small as 0.03 around the threshold of 0.36. The fourth column includes additional controls for

the potential effect of subprime lending, identifying borrowers with Vantage scores below 701 as

subprime borrowers15 and interacting this subprime dummy variable with variables associated

with key thresholds of loan to value ratio, debt to income ratio, mortgage payment to income

ratio,16 a dummy variable whether there are subordinate liens, and whether the primary lien is

adjustable rate. The fifth column adds lender fixed effects ωj:




"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
-1! #.*(2'*#3! /',('&! ')3! #*+)(,! 3(11#/#),#.! '/#! /-=0.*! *-! */(22();! *+#! 3'*'! *-! #&(2()'*#! %/#3(,*#3! :'&0#.!
-0*.(3#!-1!*+#!0)(*!()*#/:'&!>J-//',#!')3!K'$','!LMMNH5!
15
   The credit reporting agencies that developed the Vantage score algorithms describe scores below 701 as non-
prime. Further, a Vantage score of 701 is comparable to a FICO score of 660, a common FICO threshold for
subprime, in that in both cases approximately 30% of individuals have credit scores below these thresholds during
our sample period. Subprime borrowers make up about 25 percent of our weighted home purchase sample.
16
   The loan to value thresholds used are 0.80, 0.90, 0.95 and 1.00 with each bin containing 30, 12, 35 and 3 percent
of our weighted home purchase sample, the debt to income thresholds used are 0.36 and 0.45 with 13 and 42 percent
in the middle and upper bins, and the mortgage payment to income ratio thresholds used are 0.28 and 0.33 with 9
and 43 percent in the middle and upper bins.


                                                                                      )+"
"
(2)             !!" ! "#! " %" " $!"



             The results shown in the first column reveal that African-American and Hispanic

borrowers have an increased likelihood of having a rate spread loan of 20.3 and 14.0 percentage

points relative to white borrowers, respectively, for a home purchase mortgage when

conditioning only on the standard controls available in HMDA. The difference between white

and Asian borrowers is small in this specification and in all other specifications reported below.

             The addition of standard underwriting controls in columns 2 and 3 reduces the estimated

differences for African-American and Hispanic borrowers to 9.1 and 6.8 percentage points for

the home purchase and 4.6 and 1.4 for the refinance market, reductions on the order of 55-60

percent for racial differences and 65 percent for ethnic differences, 17 while the inclusion of

additional subprime controls in Column 4 has little impact on the estimated differences.18

             We refer to the model presented with the full set of borrower and loan control variables

reported in column 4 as our baseline model. In the home purchase market, the remaining racial

and ethnic differences represent 104.6 and 78.2 percent, respectively, of the incidence of rate

spread loans for white borrowers. Comparing the results of column 4 to those of column 1

reveals both (i) that a significant portion of the observed racial and ethnic differences of the

receipt of high cost loans by race and ethnicity can be explained by differences in standard

underwriting variables and (ii) that economically and statistically significant differences remain



""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
17
   The coefficients on the additional controls suggest that the model is well specified. For example, we find that the
likelihood of rate spread loans changes monotonically with the vantage score, loan to value ratio, housing expense to
income ratio and debt expense to income ratio in the expected directions, and we find that the likelihood of a rate
spread loan is higher for jumbo loans and for transactions that use subordinate liens.
!&!The addition of LTV in column 2 and credit score and income ratios in column 3 all explain a significant fraction

of the racial and ethnic differences, especially in the home purchase market.!


                                                           )!"
"
even after controlling for these most commonly used measures of credit worthiness and risk,

especially in the home purchase market.

       The addition of lender fixed effects in column 5 substantially erodes the differential

incidence of high cost loans. The point estimates in the home purchase sample decline from 8.7

and 6.9 to 3.6 and 2.4 percentage point differences for African-Americans and Hispanics,

respectively, and for the refinance sample differences decline from 4.3 and 1.4 to 1.9 and 0.5.

Thus, in all cases, a majority of the racial and ethnic differences that remain after controlling for

standard underwriting variables can be explained by differential access to traditional lenders

and/or selection into high cost lenders.

       The inclusion of lender fixed effects shifts the interpretation of racial and ethnic

differences from measures of market-level disparities to differences in the treatment of equally

qualified minority and white borrowers by the same lender.                As evidence of lender

discrimination, the lender fixed effect estimates are comparable to the findings in the Munnell et

al. (1996) study of underwriting discrimination in Boston, which also used lender fixed effects in

a sample of loan applications from many lenders in a common market. However, the racial

differences arising from their within lender comparisons were significantly larger, 80% or 8

percentage point difference over a 10 percent rejection rate, than the within lender racial and

ethnic differences in the incidence of rate spread loans, which fell between 6 and 41 percent.

       In terms of the cost of credit, Avery, Canner and Cooke (2005) and Avery, Brevoort and

Canner (2007) using 2004 and 2005/06 HMDA data, respectively, and Bhutta and Ringo (2014)

using 2006 HMDA data matched to a 1 percent sample of credit reports find that lender fixed

effects can explain a substantial portion of the unexplained racial and ethnic differences. Neither

Avery, Canner and Cooke (2005) nor Avery, Brevoort and Canner (2007) can determine whether



                                                 )#"
"
the across lender differences explained by lender fixed effects are due to the sorting of

observationally equivalent borrowers or due to key underwriting variables that are unobserved in

HMDA. Unlike the earlier studies, Bhutta and Ringo (2014) and this paper show that the

unexplained racial and ethnic differences after controlling for detailed credit variables,19 which

are often attributed to discrimination in the market, are primarily the result of the systematic

selection of African American and Hispanic borrowers into lenders who tend to issue high cost

mortgages. Neither Bhutta and Ringo (2014) nor this paper, however, observe some of the key

loan attributes that were sometimes associated with high cost loans or subprime loans during the

run up to the recent crisis, such as no documentation of income or initial teaser interest rates

combined with pre-payment penalties.



An Expositional Note

             The baseline results shown in Table 2 imply that racial and ethnic differences are

significantly greater for home purchase versus refinance mortgages in all specifications. For

expositional simplicity, therefore, we focus our presentation of the remaining results for the

home purchase sample. We include a full set of comparable tables for refinance mortgages in the

appendix. Most of the key patterns highlighted in the next section arise in the refinance sample

as well.



4. Understanding the Role of High Risk Lenders

             Having shown that the inclusion of lender fixed effects substantially reduces the

estimated racial and ethnic differences in the incidence of rate spread loans, we now demonstrate

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
!'!Bhutta     and Ringo (2014) do not observe loan to value ratio.!


                                                             )$"
"
that most of the racial differences explained by lenders are associated with lenders that have high

ex-post foreclosure risks. We also include additional lender attributes as controls: (i) the type of

lending institution (agency code),20 (ii) the share of mortgages securitized, and (iii) the share of

securitized mortgages sold to each type of purchaser.21 The lender characteristics are represented

by Z in equation (3).



(3)             !!" ! "#! " &'" " $!"



Appendix Table 2 presents means and standard deviations for each variable.

              In order to create proxies for lender foreclosure risk, we use our sample of home

purchase mortgage originations. These proxies are based on estimated lender fixed effects, (" ,

from models of whether foreclosure notices, fij, ever appear in the borrower’s credit report

between March 31 the year after origination through March 31, 2009:



(4)             )!" ! *#! " (" " +!"




""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
"(!The agency code in HMDA identifies the lender’s regulator and the regulator identifies whether the lender is a
national bank, commercial bank, a state chartered bank, a savings and loan, a credit union, or a non-depository
mortgage bank. !
"!!The variables related to securitization are calculated using the full sample of HMDA loans between 2004 and

2007 for the seven sites in our credit history sample. These securitization variables are merged into our sample using
the respondent id leading to a slightly reduced sample size. We calculate the share of loans securitized for each
lender and the share of securitized loans sold to each type of purchaser including the Government Sponsored
Enterprises (GSE), Federal Housing Administration (FHA), private securitizers, commercial or savings banks,
insurance/ companies/credit unions/mortgage banks, affiliated lenders, and other buyers. !


                                                           )%"
"
The ever foreclosure model specification is analogous to the lender fixed effects model shown in

equation (2) but with the presence of a foreclosure notice replacing the presence of a high cost

loan as the dependent variable.

             If we observed a large enough number of loans for each lender, we could simply include

the estimated lender fixed effects from the foreclosure model in equation (4) as a measure of

lender foreclosure risk when estimating the rate spread model shown in equation (3). Because

only a limited number of loans are observed for each lender, however, our measure of

foreclosure risk represents a noisy measure of the actual foreclosure risk faced by each lender.

To consistently estimate the rate spread model with lender foreclosure risk, therefore, we use a

split sample instrumental variables strategy.22

             Specifically, we restrict our sample to borrowers at lenders with at least 10 loans in our

home purchase sample, and then randomly allocate half of the loans for each lender to a hold-out

sample and the other half to the regression sample. We then estimate the foreclosure model

shown in equation (4) separately for the regression and hold-out samples. The lender fixed effect

estimate from the regression sample is included in the high cost lending model regression shown

in equation (3), and the fixed effect estimate from the hold-out sample is used as an instrument.23

Standard errors are bootstrapped by sampling lenders with replacement.



""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
""!This procedure was first used by Case and Shiller (1989) to address measurement error in estimated housing price
indices, but was described more recently and more generally by Angrist and Krueger (1995) who named this
procedure split-sample IV. In addition to measurement error, this approach also eliminates other forms of small
sample bias. For instance, in our setting, if the loans sampled for a specific lender happen to be bad loans by
random chance, then those loans are likely to be charged a high interest rate and experience a foreclosure. This
random variation will create a correlation between high cost lending and foreclosure rates unless the foreclosure
fixed effect estimate is based on a separate sample of loans, i.e. a split sample IV hold-out sample.!
"#!Estimates presented are an average of results from 20 separate runs for different draws of the regression and hold-

out samples. The standard deviation of estimates across these sample draws is about one thirtieth of the mean
estimate for the lender fixed effect and about one tenth of the estimates of racial and ethnic differences conditional
on foreclosure risk.


                                                           )&"
"
             Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 replicate the baseline and lender fixed effect results from

Columns 4 and 5 in Table 2. The next column reports the split-sample IV estimates for a

specification that includes ex-post lender foreclosure risk instead of lender fixed effects. These

results indicate that lender foreclosure risk is a strong predictor (both economically and

statistically) of the presence of a rate-spread loan and, strikingly, that lender foreclosure risk

explains the vast majority (74 and 91 percent) of the racial and ethnic differences explained by

lender fixed effects in the home purchase market.24 As shown in the fourth column, comparable

results hold for a model that includes additional controls for lender type (agency code) and

securitization, which have little additional predictive power once foreclosure risk is included in

the analysis." Notably, prior to including the control for foreclosure risk, lender type and

securitization variables have substantial explanatory power, with mortgage banks (non-

depository lenders) and lenders that sell a substantial fraction of loans into private-label

securitization having an especially high incidence of rate spread loans, but even then those

variables do little to explain racial and ethnic differences.25

             Table 4 reports results using alternative measures of lender foreclosure risk. First, we

estimate a model based only on loans to white borrowers. The goal of this analysis is to examine

whether certain lenders specialize in providing high-risk loans to all borrowers regardless of race

and ethnicity, or whether the results presented in Table 3 are driven by lenders that specialize in

providing high-risk loans primarily to African-American and Hispanic borrowers and then have

higher foreclosure risks on average due to the large number of minority loans. To conduct this

analysis, we further restrict the data to lenders with at least 10 loans to white borrowers, and re-

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
")!Not surprisingly given the design, the first stage is very powerful with F-statistics in the thousands so there are no

problems associated with weak instruments.!
"$!See appendix Table 3.




                                                           )'"
"
estimate the “ever foreclosed” model controlling for lender-by-race/ethnicity fixed effects for

both the hold-out and regression samples. We then use the lender fixed effects for white

borrowers from the two samples to implement split sample IV in the high cost loan model.

Column 1 in Table 4 contains the estimates of the baseline model from Table 3 column 2 with

the new restricted sample showing that the sample restriction has little impact on the estimates,

and column 2 shows the estimates for a model that uses foreclosure risk associated with white

loans only. The estimated racial and ethnic differences are remarkably similar whether the

estimate of lender foreclosure risk is based on all loans or only those to white borrowers.26 This

suggests that these lenders specialize in providing high-risk loans to the market as a whole, not

just to African-American and Hispanic borrowers.

             A second possible interpretation of these results is that high cost lenders also happen to

be lenders that aggressively enter the foreclosure process as loans become delinquent. In order

to rule out this possibility, we estimate a model of ever received a 30-180 day delinquency using

the original sample of all lenders with at least 10 loans in our sample. The estimated lender fixed

effects from this model are used as alternative measure of lender risk again using split-sample IV.

These results are shown in column 3. The racial and ethnic differences are very similar to our

benchmark model that controls for foreclosure risk and the coefficient on the proxy for

delinquency is large and statistically significant. These findings suggest that across lender racial

and ethnic differences arise from borrower delinquency and default rather than lender foreclosure

behavior.




""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
"*!Additional noise in the white-lender fixed effect estimates (due to a lower incidence of foreclosure) increase the
standard errors on the foreclosure risk estimates. Very similar results arise for models that include the additional
lender controls based on agency code and securitization patterns.!


                                                           )("
"
       Next, we re-estimate the ever foreclosed model including the high cost loan variable as

an additional control. The resulting measure of ex-post foreclosure risk is now conditional on

whether the loans issued by the lender were high cost loans. To the extent that lenders price

observable differences between borrower and loan attributes, the inclusion of this control should

erode the ability of foreclosure risk to explain racial differences that arise due to lender

observable factors, such as loan terms like whether the loan had low or no income documentation

requirements.

       The resulting estimates are shown in column 4 of Table 5. For these models, the racial

and ethnic differences that remain after controlling for foreclosure risk rise notably, by 45 and 32

percent, respectively. However, the vast majority of the racial and ethnic differences explained

by lender foreclosure risk are still captured by the new measure of foreclosure risk, 68 and 78

percent, respectively. Accordingly, the majority of the racial and ethnic differences in high cost

loans across lenders are associated either with borrowers sorting across lenders on factors

unobservable to the lender or observable differences between borrowers that were not

aggressively priced into loans.



Sorting across Lenders

       As a final exercise designed to better understand the implications of these high risk

lenders for mortgage markets, we examine whether these lenders also provide credit to a

disproportionate number of borrowers or loans with specific risk attributes. In particular, Table 5

presents estimates of models that relate lender foreclosure risk (" to borrower and loan attributes




                                                +*"
"
X including (i) borrower demographic and financial variables, (ii) neighborhood attributes and

(iii) loan attributes.27



(5)             (" ! ,#! " -!"



For this analysis, lender foreclosure risk is based on the lender fixed effects from the ever

foreclosed model using the sample of loans from lenders with 10 or more loans. For ease of

interpretation, we standardize the foreclosure risk variable prior to estimating the regression.

Given the inclusion of a full set of borrower, neighborhood and loan attributes in the foreclosure

model used to create (" , the results presented in Table 6 cannot be driven by the ability of these

variables to explain foreclosures directly. Rather, the regression effectively tests for whether

borrowers are negatively selected into these lenders based on borrower and loan observables.28

             The race and ethnicity correlations are quite large, approximately 4 percent of a standard

deviation for African-Americans and 5 percent for Hispanics.                         While many estimates are

statistically significant, the estimates on the other demographic variables, age, gender, presence

of a co-borrower (a proxy for marital status), and the logarithm of income tend to be smaller,

ranging between one half and 2 percent of a standard deviation.29 Similarly, the estimates on the

tract composition variables are modest. A standard deviation increase in any variable never has

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
"%!The model also includes site by purchase year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the census tract level.
"& !We do not use a hold-out sample in this analysis. There is no bias from measurement error because the
measurement error is on the left hand side of the equation. Similarly, incidental parameter bias is no longer a
concern. The fixed effects are estimated conditional on the borrower and loan attributes so any conditionally bad
draw of loans in terms of foreclosure that enter ex-post foreclosure risk through the expected residual of the “ever
foreclosed” model are independent of the draw on observable loan and borrower attributes because the model is
conditional on those attributes.
"'!O+#.#!3(11#/#),#.!'/#!#:#)!&'/;#/!9+#)!*+#!2-3#&!P0.*!,-)*/-&.!1-/!3#2-;/'%+(,.!G5G!')3!Q!1-/!=&',R.!')3!

J(.%')(,.!')3!-)&7!A5G!%#/,#)*!+(;+#/!1-/!&-').!9(*+-0*!'!,-<=-//-9#/8!*+#!&'/;#.*!3#2-;/'%+(,!#11#,*.!()!*+(.!
2-3#&5!


                                                           +)"
"
an effect much larger than one percent of a standard deviation in lender foreclosure risk,30 and

the doubling of the present value of rents relative to housing price is associated with an increase

of only 2 percent of a standard deviation in lender riskiness.

             On the other hand, the borrower’s vantage score is strongly associated with borrowing

from a high-risk lender. Having a subprime credit score is associated with about 10 percent of a

standard deviation increase in lender foreclosure risk, and having an above median credit score

within one’s corresponding market segment (prime or subprime) is associated with a 3-5 percent

of a standard deviation reduction in lender foreclosure risk. If borrowers sort across lenders

based on key risk observables, likely credit score, they presumably will sort across borrowers on

unobservables, as well. Similarly, having a loan to value ratio above 0.95 is associated with 7

percent of a standard deviation increased exposure to high-risk lenders. This last finding might

be consistent with sorting over product type, but also could arise because borrowers with few

assets available for down payment, a key unobservable, sort into these lenders.

             Taken as a whole, the results of Table 5 imply that a major reason that African-American

and Hispanic borrowers pay more for mortgage credit is that they tend to do business with

lenders who specialize in providing high-risk loans in terms of both observable risk factors (e.g.,

credit score and LTV) and unobserved foreclosure risk, but we cannot fully rule out the

possibility that these results are driven by the terms of the mortgage products that these lenders

tend to issue.




""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
#(!A  reasonable concern is that we have included many correlated neighborhood variables that have diluted the
effect of any individual neighborhood variable. However, we run a model only including one tract variable, share
households in poverty which has one of the largest effects of any of the composition variables, and the estimate on
tract poverty barely moves.


                                                           ++"
"
Variation across Metropolitan Sites

             Tables 6 presents the estimated results separately for each metropolitan housing market

for three main specifications: (i) a baseline model comparable to column 4 of Table 2, (ii) a

model controlling for overall lender foreclosure risk measure comparable to column 3 of Table 3,

and (iii) a lender fixed effects model comparable to column 5 of Table 2.                            Note that the

foreclosure risk model is estimated as a reduced form model simply including the estimated fixed

effects for each lender across all sites as a regressor because the much smaller site specific

sample sizes raised concerned about precision and small sample bias if we were to either use the

split sample IV estimator or use site specific lender fixed effects.31 The columns represent in

order Chicago, Cleveland, Denver, Los Angeles, Maryland Counties, Miami-Palm Beach

Corridor, and San Francisco Bay Area.

             While there is some variation, racial and ethnic differences in the home purchase sample

exist for all seven sites for African-Americans and six sites for Hispanics in models both with

and without lender FE's. In the home purchase market without lender FE's, differences range

between 5.9 and 11.7 for African-Americans, and 6.2 and 7.6 for Hispanics. The inclusion of

lender FE's lowers these differences to ranges of 2.1 to 5.1, and 1.8 to 2.5, respectively. Further,

adding the controls for lender foreclosure risk to the baseline model again result in racial and

ethnic differences that are closer to the differences in the lender fixed effect model with ex-post

foreclosure risk explaining between 49 and 77 percent of the across lender racial and ethnic

differences. Notably, the estimates on the foreclosure risk range between 2.10 and 2.91, which is

comparable to the reduced form estimate of 2.56 for the entire sample.

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
#!!Further, bias from measurement error leads to conservative estimates, and concerns about incidental parameters
bias are substantially mitigated because the lender fixed effect is based on the entire sample, not just the loans in a
given site.


                                                           +!"
"
             Taken together, we conclude that the market wide differences in the incidence of high

cost loans are present in all of our market areas in the home purchase sample. Further, as with

the overall sample, lender fixed effects significantly erode the estimates primarily because some

lenders have both a disproportionate share of minority borrowers and those lenders tend to have

unusually high ex-post foreclosure risks.



5. Heterogeneity in Racial and Ethnic Differences

             In order to further assess how widespread is the incidence of racial and ethnic differences

in high cost loans, we estimate models in which race and ethnicity are interacted with three key

classes of variables: borrower risk factors, census tract attributes associated with the property,

and the ex-post foreclosure risk of the lender. These results are presented in Table 7 for home

purchase mortgages. The first two columns of the table present estimates based on adding

interaction terms to the baseline model shown in column 4 of Table 2, and column 3 presents

estimates built on the foreclosure risk regression in column 3 of Table 3. The last three columns

present estimates based on the lender fixed effect model shown in column 5 of Table 2.

             Columns 1 and 4 present the interactions with three key risk variables: subprime credit

score or Vantage score below 701, non-conforming loan to value ratio above 0.95, and a debt to

income ratio above 0.45.32 The results imply large differences in the likelihood of a having a

high cost loan even for low-risk African-American borrowers, (i.e. those with prime credit scores,

conforming loan to value ratios and reasonably low debt to income ratios) relative to their white

counterparts. In particular, for our baseline model, low-risk African-American borrowers have
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
#"!In our weighted sample, African-American and Hispanic loans make up 54 and 40 percent of their racial and
ethnic subsamples where only 18 percent of white borrowers in our sample have subprime credit scores. Similarly,
the share of African-American and Hispanic loans with an LTV above 0.95 is 62, 54, and 31 percent, respectively,
and the shares for DTI above 0.45 are 49, 47, and 40 percent. !


                                                           +#"
"
an 8.5 percentage point higher likelihood of receiving a rate spread loan compared to low-risk

white borrowers, very close to the 8.7 estimate for the entire sample reported in column 4 of

Table 2. African-American borrowers with subprime credit scores are more likely to have high

cost loans, but the effect is small and does not persist with the inclusion of lender fixed effects.

In the lender fixed effects model, the racial difference for low risk African-American borrowers

is 2.6 percentage points, a modest reduction from the 3.6 difference estimated for the full sample

in column 5 of Table 3.

             Low-risk Hispanic borrowers, on the other hand, have a substantially lower likelihood of

high cost loans relative to the likelihood for the full sample, 2.4 versus 6.9 for the baseline model

and 0.1 versus 2.4 for the lender fixed effects model. The changes for low-risk Hispanic

borrowers are driven by the fact that Hispanics with high LTV loans are much more likely to

have high cost loans. While smaller, the LTV effect for Hispanics persists in the lender fixed

effect model, and no ethnic differences exist for low LTV borrowers.

             In columns 2 and 5, we estimate models that interact geographic controls for borrower

location with race and ethnicity. We include geographic controls for the percent of households

in poverty, the percent of residences that are owner occupied, racial and ethnic composition and

the mean rent to value ratio, all within the census tract where the borrower will reside upon

closing. Percent poverty is included as a general proxy for a disadvantaged neighborhood, while

rent to value ratio is used as a measure of perceived equity risk and is scaled to capture the ratio

of the present value of all future rents at the current rental rates to current value so that higher

values are associated with lower expected rates of price appreciation.33 We only interact share


""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
##!Specifically,we assume an annual discount rate of 0.06 or a monthly discount rate of 0.005, and multiply monthly
rents by 200 prior to dividing by housing prices.


                                                           +$"
"
African-American and share Hispanic with the African-American and Hispanic identifiers,

respectively.

       Focusing on the baseline model for the home purchase sample in column 2, the results

imply that racial and ethnic differences are somewhat concentrated in neighborhoods

characterized by variables typically associated with disadvantage or risk. A higher neighborhood

percent poverty implies significantly higher rates of high cost lending for African-Americans.

For Hispanic borrowers ethnic differences are higher in neighborhoods with more Hispanics,

lower home ownership rates and higher rent to price ratios. In order to examine unexplained

racial differences for low-risk borrowers, we evaluate the race and ethnicity coefficients for the

25th percentile on all tract attributes, except for percent owner-occupied, which we evaluate at

the 75th percentile.     Low risk African-American borrowers in relatively advantaged

neighborhoods have only a 1.3 percentage point difference compared to the 8.5 difference for

low risk borrowers in column 1, and therefore most of the racial differences are concentrated in

high poverty neighborhoods, even if the individual minority borrowers and loans are observably

low risk. On the other hand, the Hispanic interactions lead to only a modest reduction to 2.1 for

low risk borrowers in advantaged neighborhoods from 2.4 for low risk borrowers overall.

       The finding that racial and ethnic differences vary by neighborhood is consistent with the

literature that documents the concentration of subprime lending in poor and minority

neighborhoods (Calem, Gillen, Wachter 2004; Mayer, Pence 2008; Reid, Laderman 2009; Fisher,

Lambie-Hanson, Willen 2010). To our knowledge, however, ours is one of the few studies to

document such neighborhood effects after the inclusion of detailed underwriting controls, and

ours is the first study to document the concentration of racial and ethnic differences in the

incidence of high cost lending in high poverty rate neighborhoods.



                                               +%"
"
       In columns 3 and 6, we present estimates of a model where we also interact race and

ethnicity with the lender foreclosure risk variable. The coefficients on the interactions of race

and ethnicity with the foreclosure risk variable are both positive, and the coefficient on the

interaction with race is sizable and statistically significant. Strikingly, the coefficients reported

in the first two rows of the table fall towards zero with the exception of the coefficient on the

interaction of race with tract rent to price ratio. Now evaluating lender risk and neighborhood

disadvantage variables at the 25th percentile, we find that the racial and ethnic differences for low

risk borrowers at low foreclosure risk lenders have both fallen below zero to -0.4 and -2.4

percentage points, respectively. Therefore, African-American and Hispanic borrowers that do

business with low-risk lenders are no more likely to have high cost loans than comparable white

borrowers at these institutions, and these differences explain all of the neighborhood effects on

racial and ethnic differences. Looking at Columns 5 and 6, the inclusion of lender fixed effects

has basically the same effect as the inclusion of lender foreclosure risk capturing all remaining

racial differences, eliminating the interaction between race and subprime credit score, cutting in

half the effect for Hispanic borrowers with high LTVs, and eliminating or weakening all of the

originally significant interactions between race and ethnicity and the neighborhood attributes.

       Taken as a whole, the results presented in Table 7 provide a picture of the main drivers of

racial and ethnic differences in the incidence of high cost loans. Regardless of individual risk

factors, African-American borrowers are substantially more likely to have high cost mortgages

due primarily to the increased likelihood of doing business with high-risk lenders, which are

especially likely to provide high-cost loans to African-American borrowers. A similar pattern

emerges for Hispanic borrowers.




                                                 +&"
"
6. Summary and Conclusion

       In this paper, we identify large racial and ethnic differences in the likelihood of receiving

a rate spread mortgage in both the home purchase and refinance market after controlling for

detailed borrower and loan attributes. Differential sorting across lenders and the differential

treatment of equally qualified borrowers by the same lender both emerge as important drivers of

market-wide differences. These findings are consistent with evidence that African American and

Hispanic borrowers are less likely to compare prices across lenders (Courchane, Surette, Zorn

2004; Alexandrov and Koulayev 2015). Of course, this sorting may also be influenced by lender

behavior. In field studies, Ross, Turner, Godfrey and Smith (2008) and Hanson, Hawley, Martin

and Liu (In Press) find that lenders offer more information and assistance in response to

borrower inquiries and in the case of Hanson et al. are more likely to follow-up on initial contact

from white borrowers.

       The majority of the racial and ethnic differences due to sorting across lenders can be

explained by lender ex-post foreclosure risk, which is strongly predictive of the likelihood of

receiving a high cost loan. Substantial market-wide racial and ethnic differences in the incidence

of high cost lending arise because African-American and Hispanic borrowers tend to be

concentrated at these high-risk lenders, even when their own credit scores are relatively

unblemished.

        Interestingly, high-risk lenders are also largely responsible for the differential treatment

of equally qualified borrowers within lender. African-American and Hispanic borrowers are

especially likely to receive high cost loans from these lenders, while minimal differences exist

for lenders that specialize in serving less risky segments of the market. Further, the higher racial

and ethnic differences observed among high risk borrowers and in disadvantaged neighborhoods



                                                +'"
"
are entirely explained by higher minority concentration and higher racial and ethnic differences

at high foreclosure risk lenders.

         The results of our analysis may have important implications for the dynamics of racial

and ethnic differences along a number of dimensions related to wealth, credit-worthiness and

home ownership. In particular, the greater financial burden associated with high cost loans not

only leads directly to slower wealth accumulation due to the higher mortgage payments, but is

also associated with a higher risk of future delinquency and default, with serious long-term

consequences for long-term credit scores and home ownership rates. These effects can be

expected to exacerbate existing wealth gaps (Charles and Hurst 2002; Gittleman and Wolff

2004).

         In fact, using the same sample of loans, Bayer, Ross and Ferreira (2016) show that having

a rate spread loan is associated with an 8.0 percentage point higher incidence of foreclosure

notices on an individual’s credit report among home purchase loans. This implies that the

unexplained racial and ethnic differences estimated in this paper (in models without lender fixed

effects) are associated with a 0.60 and 0.50 percentage point increase in foreclosure rates for

African-Americans and Hispanics, respectively, relative to a population average foreclosure rate

of 5.3 percent, i.e. 12 and 9 percent increases in foreclosure rates.

         The results of our analysis also have implications for policymakers when developing

strategies to reduce racial and ethnic differences in the incidence of high cost loans. First, across

our entire analysis, the inclusion of lender fixed effects substantially reduced the estimated

coefficients, by over 50 percent in every specification. The strong explanatory power of lender

fixed effects suggests that the structure of the mortgage market involving separate prime and

subprime subsidiaries for most major lenders may play a much larger role in creating mortgage



                                                 +("
"
market disparities than differential treatment of borrowers applying for credit through the same

credit market channel.

       While we cannot directly test the above hypothesis with our data, the fact that controlling

for ex-post foreclosure risk eliminates any correlation between private label securitization or

non-depository lenders and high cost lending is again suggestive that our measure of high

foreclosure risk lender captures important information about the non-conforming mortgage

market and the impact of this market on minority borrowers. In fact, recent Justice Department

settlements with Countrywide and Wells Fargo specifically focused on the impact of cost

differentials between the prime and subprime subsidiaries and the potential steering of African

American and Hispanic borrowers (Savage 2011, 2012). At the same time, the substantial

differences across lenders in terms of borrower credit score, loan to value ratio and ex-post

foreclosure risk suggest that these lenders may be operating in submarkets with different

unobserved risk profiles.




                                               !*"
"
References

Alexandrov, Alexi and Sergei Koulayev. 2015. No Shopping in the U.S. Mortgage Market:

       Direct and Strategic Effects of Providing Information. Working Paper.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Split-Sample Instrumental Variables Estimates of

       the Return to Schooling. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 13 (2), 225-235.

Avery, Robert B., Glen B. Canner, and Robert E. Cooke. 2005. New Information Reported under

       HMDA and Its Implications in Fair Lending Enforcement. Federal Reserve Bulletin,

       Summer.

Avery, Robert B., Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner. 2007. The 2006 HMDA Data.

       Federal Reserve Bulletin, December.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira and Stephen L. Ross. 2016. The Vulnerability of Minority

       Homeowners in the Housing Boom and Bust. American Economic Journal: Economic

       Policy, 8 (1), 1-30.

Belsky, Eric S., Nicolas P. Retsinas and Mark Duda. 2007. The Financial Returns to Low-

    Income Homeownership, In: Chasing the American Dream: new perspectives on affordable

    homeownership, eds. W. Rohe and H. Watson, 191-212. Ithaca and London: Cornell

    University Press.

Bhutta, Neil and Daniel R. Ringo. 2014. The 2013 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data. Federal

       Reserve Bulletin, 100 (6).

Black, Harold A., Thomas P. Boehm, and Ramon P. DeGennaro, 2003. Is There Discrimination

       in Mortgage Pricing? The Case of Overages. Journal of Banking and Finance, 27 (6),

       1139-65.




                                              !)"
"
Calem, Paul S., Kevin Gillen, and Susan Wachter. 2004. The Neighborhood Distribution of

       Subprime Mortgage Lending Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 29 (4), 393-

       410.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller. 1989. The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family Homes.

       American Economic Review, 79 (1), 125–137.

Chan, Sewin, Andrew Haughwout and Joseph Tracy. 2015. How Mortgage Finance Affects the

       Urban Landscape, In the Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Eds. G. Duranton,

       W. Strange and V. Henderson, 987-1046. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Erik Hurst. 2002. The Transition to Home Ownership and the

       Black#White Wealth Gap. Review of Economics and Statistics, 84 (2), 281#$97.

Courchane, Marsha J. 2007. The Pricing of Home Mortgage Loans to Minority Borrowers: How

       Much of the APR Differential Can We Explain? Journal of Real Estate Research, 29 (4),

       399-440.

Courchane, Marsha J. and David Nickerson. 1997. Discrimination Resulting from Overage

       Practices. Journal of Financial Services Research, 11 (1), 133-151.

Courchane, Marsha J., Brian J. Surette, and Peter M. Zorn. 2004. Subprime Borrowers:

       Mortgage Transitions and Outcomes. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 29

       (4), 365-392.

Demyanyk, Yuliya and Otto Van Hemert. 2011. Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis.

       Review of Financial Studies, 24 (6), 1848-1880.

Edminston, Kelly D. 2009. Characteristics of High-Foreclosure Neighborhoods in the Tenth

       District. Economic Review (2nd Quarter), 51-75.




                                              !+"
"
Ferreira, Fernando and Joseph Gyourko. 2015. A New Look at the U.S. Foreclosure Crisis:

       Panel Data Evidence of Prime and Subprime Borrowers from 1997 to 2012. NBER

       Working Paper #21261.

Fisher, Lynn, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, and Paul S. Willen. 2010. A Profile of the Mortgage

       Crisis in a Low and Moderate Income Community. Boston Federal Reserve Public Policy

       Discussion Papers 10-6.

Gerardi, Kristopher S. and Paul Willen. 2009. Subprime Mortgages, Foreclosures, and Urban

       Neighborhoods. BE Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 9 (3).

Ghent, Andra C., Rubén Hernández-Murillo, and Michael T. Owyang. In Press. Differences in

       Subprime Loan Pricing Across Races and Neighborhoods. Regional Science and Urban

       Economics.

Gittleman, Maury and Edward N. Wolff. 2004. Racial Differences in Patterns of Wealth

       Accumulation. Journal of Human Resources, 39 (1), 193#227.

Hanson, Andrew, Zackary Hawley, Hal Martin and Bo Liu. In Press. Discrimination in Mortgage

       Lending: Evidence from a Correspondence Experiment. Journal of Urban Economics.

Harding, John and Stephen L. Ross. 2010. Regulation of Large Financial Institutions: Lessons

       from Corporate Finance Theory. Connecticut Insurance Law Journal, 16 (1), 243-260

Haughwout, Andrew, Christopher Mayer, and Joseph Tracy. 2009. Subprime Mortgage Pricing:

       The Impact of Race, Ethnicity and Gender on the Cost of Borrowing. Brookings-Wharton

       Papers on Urban Affairs, Eds. G. Burtless and J. Pack, 33-63. Washington D.C.:

       Brookings Institution Press.

Heckman, James J. 1998. Detecting Discrimination. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (2),

       101-116.



                                              !!"
"
Herbert, Christopher E., Donald R. Haurin, Stuart S. Rosenthal, and Mark Duda. 2005.

    Homeownership Gaps among Low Income and Minority Borrowers and Neighborhoods.

    Washington,      DC:    U.S.    Department     of    Housing     and    Urban     Development.

    https://www.huduser.gov/Publications/pdf/HomeownershipGapsAmongLow-IncomeAndMinority.pdf

Holmes, Andrew and Paul Horvitz. 1994. Mortgage Redlining: Race, Risk, and Demand. The

       Journal of Finance, 49 (1) 81-99.

Horrace, William C. and Ronald L. Oaxaca. 2006. Results on the Bias and Inconsistency of

       Ordinary Least Squares for the Linear Probability Model. Economics Letters, 90 (3), 321-

       327.

Mayer, Christopher and Karen Pence. 2008. Subprime Mortgages: What, Where and To Whom?

       Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board, 2008-29.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. 2009. The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence

    from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (4), 1449–1496.

Munnell, Alicia H., Geoffrey M. B. Tootell, Lynn E. Browne, and James McEneaney. 1996.

       Mortgage Lending in Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data. American Economic Review, 86

       (1), 25-53.

Nelson, Ashlyn Aiko. 2005. Better Credit, Better Schools: Credit Quality, Race, and Discrete

       Choice Residential Sorting. Doctoral Dissertation. Stanford University.

Quercia, Roberto G., George W. McCarthy, and Susan M. Wacther. 2003. The Impacts of

    Affordable Lending Efforts on Homeownership rates. Journal of Housing Economics, 12 (1),

    29-59.

Reid, Carolina and Elizabeth Laderman. 2009. The Untold Costs of Subprime Lending:

       Examining the Links among Higher#Priced Lending, Foreclosures and Race in California,

       Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper.

                                                 !#"
"
Ross, Stephen L. 2005. The Continuing Practice and Impact of Discrimination. University of

       Connecticut Working Paper 2005-19.

Ross, Stephen L., Margery Austin Turner, Erin Godfrey, and Robin R. Smith. Mortgage Lending

       in Chicago and Los Angeles: A Paired Testing Study of the Pre-application Process.

       Journal of Urban Economics 63 (3): 902-919.

Ross, Stephen L. and John Yinger. 2002. The Color of Credit: Mortgage Lending Discrimination,

       Research Methodology, and Fair-Lending Enforcement. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Savage, Charlie. 2012. Wells Fargo Will Settle Mortgage Bias Charges. The New York Times

       (July 12, 2012).

Savage, Charlie. 2011. Countrywide Will Settle a Bias Suit. The New York Times (July 12,

       2012).

Tootell, Geoffrey M.B. 1996. Redlining in Boston: Do Lenders Discriminate Against

       Neighborhoods? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (4), 1049-1079.




                                             !$"
"
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                 Purchase Sample             Refinance Sample
                                                 Mean        Std. Dev.       Mean        Std. Dev.
HMDA Data
Rate Spread                                      0.161            0.367      0.185            0.388
American Indian                                  0.003            0.053      0.003            0.057
Asian                                            0.094            0.292      0.082            0.274
African American                                 0.093            0.290      0.133            0.340
Hispanic                                         0.614            0.487      0.593            0.491
White                                            0.197            0.398      0.189            0.392
Male                                             0.649            0.477      0.650            0.477
Female                                           0.348            0.476      0.347            0.476
Loan Amount (in 1000s)                           292.9            217.2      267.1            206.0
Applicant Income (in 1000s)                      109.3            113.1      102.7            111.4
Coborrower Present                               0.385            0.487      0.503            0.500
Jumbo Loan                                       0.283            0.450      0.190            0.393
Tract Median Income (in 1000s)                   60158            23489      60123            23380
Tract Share African American                      10.0            18.5        12.7            22.1
Tract Share Hispanic                              15.9            20.1        17.2            20.8
Tract Share Asian                                 6.3             10.1         7.0            10.6
Tract Share Owner Occupant                        68.5            23.9        69.4            22.7
Tract Share in Poverty                            7.7              7.3         8.0             7.5
Tract Rent/Price                                 0.004            0.002      0.004            0.002


Dataquick Data
Loan to Value Ratio >=0.80                       0.800            0.400      0.518            0.500
Loan to Value Ratio >= 0.95                      0.377            0.485      0.362            0.481
Subordinate Lien                                 0.003            0.055      0.066            0.248
First Lien Adjustable Rate                       0.499            0.500      0.470            0.499
Condo                                            0.216            0.411      0.135            0.341
Mobile                                           0.001            0.037      0.001            0.036
Single Family                                    0.776            0.417      0.842            0.365
Lot Size (sf in 1000s)                           12384            92140      14345        152661
Unit square feet (in 1000s)                      1804             26329       1768            20173
Number of Bathrooms                               1.98            5.64        2.01            1.14
Number of Bedrooms                                2.15            5.88        2.02            1.76
Number of Stories                                 1.18            1.64        1.22            1.33
Units in Building                                 1.41            17.25       1.45            18.25


Credit Data
Vantage Score                                     782              105         773            109
Mortgage Payment to Income Ratio                 0.257            0.313      0.249            1.131
Debt Payment to Income Ratio                     0.323            0.382      0.352            1.275
Borrower Age                                      43.7            11.3        49.6            11.0


Sample Size                                              94,699                      91,242

Notes: The table presents means and standard errors of the key variables in the home purchase and
refinance regression samples used in Table 2.                                                         !
Table 2: Rate Spread Models (04-07 Originations)
                                         Home Purchase Sample
Variable Names          HMDA            Dataquick     Credit Data             Baseline          Lender FE

Asian                   0.008             0.013**           0.010**            0.010**           0.006*
                       (0.006)            (0.005)           (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.003)
African American       0.203***          0.152***           0.090***          0.087***           0.036***
                        (0.021)           (0.015)            (0.011)           (0.009)            (0.007)
Hispanic               0.140***          0.090***           0.068***          0.069***           0.024***
                        (0.017)           (0.011)            (0.010)           (0.009)            (0.004)

Observations           94,699             94,699            94,699             94,699            94,699
R-squared               0.186              0.297             0.368              0.417             0.609

                                            Refinance Sample
Variable Names          HMDA            Dataquick       Credit Data           Baseline          Lender FE

Asian                   0.001              0.001             0.008              0.007             0.005
                       (0.007)            (0.007)           (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.004)
African American       0.118***          0.104***           0.046***          0.043***           0.019***
                        (0.015)           (0.014)            (0.009)           (0.009)            (0.004)
Hispanic               0.046***          0.027***           0.014**            0.014*             0.005
                        (0.010)           (0.008)           (0.007)            (0.007)           (0.003)

Observations           91,242             91,242            91,242             91,242            91,242
R-squared               0.116              0.196             0.336              0.354             0.551
Notes: These models are estimated using OLS with standard errors clustered at the lender level. The first
column controls for just the variables available in the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data, the second column
includes additional controls made available from assessor's data including Combined Loan to Value Ratio and
the presence of subordinate liens, column three includes credit score and income ratios based on data from the
credit repository, column 4 adds interactions between key loan terms and whether the borrower has a subprime
credit score (Vantage<701), and column 5 presents the model from column 4 after including lender fixed
effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                                                                 !
Table 3: Rate Spread Loans and Lender Risk
                                               Home Purchase Sample
                                                                        Baseline Model +
                                                        Lender Fixed   Lender Foreclosure   Baseline Model +
Variable Names                         Baseline Model      Effects            Risk          Lender Attributes

African American                          0.087***        0.036***          0.049***            0.046***
                                           (0.009)        (0.007)            (0.009)             (0.010)
Hispanic                                  0.069***        0.024***          0.028***            0.026***
                                           (0.009)        (0.004)            (0.007)             (0.006)
Foreclosure risk by lender                                                  3.181***            3.438***
                                                                             (0.303)             (0.432)
Lender Type (National Banks omitted)
    Commercial Banks                                                                              0.004
                                                                                                 (0.046)
    State Chartered Banks                                                                         -0.036
                                                                                                 (0.103)
    Savings and Loans                                                                             -0.039
                                                                                                 (0.028)
    Credit Unions                                                                                 0.027
                                                                                                 (0.075)
    Mortgage Banks                                                                                -0.025
                                                                                                 (0.033)
Share of Mortgages Re-Sold                                                                        -0.042
                                                                                                 (0.038)
Loan Buyer (GSE omitted)
    FHA                                                                                           -0.119
                                                                                                 (0.168)
    Private Securitization                                                                        -0.105
                                                                                                 (0.102)
    Commercial/Savings Bank                                                                       -0.059
                                                                                                 (0.058)
    Ins, CU, Mort Bank                                                                            0.018
                                                                                                 (0.065)
    Affiated Lender                                                                              -0.067*
                                                                                                 (0.039)
    Other                                                                                         -0.042
                                                                                                 (0.038)

    Observations                          94,699           94,699           46,933               44,284
    R-squared                              0.417           0.609             0.490                0.489         !
!                              !
Notes: This table presents estimates for the home purchase sample. The table presents estimates from the
subprime model for a subsample restricted to only lenders with 10 or more loans. The estimates from the subprime
model are shown in column 1, and the estimates for the lender fixed effects model are shown in column 2. These
models are estimated using OLS. Column 3 includes a control for the lender's ex-post foreclosure risk based on the
lender fixed effect from a model of whether the borrower ever faces foreclosure, and column 4 adds controls for the
type of lender based on the lender's regulator, the share of loans sold by the lender on the secondary market, and
the share of sold loans by type of purchaser. Columns 3 and 4 are estimated using split sample IV estimates. The
split sample IV estimates are based on a subsample with at least 10 loans per lender, and the estimates presented
are the average of 20 hold-out sample draws. Standard errors are clustered at the lender level except for the last two
columns where they are bootstrapped by sampling lenders with replacement.
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                         !
Table 4: Alternative Lender Risk Measures

                                                            Home Purchase Sample
                                                         Lenders with >=10 white loans                     Lenders with >= 10 loans
Variable Names                                          Baseline        White Foreclosure Risk     30 Day Delinquency Conditional on High Cost

African American                                        0.046***                0.047***                 0.052***                 0.061***
                                                        (0.009)                 (0.010)                  (0.011)                  (0.010)
Hispanic                                                0.025***                0.020***                 0.028***                 0.037***
                                                        (0.006)                 (0.007)                  (0.006)                  (0.009)
Lender Foreclosure Risk (based on all loans)            3.331***
                                                        (0.261)
Lender Foreclosure Risk (based on white loans)                                   4.295***
                                                                                 (0.851)
Lender 30 Day Delinquency                                                                                2.142***
                                                                                                         (0.277)
Foreclosure net of rate spread loans                                                                                               3.652
                                                                                                                                  (0.570)
Observations                                             46,763                  46,752                   46,933                  46,933
R-squared                                                0.493                   0.349                    0.460                   0.419
Notes: Column 1 presents the results from Column 3 in Table 3 for the home purchase sample restricted only to lenders with at least 10 white
loans. Column 2 contains estimates from a model controlling for lender foreclosure fixed effects based only on the lender's white loans. Column 3
contains estimates using ex-post lender risk of 30 to 180 day delinquency, and Column 4 contains estimates using ex-post foreclosure risk based
on an ever foreclose model that controls for having a high cost loan. Columns 3 and 4 use the original home purchase sample of lenders with at
least 10 loans overall. All models are estimated using split sample IV, and standard errors are bootstrapped.
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                                                    !
!
Table 5: Sorting over Ex-post Foreclosure Risk

Variable Names                               Coefficient Estimates
Borrower Characteristics
   African American                                0.038***
                                                    (0.003)
   Hispanic                                        0.049***
                                                    (0.002)
   Asian                                            0.004*
                                                    (0.002)
   Female                                          0.007***
                                                    (0.001)
   Co-borrower present                             -0.013***
                                                    (0.001)
   Age second quintile                             0.005***
                                                    (0.002)
   Age third quintile                              0.012***
                                                    (0.002)
   Age fourth quintile                             0.020***
                                                    (0.002)
   Age fifth quintile                              0.020***
                                                    (0.002)
   Log Income                                      0.015***
                                                    (0.001)
   Subprime Credit Score                           0.106***
                                                    (0.003)
   Subprime Score above Median                     -0.055***
                                                    (0.003)
   Prime Score above Median                        -0.028***
                                                    (0.001)
Neighborhood Characteristics
   Tract Percent African-American                  0.017***
                                                    (0.005)
   Tract Percent Hispanic                          0.044***
                                                    (0.006)
   Tract Percent Owner-Occupied                    0.030***
                                                    (0.004)
   Tract Percent Poverty                           0.044***
                                                    (0.015)
   Tract Rent to Price Ratio                       0.013***
                                                    (0.002)          !   !
Table 5: Sorting over Ex-post Foreclosure Risk

Variable Names                                     Coefficient Estimates
Loan Risk Factors
   Loan to Value Ratio above 0.80                        0.014***
                                                          (0.001)
   Loan to Value Ratio above 0.90                        0.018***
                                                          (0.002)
   Loan to Value Ratio above 0.95                        0.071***
                                                          (0.002)
   Loan to Value Ratio above 1.00                          -0.004
                                                          (0.004)
   Housing Expense to Income                             -0.015***
   Ratio above 0.26                                       (0.002)
   Housing Expense to Income                             -0.012***
   Ratio above 0.33                                       (0.002)
   Debt to Income Ratio above 0.36                       -0.004**
                                                          (0.002)
   Debt to Income Ratio above 0.42                       0.010***
                                                          (0.002)
   Observations                                           94,481
   R-squared                                               0.232
Notes: This model regresses the standardized measure of ex-post
foreclosure risk on borrower, neighborhood and loan attributes in the
home purchase sample. Standard errors are clustered at the census
tract level.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                             !   !
Table 6: Metropolitan Specific Estimates Model - Home Purchase Sample
                                                            Baseline Model
Variable Names        Chicago        Cleveland           Denver        Los Angeles        Maryland    Miami     San Francisco


African American      0.094***        0.066***          0.082***         0.059***         0.085***   0.117***     0.062***
                      (0.016)         (0.020)            (0.014)          (0.011)         (0.011)    (0.014)       (0.014)

Hispanic              0.062***         0.011            0.063***         0.063***         0.076***   0.071***     0.075***
                      (0.015)         (0.018)            (0.010)          (0.010)         (0.021)    (0.013)       (0.014)


Observations          12,752          11,976             13,182           13,515           13,693    13,395        14,293
R-squared              0.429           0.445             0.414               0.435         0.412      0.431         0.407


                                                 Lender Foreclosure Risk (Reduced Form)
Variable Names        Chicago        Cleveland           Denver        Los Angeles        Maryland    Miami     San Francisco


African American      0.068***         0.034*           0.050***         0.036***         0.057***   0.075***     0.039***
                      (0.011)         (0.017)            (0.014)          (0.008)         (0.008)    (0.011)       (0.011)

Hispanic              0.034***         0.014            0.046***         0.033***         0.036***   0.046***     0.034***
                      (0.012)         (0.018)            (0.010)          (0.007)         (0.013)    (0.010)       (0.011)

Foreclosure Risk      2.743***        2.877***          2.256***         2.515***         2.915***   2.435***     2.105***
                      (0.228)         (0.238)            (0.207)          (0.207)         (0.200)    (0.235)       (0.277)


Observations          12,752          11,976             13,182           13,515           13,693    13,395        14,293
R-squared              0.531           0.549             0.502               0.545         0.546      0.521         0.513


                                                       Lender Fixed Effect Model
Variable Names        Chicago        Cleveland           Denver        Los Angeles        Maryland    Miami     San Francisco


African American      0.039***         0.030*            0.032**          0.021**         0.039***   0.051***      0.018*
                      (0.010)         (0.016)            (0.013)          (0.010)         (0.009)    (0.011)       (0.010)

Hispanic              0.018**          0.011            0.021***         0.021***         0.024**    0.032***     0.022***
                      (0.008)         (0.015)            (0.008)          (0.006)         (0.010)    (0.008)       (0.007)


Observations          12,752          11,976             13,182           13,515           13,693    13,395        14,293
R-squared              0.600           0.620             0.601               0.641         0.645      0.603         0.654       !
Notes: Table 6 presents estimates by individual sites in each column for the home purchase sample. Panel 1 presents the subprime model, panel 2
presents reduced form models that control for estimated lender fixed effects from the ever foreclose regression, and the third panel presents the lender
fixed effects estimates. Standard errors are clustered at the lender level.

Robust standard errors shown in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                                                             !
Table 7: Racial and Ethnic Differences for Home Purchase Market

Variable Names                                              Baseline Model                 Lender Fixed Effects Model

African American                                 0.085***      0.042*         0.001     0.025***     0.004       0.010
                                                  (0.013)      (0.025)       (0.023)     (0.008)    (0.014)     (0.037)
Hispanic                                         0.024**        0.036        -0.005      0.001       0.008       0.013
                                                 (0.010)       (0.022)       (0.021)    (0.005)     (0.014)     (0.008)
Interactions with Common Loan Risk Factors
    African American*Subprime                    0.032*        0.027*        -0.010      0.015       0.013       0.007
                                                 (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.014)    (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.006)
   Hispanic*Subprime                             -0.029*       -0.030*       -0.012     -0.009       -0.010     -0.017
                                                 (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.013)    (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.004)
   African American*High DTI                      0.005         0.005         0.010      0.007       0.007       0.011
                                                 (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.012)    (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.010)
   Hispanic*High DTI                             -0.006         -0.005       -0.001      0.000       0.000       0.001
                                                 (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.011)    (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.014)
   African American*High LTV                     -0.015         -0.018        0.006      0.009       0.007       0.003
                                                 (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.011)    (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.004)
   Hispanic*High LTV                             0.113***      0.110***      0.061***   0.056***    0.054***    0.049***
                                                  (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.016)    (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.014)
Interactions with Neighborhood Characteristics
    African American*Pct Poverty                               0.145**        0.058                  0.057       0.059
                                                               (0.063)       (0.072)                (0.067)     (0.179)
   Hispanic*Pct Poverty                                         0.001         0.040                  0.051       0.057
                                                               (0.066)       (0.074)                (0.050)     (0.069)
   African American*Pct Black                                   -0.021       -0.008                  -0.005     -0.004
                                                               (0.018)       (0.019)                (0.013)     (0.003)
   Hispanic*Pct Hispanic                                       0.042***       0.018                  0.001       0.001
                                                                (0.016)      (0.025)                (0.012)     (0.009)
   African American*Pct Owner-Occupied                          -0.022       -0.022                 -0.018      -0.020**
                                                               (0.021)       (0.022)                (0.015)      (0.009)
   Hispanic*Pct Owner-Occupied                                 -0.050**      -0.027                 -0.035**   -0.035***
                                                                (0.020)      (0.021)                 (0.014)    (0.013)
   African American*Rent to Price ratio                        -0.021        0.048***               0.031***    0.028***
                                                               (0.018)        (0.015)                (0.010)     (0.008)
   Hispanic*Rent to Price Ratio                                0.042***       0.018                  0.013       0.011
                                                                (0.016)      (0.011)                (0.009)     (0.007)    !
Table 7: Racial and Ethnic Differences for Home Purchase Market


Variable Names                                            Baseline Model                      Lender Fixed Effects Model

Interactions with Lender Foreclosure Risk
    African American*Lender Foreclosure Risk                               0.524**                                     0.187
                                                                           (0.225)                                    (0.208)
    Hispanic*Lender Foreclosure Risk                                        0.185                                     0.197**
                                                                           (0.217)                                    (0.080)
    Observations                                 94,481       94,481       46,424           94,481       94,481       46,424
    R-squared                                     0.421        0.436        0.492            0.610        0.610        0.198
Notes: This table presents the estimates for the home purchase sample of models that interact race and ethnicity with key
borrower, location and lender controls to the baseline subprime and lender fixed effect models. The first and fourth rows
present the estimates interacting dummies for subprime credit score, debt to income ratio above 0.45 and loan to value ratio
above 0.95 with race and ethnicity for the subprime and lender fixed effects models, respectively. Columns 2 and 5 also add
interactions between race and ethnicity and census tract attributes for the tract in which the housing unit is located. Columns
3 and 6 also interact race and ethnicity with lender ex-post foreclosure risk. Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 are estimated using OLS
with standard errors clustered at the lender level, and columns 3 and 6 are estimated using split-sample IV and standard
errors are bootstrapped.
Standard errors shown in paretheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                                  !
!                                !
Appendix Table 1: Sample Selection of HMDA Variables

                                                             DQ High quality       DQ High quality                  Credit Data Matched
                                     HMDA full sample                                              Sample, weighted
                                                                 match            match   May-Aug                   Sample, weighted2

                                                Stand.                  Stand.               Stand.               Stand.                  Stand.
Variable                              Mean       Dev.        Mean        Dev.       Mean      Dev.       Mean      Dev.         Mean       Dev.
African American                      0.111      0.339       0.116       0.345      0.114     0.343      0.114     0.343        0.112      0.315
Hispanic                              0.174      0.410       0.194       0.427      0.193     0.426      0.192     0.426        0.185      0.388
Asian                                 0.075      0.284       0.086       0.303      0.085     0.301      0.086     0.303        0.089      0.284
White                                 0.678      0.505       0.601       0.529      0.605     0.528      0.605     0.528        0.611      0.487
Loan Amount (in 1000s)                 247        243         271         221        274       224        274       227          278        211
Applicant Income (in 1000s)            107        142         105         128        105       127        106       132          106        115
Tract Median Income (in 1000s)         59.1       25.6        59.6       25.2        59.7      25.2       59.7      25.2        60.4       23.5
Tract Pct African American            0.126      0.238       0.116       0.225      0.115     0.224      0.115     0.224        0.113      0.204
Tract Pct Hispanic                    0.169      0.227       0.165       0.221      0.164     0.220      0.165     0.221        0.163      0.202
Tract Pct Asian                       0.063      0.109       0.065       0.112      0.065     0.111      0.065     0.111        0.066      0.104
Number of Observations                   9,345,709               4,002,996             1,459,468             273,589                238,785
Notes: This table presents means and standard errors for the pooled sample from HMDA for all seven sites. The first column is the full sample, the
second column is just loans that match our assessors data on all key fields including lender name, the third column restricts the sample to
transactions between May and Aug, the fourth column is our random sample using the sampling weights, and the final column is for the final sample
of observations with a pre-origination Vantage score.                                                                                                !
Appendix Table 2: Sample Means for Lender Variables
                                       Purchase Sample                               Refinance Sample
                                    Mean            Std. Dev.                       Mean         Std. Dev.
Agency Code
National Banks                      0.287            0.452                          0.260             0.439
Commercial Banks                    0.129            0.335                          0.128             0.334
State Chartered Banks               0.042            0.201                          0.045             0.207
Savings and Loans                   0.188            0.391                          0.223             0.417
Credit Unions                       0.009            0.092                          0.018             0.132
Mortgage Banks                      0.344            0.475                          0.326             0.469
Sample Size                                 94,699                                          91,242

Securitization
Share sold                                 0.256             0.262                  0.287             0.287
Share to GSE                               0.315             0.343                  0.322             0.351
Share to FHA                               0.024             0.052                  0.012             0.036
Private Securitization                     0.070             0.161                  0.073             0.164
Commercial/Savings Bank                    0.074             0.136                  0.065             0.128
Ins, CU, Mort Bank                         0.109             0.230                  0.128             0.246
Affiated Lender                            0.149             0.277                  0.178             0.304
Other                                      0.259             0.343                  0.223             0.320
Sample Size                                         89885                                   84748

Foreclosure Risk Variables
Foreclosure risk by lender                0.000              0.058                    0.000            0.038
Sample Size                                        92,806                                     89,078
Foreclosure risk using white loans        0.000              0.283                    0.000            0.260
Sample Size                                        91,675                                     87,770
Notes: The table presents means and standard errors of key lender variables for the home purchase and refinance
regression samples used in Table 3 and appendix Table 3, which are restricted to lenders with 10 or more loans.   !
Appendix Table 3: Rate Spread Loans and Lender Attributes
                                   Home Purchase Sample
                                                                        Baseline Model +
                                                  Baseline Model +       Securitization      Baseline Model +
Variable Names                Baseline Model       Agency Code              Shares           Lender Attributes

African American                  0.087***             0.084***             0.075***             0.046***
                                   (0.009)              (0.008)              (0.007)             (0.010)
Hispanic                          0.069***             0.064***             0.058***             0.026***
                                   (0.009)              (0.008)              (0.008)             (0.006)
Foreclosure risk by lender                                                                       3.438***
                                                                                                 (0.432)
Commercial Banks                                       0.056**                                     0.004
(omit national banks)                                   (0.022)                                  (0.046)
State Chartered Banks                                    0.145                                    -0.036
                                                        (0.112)                                  (0.103)
Savings and Loans                                      0.053***                                   -0.039
                                                        (0.020)                                  (0.028)
Credit Unions                                            0.007                                     0.027
                                                        (0.021)                                  (0.075)
Mortgage Banks                                         0.113***                                   -0.025
                                                        (0.022)                                  (0.033)
Share sold                                                                    0.039               -0.042
                                                                             (0.038)             (0.038)
FHA                                                                           0.166               -0.119
(Omit sold to GSE)                                                           (0.104)             (0.168)
Private Securitization                                                      0.495***              -0.105
                                                                             (0.091)             (0.102)
Commercial/Savings Bank                                                       0.008               -0.059
                                                                             (0.047)             (0.058)
Ins, CU, Mort Bank                                                          0.214***               0.018
                                                                             (0.064)             (0.065)
Affiated Lender                                                             0.071**              -0.067*
                                                                             (0.031)             (0.039)
Other                                                                       0.185***              -0.042
                                                                             (0.033)             (0.038)

Observations                       94,699               94,699                89,885              44,284
R-squared                           0.417                0.432                 0.459               0.489
Notes: This table presents estimates for the home purchase sample. The first column of the table presents
estimates for the subprime model for a subsample restricted to only lenders with 10 or more loans. The next
two columns present estimates after including either agency code or securitization controls, respectively. The
first three models are estimated using OLS with standard errors clustered at the lender level. The final column
presents estimates for a model that contains all of our lender controls, and is estimated using split-sample IV
with bootstrapped standard errors.
Standard errors shown in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                  !
Appendix Table 4: Rate Spread Loans and Lender Risk
                                      Refinance Sample
                                                                   Baseline Model +
                                                                  Lender Foreclosure Baseline Model +
Variable Names                Baseline Model Lender Fixed Effects        Risk        Lender Attributes

African American                  0.042***            0.018***              0.031***             0.023***
                                   (0.009)             (0.004)               (0.009)             (0.005)
Hispanic                           0.013*               0.005                 0.011               -0.004
                                   (0.007)             (0.003)               (0.011)             (0.008)
Foreclosure risk by lender                                                  3.884***             3.921***
                                                                             (0.561)             (0.854)
Commercial Banks                                                                                   0.082
(omit national banks)                                                                            (0.076)
State Chartered Banks                                                                             -0.057
                                                                                                 (0.052)
Savings and Loans                                                                                 -0.038
                                                                                                 (0.043)
Credit Unions                                                                                     -0.045
                                                                                                 (0.062)
Mortgage Banks                                                                                    -0.020
                                                                                                 (0.040)
Share sold                                                                                         0.075
                                                                                                 (0.056)
FHA                                                                                               -0.136
(Omit sold to GSE)                                                                               (0.185)
Private Securitization                                                                           0.167**
                                                                                                 (0.075)
Commercial/Savings Bank                                                                            0.038
                                                                                                 (0.093)
Ins, CU, Mort Bank                                                                               0.149**
                                                                                                 (0.063)
Affiated Lender                                                                                   -0.044
                                                                                                 (0.059)
Other                                                                                              0.047
                                                                                                 (0.047)

Observations                      91,242               91,242               45,101               41,649
R-squared                          0.354                0.551                0.351               0.389

Notes: This table presents estimates for the refinance sample. The table presents estimates from the
subprime model for a subsample restricted to only lenders with 10 or more loans. The estimates from the
subprime model are shown in column 1, and the estimates for the lender fixed effects model are shown in
column 2. These models are estimated using OLS. Column 3 includes a control for the lender's ex-post
foreclosure risk based on the lender fixed effect from a model of whether the borrower ever faces foreclosure,
and column 4 adds controls for the type of lender based on the lender's regulator, the share of loans sold by
the lender on the secondary market, and the share of sold loans by type of purchaser. Columns 3 and 4 are
estimated using split sample IV estimates. The split sample IV estimates are based on a subsample with at
least 10 loans per lender, and the estimates presented are the average of 20 hold-out sample draws.
Standard errors are clustered at the lender level except for the last two columns where they are bootstrapped
by sampling lenders with replacement.
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                 !
Appendix Table 5: Lender Foreclosure Risk and Racial Composition of Loans
                                                        Refinance Sample
                                                Lenders with >=10 white loans                                 Lenders with >= 10 loans
Variable Names                                Baseline         White Foreclosure Risk                30 Day Delinquency    Conditional on High Cost

African American                                      0.029***                   0.031***                  0.026***                  0.036***
                                                      (0.009)                    (0.007)                   (0.008)                   (0.011)

Hispanic                                                0.001                     0.011                      -0.012                     0.09
                                                       (0.012)                   (0.009)                    (0.015)                   (0.017)

Lender Foreclosure Risk (based on all loans)          4.225***
                                                      (0.622)

Lender Foreclosure Risk (based on white loans)                                   4.359***
                                                                                 (1.531)

Lender 30 Day Delinquency                                                                                  1.992***
                                                                                                           (0.273)

Foreclosure net of rate spread loans                                                                                                 2.695***
                                                                                                                                     (0.884)

Observations                                           44,856                    44,851                     45,101                    45,101
R-squared                                              0.345                     0.270                      0.369                     0.343
Notes: Column 1 presents the results from Column 3 in Appendix Table 4 for the refinance sample restricted only to lenders with at least 10 white
loans. Column 2 contains estimates from a model controlling for lender foreclosure fixed effects based only on the lender's white loans. Column 3
contains estimates using ex-post lender risk of 30 to 180 day delinquency, and Column 4 contains estimates using ex-post foreclosure risk based on
an ever foreclose model that controls for having a high cost loan. Columns 3 and 4 use the original refinance sample of lenders with at least 10 loans
overall. All models are estimated using split sample IV, and standard errors are bootstrapped.restricted to lenders that have at least 10 white loans.
For comparison purposes, columns 1 and 2 present split sample IV estimates for the simple lender foreclosure fixed effect model using the restricted
sample. Standard errors are bootstrapping sampling lenders with replacement.
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                                                                                                         !
Appendix Table 6: Sorting over Ex-post Foreclosure Risk (Complete Estimates)
                                            Home Purchase Sample                                 Refinance Sample
                                 Borrower       + Census Tract                      Borrower     + Census Tract
Variable Names                   Attributes       Attributes    + Loan Attributes   Attributes      Attributes      + Loan Attributes

African American                   0.055***         0.045***         0.038***        0.022***        0.014***          0.014***
                                    (0.002)         (0.003)           (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Hispanic                           0.071***         0.058***         0.049***        0.022***        0.016***          0.015***
                                    (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Asian                               0.004*           0.002            0.004*          -0.003         -0.004**           -0.004*
                                    (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Female                             0.006***         0.007***         0.006***          0.002          0.002*            0.002**
                                    (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)
Co-borrower                       -0.015***        -0.015***        -0.012***       -0.004***       -0.004***          -0.004***
                                    (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)
Age second quintile                  0.001           0.001          0.005***           0.004           0.004            0.004*
                                    (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Age third quintile                 0.004**          0.004**         0.012***          -0.001          -0.001             0.000
                                    (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Age fourth quintile                0.011***         0.010***        0.019***          0.0020           0.002             0.003
                                    (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Age fifth quintile                 0.007***         0.008***        0.019***           0.003           0.003            0.005**
                                    (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Logarithm of Income                0.009***         0.014***         0.015***        0.002**         0.005***          0.004***
                                    (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)
Subprime Credit Score              0.114***         0.111***        0.105***         0.099***        0.097***          0.095***
                                    (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Subprime Score above Median       -0.055***        -0.053***        -0.054***       -0.051***       -0.050***          -0.049***
                                    (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
Prime Score above Median          -0.042***        -0.040***        -0.028***       -0.031***       -0.030***          -0.028***
                                    (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)
Tract Percent African-American                      0.023***         0.016***                        0.016***          0.016***
                                                    (0.005)           (0.005)                         (0.003)           (0.003)
Tract Percent Hispanic                              0.056***         0.043***                        0.016***          0.014***
                                                    (0.006)           (0.006)                         (0.004)           (0.004)
Tract Percent Owner-Occupied                        0.029***         0.030***                        0.018***          0.017***
                                                    (0.004)           (0.004)                         (0.003)           (0.003)
Tract Percent Poverty                               0.049***         0.044***                        0.065***          0.057***
                                                    (0.015)           (0.015)                         (0.010)           (0.011)
Tract Rent to Price Ratio                           0.018***         0.013***                        0.006***          0.007***
                                                    (0.003)           (0.002)                         (0.002)           (0.002)         !
Appendix Table 6: Sorting over Ex-post Foreclosure Risk (Complete Estimates)
                                            Home Purchase Sample                                                Refinance Sample
                                 Borrower       + Census Tract                                 Borrower         + Census Tract
Variable Names                   Attributes       Attributes    + Loan Attributes              Attributes          Attributes        + Loan Attributes

Loan to Value Ratio above 0.80                                               0.013***                                                    0.011***
                                                                               (0.001)                                                    (0.002)
Loan to Value Ratio above 0.90                                               0.018***                                                    0.016***
                                                                               (0.002)                                                    (0.002)
Loan to Value Ratio above 0.95                                               0.071***                                                    0.019***
                                                                               (0.002)                                                    (0.003)
Loan to Value Ratio above 1.00                                                  -0.004                                                   0.022***
                                                                               (0.004)                                                    (0.001)
Housing Expense to Income                                                    -0.014***                                                   -0.005***
Ratio above 0.26                                                               (0.002)                                                    (0.001)
Housing Expense to Income                                                    -0.011***                                                   -0.014***
Ratio above 0.33                                                               (0.002)                                                    (0.002)
Debt to Income Ratio above 0.36                                               -0.004**                                                   0.007***
                                                                               (0.002)                                                    (0.002)
Debt to Income Ratio above 0.42                                              0.010***                                                    0.017***
                                                                               (0.002)                                                    (0.002)

Observations                           94,481              94,481             94,481             91,070              91,070               91,070
R-squared                               0.204              0.209               0.232              0.136              0.138                 0.144
Notes: This tables present the estimates from models that regress the standardized measure of ex-post foreclosure risk on borrower, neighborhood
and loan attributes in the home purchase and refinance samples of lenders with at least 10 loans. Columns 1-3 present the home purchase sample
estimates beginning with a model that adds borrower attributes, followed by the addition of neighborhood attributes, and finally by loan terms. Columns
4-6 contain estimates of the same models for the refinance sample. Standard errors are clustered at the census tract level.
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                                                          !
Appendix Table 7: Metropolitan Specific Estimates Model Refinance Sample
                                                       Subprime Model
Variable Names     Chicago        Cleveland        Denver        Los Angeles        Maryland    Miami      San Francisco

African American   0.051***         0.029            0.027**         0.034**         0.040***   0.052***      0.028*
                    (0.015)         (0.018)          (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.012)    (0.019)       (0.015)
Hispanic            0.026**         -0.008          0.031***        0.013360*         0.007      0.01          0.006
                    (0.013)         (0.020)          (0.012)         (0.007)         (0.016)    (0.013)       (0.007)


Observations        12,385          11,365           12,793          13,103          12,920     12,974        13,538
R-squared            0.396          0.362            0.306            0.325           0.423      0.388         0.231


                                              Lender Foreclosure Risk (Reduced Form)
Variable Names     Chicago        Cleveland          Denver         Los Angeles      Maryland   Miami      San Francisco

African American   0.043***         0.025            0.024*          0.027**         0.035***   0.032*         0.023
                    (0.016)         (0.017)          (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.011)    (0.017)       (0.014)
Hispanic           0.022100*        -0.001           0.019*           0.005           0.003      -0.001         0
                    (0.012)         (0.019)          (0.011)         (0.008)         (0.015)    (0.012)       (0.007)
Foreclosure Risk   2.763***        2.319***         2.012***        2.110***         3.053***   2.682***     2.138***
                    (0.836)         (0.806)          (0.727)         (0.311)         (0.297)    (0.377)       (0.361)


Observations        12,385          11,365           12,793          13,103          12,920     12,974        13,538
R-squared            0.438          0.391            0.339            0.368           0.479      0.440         0.293


                                                    Lender Fixed Effect Model
Variable Names     Chicago        Cleveland         Denver         Los Angeles      Maryland    Miami      San Francisco

African American    0.018**         0.012            0.001           0.020**       0.015622**   0.032***       0.01
                    (0.009)         (0.014)          (0.010)         (0.009)         (0.007)    (0.010)       (0.008)
Hispanic            0.014*          0.004            0.016*           0.006         0.003424     0.002         0.003
                    (0.007)         (0.015)          (0.008)         (0.006)         (0.010)    (0.009)       (0.005)


Observations        12,385          11,365           12,793          13,103          12,920     12,974        13,538
R-squared            0.613          0.577            0.548            0.492           0.619      0.572         0.483
                                                                                                                           !
Notes: This table presents estimates by individual sites in each column for the refinance sample. Panel 1 presents the subprime model, panel 2
presents reduced form model that controls for lender fixed effects from the ever foreclose regression, and the third panel presents the lender fixed
effects estimates. Standard errors are clustered at the lender level.
Robust standard errors shown in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                                                         !
!                               !
Appendix Table 8: Racial and Ethnic Differences for Refinance Subprime model
                                            Subprime                                    Lender FE
Variable Names          Credit Quality     Neighborhood      Foreclosure   Credit Quality      Neighborhood   Foreclosure

African American               0.023**        0.026            0.021            0.007*            -0.007         0.000
                               (0.009)       (0.026)          (0.034)           (0.004)           (0.020)       (0.028)
Hispanic                        0.011         0.0026           0.005            0.008*             0.010         0.020
                               (0.007)       (0.017)          (0.026)           (0.004)           (0.017)       (0.024)
African American*Subprime       0.017          0.016          -0.003             0.009             0.007         -0.001
                               (0.013)       (0.013)          (0.018)           (0.009)           (0.009)       (0.015)
Hispanic*Subprime               0.009          0.007          -0.001             0.000             -0.001        -0.013
                               (0.009)       (0.009)          (0.016)           (0.007)           (0.007)       (0.011)
African American*High DTI       0.008          0.008          -0.003             -0.002            -0.002        -0.007
                               (0.007)       (0.007)          (0.011)           (0.006)           (0.006)       (0.009)
Hispanic*High DTI               0.004          0.004           0.004             -0.009            -0.009        -0.010
                               (0.008)       (0.008)          (0.010)           (0.007)           (0.007)       (0.008)
African American*High LTV      0.030***      0.029***          0.011           0.022***          0.021***      0.015**
                               (0.008)       (0.008)          (0.009)           (0.006)           (0.006)       (0.007)
Hispanic*High LTV               0.005          0.004          -0.007             0.000             -0.001      -0.0047
                               (0.006)       (0.006)          (0.009)           (0.005)           (0.005)       (0.007)
African American*Pct Poverty                   0.023          -0.029                               0.037         0.036
                                             (0.067)          (0.095)                             (0.052)       (0.075)
Hispanic*Pct Poverty                          -0.005          -0.045                              0.0132         -0.004
                                             (0.076)          (0.098)                             (0.076)       (0.089)
African American*Pct Black                    -0.030          -0.015                               -0.012        -0.011
                                             (0.020)          (0.024)                             (0.016)      (0.0189)
Hispanic*Pct Hispanic                          0.009           0.017                                0.000         0.000
                                             (0.017)          (0.024)                             (0.013)       (0.016)
African American*Pct Owner-Occupied           -0.022          -0.032                               -0.008        -0.007
                                             (0.023)          (0.030)                             (0.019)       (0.025)
Hispanic*Pct Owner-Occupied                   -0.014          -0.037                               -0.020        -0.025
                                             (0.016)          (0.024)                             (0.016)       (0.021)
African American*rent to price ratio           0.018          0.030**                             0.019*       -0.031**
                                             (0.014)          (0.015)                             (0.011)       (0.013)
Hispanic*Rent to Price Ratio                  0.017*          0.024**                               0.011         0.016
                                             (0.010)          (0.012)                             (0.009)       (0.013)     !
!                                !
Appendix Table 8: Racial and Ethnic Differences for Refinance Subprime model
                                            Subprime                                    Lender FE
Variable Names          Credit Quality     Neighborhood      Foreclosure   Credit Quality      Neighborhood                        Foreclosure

African American*Lender Foreclosure                                     0.516                                                         0.408
                                                                       (0.486)                                                       (0.267)
Hispanic*Lender Foreclosure                                             0.293                                                         0.389
                                                                       (0.593)                                                       (0.245)

Observations                   91,070              91,070              44,600             91,070               91,070                44,600
R-squared                      0.371               0.371               0.370               0.551                0.551                0.201
Notes: This table presents the estimates for the refinance sample of models that interact race and ethnicity with key borrower, location and lender
controls to the baseline subprime and lender fixed effect models. The first and fourth rows present the estimates interacting dummies for subprime
credit score, debt to income ratio above 0.45 and loan to value ratio above 0.95 with race and ethnicity for the subprime and lender fixed effects
models, respectively. Columns 2 and 5 also add interactions between race and ethnicity and census tract attributes for the tract in which the
housing unit is located. Columns 3 and 6 also interact race and ethnicity with lender ex-post foreclosure risk. Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 are estimated
using OLS with standard errors clustered at the lender level, and columns 3 and 6 are estimated using split-sample IV and standard errors
bootstrapped.
Standard errors shown in paretheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                                                      !!
!

!
