NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DYNAMIC SAVINGS CHOICES WITH DISAGREEMENTS
Dan Cao
Iván Werning
Working Paper 22007
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22007
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

For useful comments and discussions we thank Fernando Alvarez, Manuel Amador, Jinhui Bai, Abhijit
Banerjee, Marco Battaglini, Satyajit Chatterjee, Hugo Hopenhayn, Roger Lagunoff, Benjamin Moll,
Patrick Rabier, Debraj Ray, Eric Young as well as seminar and conference participants. This project
was inspired by conversations with Abhijit Banerjee on self-control problems with many goods. Finally,
we thank Nathan Zorzi for valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Dan Cao and Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Dynamic Savings Choices with Disagreements
Dan Cao and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 22007
February 2016, Revised April 2016
JEL No. C61,C62,C71,C73,D31,D91,H31,I3,O12
ABSTRACT
We study a flexible dynamic savings game in continuous time, where decision makers rotate in and
out of power. These agents value spending more highly while in power creating a time-inconsistency
problem. We provide a sharp characterization of Markov equilibria. Our analysis proceeds by construction
and isolates the importance of a local disagreement index defined as the ratio of marginal utility for
those in and out of power. If disagreement is constant the model specializes to hyperbolic discounting.
We also provide novel results for this case, offering a complete and simple characterization of equilibria.
For the general model we shoe that dissaving occurs when disagreements are sufficiently high, while
saving occurs when disagreements are sufficiently low. When disagreements vary sufficiently with
spending, richer dynamics are possible. We provide conditions for continuous equilibria and also show
that the model can be inverted for primitives that support any smooth consumption function. Our framework
applies to individuals under a behavioral interpretation or to governments under a political-economy
interpretation.
Dan Cao
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
ICC 580
37th and O Sts., NW
Washington, DC 20057
dc448@georgetown.edu
Iván Werning
Department of Economics, E52-536
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu

Dynamic Savings Choices with Disagreements∗
Dan Cao
Georgetown University

Iván Werning
MIT

April 2016
We study a flexible dynamic savings game in continuous time, where decision makers rotate in and out of power. These agents value spending more highly while in
power creating a time-inconsistency problem. We provide a sharp characterization of
Markov equilibria. Our analysis proceeds by construction and isolates the importance
of a local disagreement index, β(c), defined as the ratio of marginal utility for those in
and out of power. If disagreement is constant the model specializes to hyperbolic discounting. We also provide novel results for this case, offering a complete and simple
characterization of equilibria. For the general model we shoe that dissaving occurs
when disagreements are sufficiently high, while saving occurs when disagreements
are sufficiently low. When disagreements vary sufficiently with spending, richer dynamics are possible. We provide conditions for continuous equilibria and also show
that the model can be inverted for primitives that support any smooth consumption
function. Our framework applies to individuals under a behavioral interpretation or
to governments under a political-economy interpretation.

1

Introduction

Time-inconsistency problems that bias behavior towards the present may help explain a
number of phenomena and have received ample attention from economists. However,
the extent of these problems likely varies significantly according to the situation. In particular, there is no reason to expect the allure of the present over the future felt by the poor
to be comparable to that experienced by the rich. Similarly, it has been noted that governments may suffer from a similar present bias for political economy reasons, yet the degree
of this bias may be quite different for advanced countries than for developing countries.
The general point is that the strength of time-inconsistency problems may depend on the
∗ First

version: April 2008. For useful comments and discussions we thank Fernando Alvarez, Manuel
Amador, Jinhui Bai, Abhijit Banerjee, Marco Battaglini, Satyajit Chatterjee, Hugo Hopenhayn, Roger Lagunoff, Benjamin Moll, Patrick Rabier, Debraj Ray, Eric Young as well as seminar and conference participants. This project was inspired by conversations with Abhijit Banerjee on self-control problems with many
goods. Finally, we thank Nathan Zorzi for valuable research assistance.

1

level of wealth or spending. This possibility has received relatively little attention from
the literature.
This paper introduces and studies an infinite-horizon continuous-time savings game
that accommodates flexible forms of time inconsistency. Decision makers rotate in and out
of power. An agent currently in power controls consumption and savings, choosing how
much to spend subject to a borrowing constraint and a constant flow of income. Agents
currently in power retain power for a stochastic interval of time and lose it at a Poisson
rate to a successor. Once removed from power, an agent continues to care about the
future spending path chosen by other agents. However, spending is enjoyed more while
in power. This disagreement, represented by differences in the utility functions for those
in and out of power, captures a form of present bias and leads to a time-inconsistency
problem in savings choices. As a result, we approach the problem as a dynamic game
and study Markov equilibria, a widely used refinement in this literature.
Our model admits both a behavioral and political-economy interpretation. For the
behavioral one, following Strotz (1956), Laibson (1997) and many others, the model may
describe the problem of a single consumer playing an intertemporal game against future
’selves’ (a closely related literature, initiated by Phelps and Pollak, 1968, studies paternalistic intergenerational growth models). The disagreement on the utility function that we
allow generates a time inconsistency problem that is similar, but strictly generalizes, hyperbolic discounting. For the political economy interpretation, the model describes a situation where the ruling party controls the budget and obtains private benefits from spending while in power, due to pork spending or outright transfers to ruling party members.
This relates our work to political economy models of government debt, such as Alesina
and Tabellini (1990), Amador (2002), Battaglini and Coate (2008), Azzimonti (2011) and
others.1
With few exceptions, the existing time-inconsistency literature has focused on saving
games that are effectively variants of the hyperbolic discounting setup. In our model
this amounts to the assumption of a uniform disagreement, with utility out of power
proportional to utility in power. Our analysis also applies to this special case and actually
delivers new and sharp results.
Our first contribution, however, is to provide a framework to explore disagreements
that vary with spending. To this end, we consider general differences in the utility functions for those in and out of power. This may give rise to a non-uniform time-inconsistency
1A

different strand of the literature models the endogenous transition of power by examining Markov
equilibria in dynamic political economy games (e.g. Timothy Besley, 1998; Acemoglu and Robinson, 2001;
Bai and Lagunoff, 2011), but abstracts from government debt or savings.

2

problem, where the incentives to save vary with wealth. We are especially interested in
the long-run dynamics of wealth and how this depends on the form disagreements take.
Why would disagreements vary with spending? One straightforward answer is that
there is no real reason to expect them to be constant and so the possibility that they are not
must be contemplated. For example, in the behavioral context, it is plausible that presentbiased impulses and behaviors decrease with spending. A deeper answer is offered by
Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010), who provide a foundation for disagreements based on
the notion that spending takes place over many goods, with disagreements on how to
spend across these goods.2 The overall disagreement on total spending then varies with
the level of spending, except in special cases. This perspective explains a bias towards
the present, but shifts the focus from intertemporal discounting to disagreements across
different goods. For example, in a behavioral context, agents may feel drawn to consume certain tempting goods today—extreme examples may include unhealthy foods,
alcohol or drugs—but do not value the consumption of these goods by future ‘selves’. If
the marginal propensity to spend on such goods falls with greater spending this implies
decreasing disagreements. A similar argument applies in political economy contexts. Indeed, the voting model in Battaglini and Coate (2008) implies increasing disagreements
because the marginal propensity to spend on pork transfers is increasing in spending.
One of the goals of this paper is to provide a framework that can encompass a wide class
of assumptions on the form of disagreements, including increasing and decreasing disagreements.
Our second contribution is both technical and substantive, providing a sharp characterization of all Markov equilibria. As is well known, dynamic saving games in discrete
time may be quite ill behaved.3 For example, Harris and Laibson (2001, 2002) point out
that discontinuous equilibria are relatively pervasive in these standard settings. Krusell
and Smith (2003) proved that the hyperbolic model has a continuum of local solutions
with discontinuous policy functions. Recently Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2015) show
that in discrete time all Markov equilibrium must be discontinuous (see also Morris and
Postlewaite, 1997 and Morris, 2002 for the analogs in finite horizon settings). Properties
2 In

a behavioral context, Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010) focus on a finite-horizon model with many
goods and additively separable utilities, with disagreements over which goods should be valued. In a
political economy context, Alesina and Tabellini (1990) consider an infinite-horizon model with a relatively
general form of disagreement in the composition of spending across different goods (see their equations 1).
However, for their analysis they specialize to corner cases and a more extreme and uniform disagreement
(see their equations 4 and 5).
3 Linear equilibria exist in the absence of a borrowing constraint. Such equilibria were first studied by
Phelps and Pollak (1968) and later put to good use by many others. However, linear equilibria do not exist
in the presence of a binding borrowing constraint, a case that has been the primary focus of the literature.

3

such as these render these models relatively intractable and make it difficult to characterize equilibria.4 The literature has responded to these challenges in a number of ways.
Harris and Laibson (2001) introduce income uncertainty to derive a Generalized Euler
equation. Harris and Laibson (2013) propose a continuous-time model, focusing on a
limit with ’instant gratification’ and small noise in asset returns to apply the theory of
viscosity solutions. Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2015) work in a discrete-time setting but
introduce lotteries to smooth out the solution.
Despite these efforts from the hyperbolic literature, many fundamental questions remain open or have only received partial answers. For example, are there conditions that
ensure that the equilibrium involves saving or dissaving? Can saving and dissaving equilibria coexist for some parameters? For a given equilibrium, can saving and dissaving
coexist at different wealth levels? Do continuous equilibria exist, and, if so, under what
conditions? Do these models display multiple equilibria?
Our model is cast in continuous time and this turns out to be crucial to our approach
and results. We show that our continuous-time framework is relatively well behaved,
without introducing uncertainty or lotteries. Our formulation builds on Harris and Laibson (2013), but extends it to allow for more general disagreements. In addition, we do
not focus on the instant-gratification limit and our solution strategy is different.5 Our
approach is to attack the differential equations for a Markov equilibrium head on. Due
to the presence of singularities, no off-the-shelf results exist for such equations, but we
provide a simple method to construct and characterize equilibria. Since wealth evolves
continuously over time, we build up locally towards a global equilibrium. Since our
proofs proceed by construction, we characterize equilibria sharply, delivering answers to
the questions listed above, as well as providing a straightforward procedure for computation. In fact, our characterization is exhaustive, providing a complete description of
the class of equilibria that are possible. Finally, we provide sufficient conditions for the
existence and uniqueness of a continuous equilibrium.
4 Despite

these difficulties the literature has obtained various results on the existence of Markov equilibria, allowing for potentially discontinuous policy and value functions. Bernheim et al. (2015) shows the
existence of Markov equilibrium in the standard model without uncertainty, assuming an interest rate that
is strictly greater than the discount factor. Harris and Laibson (2001) provide existence results by adding
i.i.d. uncertainty in income in the standard quasi-hyperbolic model (Bernheim and Ray (1989) provide a
related result in an altruistic growth model with bounded transfers), while Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2015)
does the same for a model with lotteries.
5 The instantaneous gratification limit is tractable and provides a good approximation in some applications. Nevertheless, it is of obvious theoretical interest to obtain a more general characterization, away from
this approximation. Moreover, in some applications, such as political economy settings, the approximation
may be inadequate, since it would represent a situation of extremely high political turnover.

4

Although the entire analysis and results apply to our general framework, they are of
interest even within the special hyperbolic case. For this case, we provide a novel graphical analysis that delivers a complete characterization for the entire set of equilibria in a
particularly simple and visual manner. For example, we show that depending on parameters there can be either saving or dissaving, but never both; a continuous equilibrium
may exist and there is at most one such equilibria; whenever the equilibrium involves
savings then the equilibrium is unique. To the best of our knowledge, such results have
no counterparts in the existing literature and settle various open questions mentioned
above.
Our third contribution is to isolate the conditions for saving or dissaving and to characterize the resulting dynamics for wealth. A crucial innovation of our analysis here is
our introduction a local disagreement index β(c), defined as the ratio of marginal utilities
from spending for agents in and out of power. The shape of this function summarizes
how disagreements depend on spending (denoted by c). The hyperbolic case amounts to
the special case where β(c) is constant.
Our first set of results in this regard involve cases where the disagreement index does
not vary too much and is either sufficiently high or low. Under these conditions, we
show that an equilibrium exists that features either saving or dissaving at all wealth levels. Specifically, there exists a threshold β̂ which depends on the interest rate and other
parameters and show that when the disagreement index β(c) lies above β̂ then there is a
unique equilibrium with positive savings and this equilibrium is continuous; when β(c)
lies below β̂ all equilibria must feature dissaving and there is at most one continuous
equilibrium. Although these results apply more generally, a special case of interest is the
hyperbolic case with constant β(c).
As a byproduct of our analysis of the hyperbolic case we touch on the issue of local
indeterminacy. For the discrete-time quasi-hyperbolic model, Krusell and Smith (2003)
constructed a continuum of local solutions to the equilibrium conditions. We provide an
analogous result for our continuous-time setup: for any proposed steady state wealth a
local solution exists, with wealth converging to this level. However, we show that these
local constructs are not part of an equilibrium in our model.6 This conclusion actually
follows as a corollary of our result showing that there exists a unique Markov equilibrium
6 Indeed,

the local constructs can only be interpreted as Markov equilibria for a modified saving game
that adds ad hoc constraints, forcing the agent to choose wealth below a certain bound; this bound must
be close enough to the proposed steady state. Such an ad hoc constraint is unnatural, however, and not
standard in the literature. The local constructs do not characterize a part of any equilibrium of the original
saving game, which imposes no upper bounds on wealth.

5

with strict savings.7
Our second set of results involve cases where the disagreement index β(c) does not
lie on one side of β̂ but instead varies enough that it crosses this threshold. We find
that rich dynamics then emerge, with saving and dissaving coexisting at different wealth
levels. We focus on two polar opposite cases, when β(c) is decreasing and when β(c) is
increasing.
In particular, if disagreements fall with spending then we show that a poverty trap
may emerge, with dissavings below a threshold and savings above this same threshold.
Intuitively, at low wealth levels the time-inconsistency problem is relatively severe because spending takes place in the range where disagreements are high. The incentive to
consume is high because agents in power do not want to leave resources that may be
spent when they are out of power. There is a feedback loop: the incentive to dissave is reinforced by the anticipation that successors overspend from the point of view of those in
power. At high wealth levels the time-inconsistency problem is mitigated by the fact that
spending takes place in regions with lower disagreement, so saving emerges. Again, a
feedback loop reinforces these incentives: the incentive to save is enhanced if successors
or future selves do not overspend too much. Poverty traps cannot arise without these
feedback loops.
Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010) derive a related result. As mentioned earlier, their
paper focuses on various implications of intraperiod disagreements on how to spend
across goods. In the context of a two-period model with a single savings choice in the
first period, they show there may be a downward jump in consumption as a function
of wealth. This discontinuity may be interpreted as a poverty trap of sorts in their twoperiod setup. There are important differences, however. Obviously, a two-period framework does not permit the study of long-run wealth. In contrast, in our framework a
poverty trap involves wealth getting trapped below a threshold forever. Moreover, a discontinuity like theirs cannot arise in a two-period adaptation of our model. Instead, in our
setting poverty traps emerge from the strategic interactions across savings decisions over
longer horizons. In this sense, the feedback loop described in the previous paragraph is
crucial to our result, but is absent in their setup.
Our poverty trap result relies on non-uniform disagreements. Indeed, our results
show that this is not only sufficient but also necessary: no Markov equilibrium exists
featuring a poverty trap in the hyperbolic case. Poverty traps may emerge, however,
in the hyperbolic case if one drops the Markov equilibrium requirement. Working in a
7 The

results presented here formally apply only to our continuous-time model and should be taken
only as suggestive for the discrete-time model studied by Krusell and Smith (2003).

6

discrete time setting, Bernheim et al. (2015) show that subgame perfect equilibria may
feature poverty traps.8 As they argue, trigger strategies may be interpreted as self punishments that provide an internal and endogenous form of self control. Poverty traps may
emerge in this context because this kind of self control is more effective for the rich, who
are far from the asset limit. Our focus on Markov equilibria abstracts from these forms of
self control and relies instead on the rich suffering less disagreements with future selves.
Thus, Bernheim et al. (2015) focus on non-uniform self control with uniform disagreements; while we focus on non-uniform disagreements, without self control. Both are obviously compatible with one another and could act as complements. Interestingly, these
two mechanisms have a few different implications: lower labor income or greater access
to credit make poverty traps less likely in Bernheim et al. (2015), but more likely in our
model. Such contrasting comparative statics serve to highlight the underlying differences
in the mechanisms at work.
Turning to the opposite case, if disagreements rise with spending then the problem of
time inconsistency becomes heightened at higher wealth levels. We show that an equilibrium exists where the wealthy dissave, while the poor save. Starting from any initial
value, wealth converges to an interior steady state. Stability forces of this kind lie at the
heart of the mean-reverting result in the political economy model of Battaglini and Coate
(2008). Indeed, as we discuss in more detail in Section 5.2, their framework provides
a foundation for disagreements that increase with spending. They set up and study a
model of legislative voting, with this body determining the composition of spending. As
we discuss, they prove a representation that fits our framework.
In addition to solving for an equilibrium, given primitives, using our differential approach, we show how our model can be fruitfully inverted to solve for primitives that
support any given postulated equilibrium. We know of no parallel of this idea in the existing literature. In particular, we back out a disagreement function β(c) for any given
smooth consumption function. One advantage of this inverse perspective is that it is
extremely tractable and insightful. Another is that it may also be more appropriate, at
least conceptually, if the outside economist or econometrician observes behavior (the consumption function) but has no direct evidence on disagreements and how they vary.
Finally, we show that in our continuous-time framework there is at most one continuous equilibrium and provide sufficient conditions for its existence. The potential
for a continuous equilibrium underscores, once again, that equilibria in our continuoustime framework can be extremely well-behaved compared to discrete-time counterparts,
where no continuous equilibrium exists. We also provide conditions for the existence
8 Their

definition of a poverty trap is slightly different from ours, as we discuss in Section 5.1.

7

of discontinuous equilibria in our model. As a corollary, since both conditions turn out
to be compatible in some cases, these results prove the possibility of multiple Markov
equilibria.

2

A Dynamic Savings Game

This section introduces a continuous-time savings framework with a single consumption
good that can accommodate relatively general forms of disagreement. We then offer one
interpretation or motivation for our primitives, in a setting with many goods.

2.1

Preferences

Time is continuous with an infinite horizon, denoted by t ∈ [0, ∞). The flow utility obtained from consumption by an agent in power is
U1 (ct ),
while utility for an agent out of power is
U0 (ct ).
The utility functions U1 : R+ → R and U0 : R+ → R are concave, increasing, continuous
and differentiable. We also assume U10 (0) = ∞ and limc→∞ U10 (c) = 0.9
Agents in power are removed at a constant Poisson arrival rate λ ≥ 0. To simplify the
exposition we assume power cannot be regained, but show later that this is without loss
of generality (see Section 3.3). The continuation lifetime utility at time t for an agent in
power is then
ˆ τ
 ˆ ∞
−ρs
−ρτ
Vt ≡ Et
e U1 (ct+s )ds + e Wt+τ =
e−(ρ+λ)s (U1 (ct+s ) + λWt+s )ds (1)
0

0

where ρ > 0 is the discount rate and τ the random time at which the agent currently in
power is removed.10 Here Wt is the continuation lifetime utility for an agent out of power
ˆ ∞
Wt ≡
e−ρs U0 (ct+s )ds.
(2)
0

9 Concavity

and differentiability of U0 are not crucial for the analysis but simplify the exposition for
most of the results. An earlier version of the paper focused on a case that had a convex kink in U0 (c).
Theorem 8 below also relaxes the concavity assumption and assumes a concave kink in U0 .
10 The only uncertainty present in the model is the timing for the alteration of power, τ. However, consumption is deterministic and does not depend on the realization of this uncertainty because of the symmetry of preferences (i.e. agents stepping up to power have identical preferences to those stepping down)
and our focus on Markov strategies.

8

The difference between U1 and U0 is a form of disagreement that creates a timeinconsistency problem. The framework can be interpreted literally in a political economy
setting as describing the alteration of power of different rulers or legislative majorities.
Alternatively, a behavioral interpretation is that the different agents represent different
selves or states of mind within an individual.
Crucial to our analysis is the introduction of a local disagreement index, which summarizes these differences, defined as the ratio of marginal utilities
β(c) ≡

U00 (c)
.
U10 (c)

When β(c) = 1 for all c there is no disagreement and the utility functions coincide, up to a
constant. As we shall show, the function β(c) summarizes the relevant difference between
the utility functions U1 and U0 . Throughout the paper we assume that the marginal utility
from consumption is higher while in power.
Assumption 1 (Present Bias). The utility functions U1 and U0 are such that, for some β > 0
β(c) ∈ [ β, 1]

for all c > 0.

When β(c) < 1 agents prefer to consume relatively more while in power, leading to
a present-bias time-inconsistency problem. Those out of power want those in power to
exercise restraint, to consume less and save more. Likewise, those currently in power
would like to commit their successors somehow, but have no means to do so.
This simple and flexible framework allows us to capture different patterns of disagreement. In particular, for some applications it is natural to assume that disagreements are
stronger at lower consumption levels, so that β(c) is increasing. Yet in other cases it may
be reasonable to suppose that disagreements grow with spending, so that β(c) is decreasing.
Hyperbolic Discounting. An important special case occurs when disagreements are
constant: β(c) = β̄ < 1 so that U0 (c) = β̄U1 (c). The model is then equivalent to the
continuous-time hyperbolic discounting model introduced by Harris and Laibson (2013),
which in turn builds on discrete-time quasi-hyperbolic counterparts in Harris and Laibson (2001), Laibson (1997) and Phelps and Pollak (1968). It is also common to adopt power
utility functions: U1 (c) = c1−σ /(1 − σ) for σ > 0.
Harris and Laibson (2013) focus on the limit as λ → ∞, the so-called Instantaneous
Gratification limit. They show that tractability is gained from the fact that then Vt = Wt
in the limit, so that a single continuation value function suffices.
As part of our analysis, we revisit this special hyperbolic case and provide some novel
and sharp results. Indeed, we show that the equilibrium is unique in some cases, or
9

belongs to a simple class in others, and offer a tight characterization (see Section 4.3). As
we explain below, we also leverage these results for more general cases where β(c) is not
constant. Throughout, we do not focus on the instant gratification limit, but instead allow
for any finite λ.
Tail Assumptions. One of the goals of our framework is to allow for relatively general
differences in utilities, extending disagreements past the hyperbolic discounting assumption. It is convenient to restrict these differences to an arbitrary bounded interval and
assume that disagreements are constant outside this interval. This amounts to assuming
hyperbolic discounting in the tail.11
Assumption 2. At high consumption levels disagreements are constant and utilities are power
functions: β(c) = β̄ ≤ 1 and U1 (c) = 1−1 σ̄ c1−σ̄ with σ̄ > 0 for all c ≥ c̄ for some c̄ > 0.
Furthermore, (1 − σ̄)r < ρ.
For a few results, it is convenient to adopt the same hyperbolic assumption at the
lower tail.
Assumption 3. At low consumption levels disagreements are constant and utilities are power
functions: β(c) = β̃ ≤ 1 and U1 (c) = 1−1 σ̃ c1−σ̃ with σ̃ > 0 for all c ≤ c̃ for some c̃ > ra.
Assumption 2 constrains preferences only above some arbitrarily high level of consumption and places no restrictions on the disagreement index or utility functions below
this threshold. Assumption 3 constrains preferences only over an arbitrarily small interval. In this sense, both can be viewed as relatively weak constraints.
These mild assumptions are not required for all our results, but greatly simplify the
analysis for others. We employ them in two related ways. First, when the equilibrium features positive savings, our constructive approach is aided by pinning things down above
some asset level, and focusing on the remaining problem over a bounded interval of assets (when the equilibrium features dissaving, the boundary is automatically provided at
the asset limit). As we shall see, Assumption 2 effectively provides us with a boundary
condition at some high enough level of wealth ā. Secondly, for the hyperbolic model we
prove uniqueness or show that the equilibrium belongs to a restricted class, offering a
tight characterization. Assumptions 2 and 3 allow us to leverage these results outside the
hyperbolic case.
11 The condition that (1 − σ̄ )r < ρ is a standard growth condition to ensure finite lifetime discounted
utility.

10

2.2

Budget Constraints and Borrowing Limits

The agent in power chooses consumption and assets at subject to the budget constraint
.

at = rat + y − ct .

(3)

The interest rate r > 0 and income y ≥ 0 are constant and given.
Wealth is subject to an asset or borrowing limit given by
a ≤ at .

(4)
y

The so-called natural borrowing constraint sets a = − r ≤ 0 and allows borrowing against
y
the full present value of income. We mainly focus on tighter constraints, with a > − r .
Whenever at = a we require ct ≤ y + ra to ensure that ȧ ≥ 0. Asset limits can also
be interpreted as commitment devices. In the individual agent context, this may capture
forced savings such as social security or illiquid assets. In the political-economy context, it
may capture wealth funds with limits on discretionary spending from natural resources.
Without loss of generality we set income to zero, y = 0, and consider a positive asset
limit, a > 0. This is a normalization since, by a change of variables, one can transform
a problem with positive income, y > 0, to one with zero income as follows. Defining
.
y
y
ãt = at + r , then ãt = r ãt − ct and ã ≥ ã ≡ a + r . As a result of this transformation,
the asset limit becomes a positive lower bound on assets, ã > 0, except in the natural
borrowing limit case where a = 0.

2.3

Many Goods, Engel Curves and Disagreements

One interesting motivation for time-inconsistency problems is to consider spending across
various goods, with disagreement on how to spend across these goods. This notion is
popular in political economy models on government spending and debt, appearing in
Persson and Svensson (1989), Alesina and Tabellini (1990), Amador (2002) and Azzimonti
(2011) among others. However, this literature typically adopts simple specifications that
imply uniform disagreements. An important exception is Battaglini and Coate (2008)
which instead derives specific non-uniform disagreements. Banerjee and Mullainathan
(2010) work in a behavioral context and consider relatively rich and flexible disagreements across goods, providing a relationship between the shape of Engel curves and disagreements.
We apply these ideas to our formulation. Suppose consumption takes place over two
goods, c A and c B , and normalize prices to unity. Utilities are additively separable, with
h(c A ) perceived by both those in and out of power, while g(c B ) is perceived only by agents
in power (less extreme assumptions work similarly). The static subproblem of spending
11

across c A and c B given total spending defines indirect utility functions
U1 (c) = max {h(c A ) + g(c B )}
c A +c B =c

and

U0 (c) = h(ĉ A (c)),

(5)

where (ĉ A (c), ĉ B (c)) denotes the solution to the maximization. The next result shows that
we can generate any desired U1 and U0 in this way, by appropriate choices of h and g.
Proposition 1. Given U1 and U0 satisfying Assumption 1, there exists strictly concave functions
h and g so that (5) holds.
Proof. Appendix A.1.
Note that U10 (c) = h0 (ĉ A (c)) and U00 (c) = h0 (ĉ A (c))ĉ0A (c), implying
β(c) = ĉ0A (c) = 1 − ĉ0B (c),
so that a high marginal propensity to spend on c B increases disagreement, since those out
of power do not value this good. When ĉ A (c) is concave, so that the marginal propensity
to spend on c A is decreasing, β(c) is decreasing. In this way, the shape of the Engel curve
dictates the shape of our disagreement index β(c).12

3

Markov Equilibria

We focus on Markov equilibria with wealth as the state variable. The policy function
for consumption maximizes utility for the agent in power (1), taking as given the value
function for those out of power, W ( a), satisfying (2). We provide a more technical and
detailed recursive definition of our equilibrium concept below. We also incorporate a
standard refinement from the literature.

3.1

Regular Equilibria

Our Markov equilibrium concept is defined in terms of the functions (ĉ( a), V ( a), W ( a))
and imposes standard conditions. The following differential equations play a crucial role:
ρV ( a) = max{U1 (c) + V 0 ( a) (ra − c) + λ (W ( a) − V ( a))},

(6a)

ρW ( a) = U0 (ĉ ( a)) + W 0 ( a) (ra − ĉ ( a)) ,

(6b)

c

12 For example, under hyperbolic discounting, U ( c )
0

h(c A ) = β̄U1



cA
β̄



and

= β̄U1 (c), the functions h, g in Proposition 1 become


cB
g(c B ) = (1 − β̄)U1
,
1 − β̄

which implies that ĉ A (c) = β̄c and ĉ B (c) = (1 − β̄)c, i.e. constant marginal propensities to consume on both
goods.

12

where ĉ ( a) denotes the solution to the maximization in (6a), which is equivalent to the
first-order condition
U10 (ĉ ( a)) = V 0 ( a) ,
(6c)
for a > a. Equation (6a) is the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation providing a recursive
representation of the problem of maximizing (1) taking the value function W ( a) as given.
The last term takes into account the probability of transitioning out of power with probability λ, at which point the continuation value jumps from V ( a) to W ( a). Equation (6b) is
a recursive representation of condition (2), which defines W ( a) given the policy function
ĉ( a). Finally, the implied wealth must satisfy
.

at = rat − ĉ( at ).

(7)

For any initial conditions, we require a solution path to this differential equation to exist
and impose appropriate transversality conditions along this path (see below).
The elements of a Markov equilibrium spelled out above are familiar enough and all
that is required when dealing with continuously differentiable V and W and continuous ĉ. However, we allow jumps in ĉ and W, as well as points of non-differentiability
in V or W, since there is a priori reason to exclude such non smooth behavior. Indeed,
in some cases jumps naturally arise or are even essential, as in our poverty trap equilibria. Accordingly, we adapt our definition of a Markov equilibrium as a triplet of functions (ĉ( a), V ( a), W ( a)) with the following properties: (a) V is piecewise continuously
differentiable; (b) at all points of differentiability of V, equations (6a) and (6c) hold and
equation (6b) holds if in addition ĉ( a) 6= ra; and (c) for any initial value a0 ≥ a the differential equation ȧt = rat − ĉ( at ) admits a path { at }t∈[0,∞) that satisfies the asset limit
at ≥ a and implies that: W ( at ) is continuous for all t ≥ 0, the transversality conditions
limt→∞ e−(ρ+λ)t V ( at ) = 0 and limt→∞ e−ρt W ( at ) = 0 hold, and whenever ĉ( a0 ) = ra0 we
´∞
also require that W ( a0 ) = 0 e−ρt U0 (ĉ( at ))ds.
These conditions are relatively straightforward. The only subtle issue worth highlighting is the smoothness requirements for V and W. The function V must be everywhere continuous because it represents the value from a continuous-time optimal control
problem with a controllable state (assets a) and payoffs that are continuous in the control
(consumption c). Discontinuities in W do not induce discontinuities in V because c (hence
ȧ) is unrestricted for all a > a. Although V is continuous, by (6a) it inherits kinks at points
where W is discontinuous; at these same points ĉ must be discontinuous.
In contrast, the function W may be discontinuous, because it is not the value from a
smooth optimization. Jumps are severely limited, however. Condition (c) implies that
´∞
W ( at ) = t e−ρ(s−t) U0 (ĉ( as ))ds so that the value function W must be continuous and
13

differentiable along the equilibrium outcome path { at }t∈[0,∞) . Condition (b) then implies
that (c, W ) can only jump together to induce ȧ = ra − ĉ( a) to cross zero. For example, we
may jump from dissaving ȧ < 0 to saving ȧ ≥ 0 (a jump that is important for our poverty
trap equilibrium); or we may jump from dissaving ȧ < 0 to a steady state ȧ = 0 (this kind
of jump occurs in discontinuous dissaving equilibria).13 In this latter type of jump we
must have V ( a) = V̄ ( a), so jump cannot occur at any point.
Finally, we impose a standard refinement form the literature. When utility is unbounded below it is difficult to rule out the possibility that future selves consume an
infinitesimal amount which leads to ever lower continuation values. This in turn may
induce the current self to save more and consume less. This feedback effect could potentially lead to an equilibrium with vanishing consumption and utility that is unbounded
below. We have not been able to construct such an equilibrium, but it is useful to focus
away from this possibility using the following refinement.
Definition 1 (Regular equilibria). A Markov equilibrium is regular if there exists ν > 0
such that ĉ( a) ≥ νa for all a ≥ a.
Harris and Laibson (2013) impose precisely this refinement and call equilibria not satisfying it “‘pathological.” In the same spirit, Bernheim et al. (2015) add the constraint
ct ≥ νat to the decision maker problem.14
We are able to show that all Markov equilibria are regular for an important case of
interest.
Lemma 1. If U1 is bounded below and satisfies Assumption 2 with σ̄ < 1 then all Markov
equilibria are regular.
From now on we limit ourselves to regular Markov equilibria and refer to such an
equilibrium simply as ’equilibrium’, for short.

3.2

Solution Approach

The system (6) can be thought of as a differential system in (V, W ). Equation (6a) can
be solved for V 0 ( a) at any asset a given any pair of values (V ( a), W ( a)) satisfying (ρ +
13 A symmetric case occurs with savings, jumping from a steady state ȧ = 0 to saving ȧ > 0. We can
rule out, however, a jump from saving ȧ > 0 to dissaving ȧ < 0, since such a stable steady state requires
continuity of W and hence ĉ.
14 Adding a constraint in the decision maker problem is not exactly the same as focusing on equilibria
satisfying these constraints. However, both approaches prevent situations where utility goes to −∞.

14

λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra) ≥ 0. Indeed, there are two solutions or roots, one root associated with saving ĉ( a) ≤ ra and one root associated with dissaving ĉ( a) ≥ ra; the roots
coincide if and only if (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra) = 0 implying ĉ( a) = ra.
Define the values of constant wealth by
V̄ ( a) =

λ U0 (ra)
ρ U1 (ra)
+
ρ+λ ρ
ρ+λ ρ

and W̄ ( a) =

U0 (ra)
.
ρ

(8)

The value for those not in power, W̄, is the present value of utility from consuming
ra forever using U0 . For those in power the value V̄ is a weighted average using U1
and U0 . These functions play an important role in our analysis, since the equilibrium
value functions (V, W ) must coincide with (V̄, W̄ ) at steady states. Indeed, note that
(ρ + λ)V̄ ( a) − λW̄ ( a) − U1 (ra) = 0 whenever (V, W ) = (V̄, W̄ ), so that ĉ( a) = ra is the
unique root.
Our method for characterizing equilibria is to construct solutions to the differential
system (6) by attacking these equations directly. Thus, we do not appeal to general existence or uniqueness results for the system (6). Indeed, we are unaware of any off-the-shelf
results of this form for such equations for finite λ.15,16
One technical challenge is that the differential system (6) features a singularity at
steady states. As a result, we cannot apply standard existence theorems for regular
ODEs.17 Thus, we must provide our own existence result. The following lemma proves
the existence around singular points when β < β̂, which will turn out to be the relevant
case.
Lemma 2. Suppose β(ra0 ) < β̂. Then the differential system (6) with initial condition

(V ( a0 ), W ( a0 )) = (V̄ ( a0 ), W̄ ( a0 ))
admits a solution over the interval [ a0 , a0 + ω ] for some ω > 0, with (i) V ( a) > V̄ ( a) for a > a0 ;
15 This

may seem surprising at first. After all, (6a) is a Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman for V given W, and for
which various existence results may apply (at least for a regular enough class of W functions). However,
the main difficulty is not with solving (6a) for V given W. The problem lies in solving the system (6) jointly
for both V and W (a fixed point). In particular, (6b) is reminiscent of a Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation,
but it is not since ĉ( a) does not maximize the right hand side (6b), it instead maximizes (6a).
16 Harris and Laibson (2013) apply general existence results, using viscosity theory, in the hyperbolic
instantaneous-gratification limit as λ → ∞. They show that, under some conditions, (6) is then equivalent to
the condition for the value function of a time-consistent consumer with modified utility, implying existence
and uniqueness.
17 First, the differential system (6) seen as an ODE is not Lipschitz continuous around steady states.
Second and more seriously, W 0 ( a) is not even determined at steady state points. When we rewrite system (6)
as a differential algebraic equation (DAE), the steady states correspond to critical singular points. However,
the DAE at this point does not satisfy the sufficient conditions provided in the literature, for example in
Rabier and Rheinboldt (2002), for the existence and uniqueness of solutions around singular points of DAEs,
except for the case λ = 0.

15

and (ii) ĉ ( a) > ra for a > a0 , lima↓a0 ĉ( a) = ra0 and lima↓a0 ĉ0 ( a) = ∞.
Proof. Appendix C.
Fortunately, with this lemma in hand, our constructive method is relatively straightforward and also provides an immediate characterization. We construct equilibria by
solving the ODEs starting at the bottom and working up, when dissaving; or by starting
at the top and working down, with saving; or by combining these procedures. In more
detail, the construction involves the following: (i) imposing boundary conditions that
serve as initial conditions; (ii) solving the ODEs with a saving or dissaving root over an
interval of wealth; (iii) decide whether to engineer a jump in W. The great advantage of
this approach is that (ii) is local in nature. Also, (iii) is aided by the fact that V must be
continuous. Finally, the boundary conditions required for (i) are naturally supplied at the
asset limit or at high enough level of wealth, appealing to Assumption 2.

3.3

Recovery of Power

We now justify our focus on a situation where agents do not return to power. Consider
a situation where power can be recovered at Poisson rate λr > 0. The differential system
(6) becomes
ρV ( a) = max{U1 (c) + V 0 ( a) (ra − c) + λ (W ( a) − V ( a))},
c

ρW ( a) = U0 (ĉ ( a)) + W 0 ( a) (ra − ĉ ( a)) + λr (V ( a) − W ( a)) .
The last term in the second equation captures the value from returning to power. Although this creates a difference with system 6, our next result establishes that the two
settings are observationally equivalent.
Proposition 2. Consider an economy with utilities and Poisson rates (U1 , U0 , λ, λr ) with positive recovery probability λr > 0. Equilibria for this economy coincide with equilibria for an
economy with utilities and Poisson rates (U1 , Ũ0 , λ̃, 0) with no possible recovery of power, where
λr
λ̃ ≡ λ + λr and Ũ0 (c) ≡ λ+λλr U0 (c) + λ+
λr U1 ( c ).
Proof. The pair (V, W ) satisfies the differential system with power recovery above for
λr
(U1 , U0 , λ, λr ) if and only if the pair (V, W̃ ) with W̃ ≡ λ+λλr W + λ+
λr V satisfies the differential system without power recovery (6a)–(6b) for (U1 , Ũ0 , λ̃, 0) with λ̃ ≡ λ + λr and
λr
Ũ0 (c) ≡ λ+λλr U0 (c) + λ+
λr U1 ( c ).
Intuitively, the possibility of recovering power makes an agent more invested in consumption after being ousted from power, which is similar to placing a higher value on
16

consumption while out of power. In a political economy setting, Amador (2002) and Azzimonti (2011) assume that there are no benefits from consuming out of power, U0 = 0.
Then with λr = 0 there is no time-inconsistency problem, only greater discounting,
at rate ρ + λ > ρ. Thus, they assume that the agent returns to power with positive
probability, λr > 0. Proposition 2 shows that this is equivalent to a model without recovery of power but with a positive utility for those out of power: Ũ0 = β̄U1 where
β̄ = λ/(λ + λr ) ∈ (0, 1), i.e. a hyperbolic model.

3.4

Generalized Euler Equation

To economize on space we omit the calculations, but we have shown that
ˆ T∗ ´

s
0
d 0
0
U1 (ct ) = (ρ − r )U1 (ct ) + λ e− 0 (ρ+λ−r+ĉ (at+z ))dz U10 (ct+s )(1 − β(ct+s ))ĉ0 ( at+s )ds
dt
0

+ λe−

´ T∗
0

(ρ+λ−r +ĉ0 ( at+z ))dz

U10 (ra T ∗ ) (1 − β(ra T ∗ )) ,

where T ∗ denotes the moment wealth reaches a steady state, i.e. ĉ( a T ∗ ) = ra T ∗ ; if T ∗ = ∞
the last term is zero. This is an adaptation of the Generalized Euler equation, derived by
Harris and Laibson (2001) in the context of the discrete-time quasi-hyperbolic model, to
our continuous-time model. When λ = 0 or β(c) = 1 this reduces to the standard Euler
equation. However, when λ > 0, β(c) < 1 and ĉ0 ( a) > 0 the second and third terms on
the right side are positive, acting in the same direction as higher ρ.

4

Dissaving and Saving

In this section we construct and characterize equilibria focusing on situations where the
disagreement index β(c) is relatively stable, implying global savings or dissavings.
When r < ρ a time-consistent agent (λ = 0 or β(c) = 1) dissaves and time inconsistency (i.e. λ > 0 and β(c) < 1) only reinforces this conclusion. When r > ρ a time
consistent agent saves, but time inconsistency may overturn this conclusion. What turns
out to be crucial is the value of our local disagreement index β(c) relative to a cutoff
defined by


ρ
r−ρ
β̂ ≡
1−
.
(9)
r
λ
Note that β̂ < 1 if and only if r > ρ. Moreover, whenever β̂ > 0 then β̂ is decreasing in r
and increasing in ρ, and increasing (decreasing) in λ if r > ρ (if r < ρ).

17

We will show that when β(c) < β̂ the agent dissaves and when β(c) > β̂ the agent
saves. To anticipate this key role played by β relative to β̂ it is useful to cover some
special cases. We first state a very simple result showing that in the borderline case β = β̂
an equilibrium exists with zero savings.
Theorem 1 (Zero Savings). Assume that β(c) = β̂ for all c ≥ ra. Then, (V, W ) = (V̄, W̄ ) and
ĉ( a) = ra is an equilibrium.
Proof. Appendix D.
Next we present a result on linear equilibria for the hyperbolic case that extends the
characterization offered already in Harris and Laibson (2013, Appendix F). The result
requires no asset limit and power utility functions.
Theorem 2 (Linear Equilibria). Suppose
1 1− σ
c
and
a = 0.
1−σ
Then if (1 − σ)r < ρ there exists a unique linear equilibrium ĉ( a) = ψa with saving ψ < r when
β̄ > β̂ and dissaving ψ > r when β̄ < β̂. When β̄ > β̂ the result holds even if a > 0.
β(c) = β̄ ≤ 1,

U1 (c) =

Proof. Appendix D.
These linear equilibria are similar to the well-known linear equilibria employed in
discrete-time quasi-hyperbolic settings, such as Phelps and Pollak (1968), Laibson (1996)
and others. An important difference is that Theorem 2 states that in continuous time linear
equilibria are always unique, echoing Harris and Laibson (2013, Appendix F). Crucially,
we show that the sign of the saving rate ψ − r depends on β versus β̂. When the interest
rate is low enough or disagreements are high enough, β < β̂, the agent dissaves. When
the interest rate is high enough or disagreements are low enough, β > β̂, the agent saves.
The linear equilibrium breaks down if β(c) is not constant, if utility functions are not
power functions, or in the presence of a non-trivial borrowing constraint. Although linear
equilibria are special, the condition for savings and dissavings turn out to hinge on β
versus β̂ more generally.

4.1

Dissaving

Our first result constructs an equilibrium with dissaving, when β(c) < β̂. Indeed, we
show that all equilibria must have this property.

18

Theorem 3 (Dissaving). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold and β(c) < β̂ for all c ≥ ra.
Then there exists an equilibrium with dissavings, ĉ( a) ≥ ra for a ≥ a, and V ( a) > V̄ ( a) in
a neighborhood of a steady state. Moreover, all equilibria satisfy these properties. If in addition
Assumption 3 holds then there is at most one continuous equilibrium and this equilibrium features
strict dissavings, ĉ( a) > ra for all a > a.
Proof. Appendix E.
When r < ρ dissaving is guaranteed, even in a time consistent situation. When
r ≥ ρ dissaving occurs if the time-inconsistency problem created by disagreements is
sufficiently strong, so that β < β̂. Whenever β̂ > 0 then β̂ is decreasing in r and increasing in ρ and λ (given r > ρ). Thus, lower r, higher ρ, higher λ and lower β all promote
dissaving.
Our constructive proof solves the differential system (6) starting at a with initial conditions V ( a) = V̄ ( a) and W ( a) = W̄ ( a), employing Lemma 2. We move up using the root
for V 0 ( a) associated with dissaving. There are two possibilities. First, in some cases the
solution may be continued indefinitely as a → ∞, providing a continuous equilibrium;
Assumption 3 then ensures that there is only one such solution. Alternatively, the solution to the differential system may reach a point where ĉ( a) = ra and V ( a) < V̄ ( a). Past
this point there is no root associated with dissaving. An equilibrium must then involve
a jump in W and ĉ at the asset point where V crosses V̄ from above. The system is then
restarted at this point, by setting (V, W ) = (V̄, W̄ ) again and continuing as before. Note
that in this construction jumps only occur at steady states.
As this discussion makes clear, both continuous and discontinuous equilibria are possible and they may even coexist in some cases. We postpone a more detailed discussion
regarding these possibilities until Section 7, where we provide sufficient conditions for
the existence of continuous equilibria.
The existence portion of Theorem 3 only requires Assumption 1 and β(c) < β̂. Assumption 2 is invoked to prove that all equilibria have the same property; this leverages
our tight characterization of the hyperbolic case contained in Section 4.3. Assumption 3
is used to provide a unique local solution immediately above a, which then implies that
there is at most one continuous equilibrium.
Commitment Devices. Time inconsistency problems generally create a demand for commitment devices. In our setting, a simple form of commitment can be captured by raising
the asset limit. This amounts to removing liquidity from the hands of those in power.
Amador et al. (2006) argue that such minimum savings policies are optimal within a re19

lated class of models. Here we simply explore whether they would be adopted by those
in power. The most extreme form of such a commitment device sets the new asset limit at
the present asset level, effectively imposing a budget balance rule to hold assets constant.
Such a commitment is desirable to those in power if V ( a) < V̄ ( a).
Is such a commitment device desirable for the agents in power in our model? Theorem
3 shows that V ( a) ≥ V̄ ( a) near steady states. Moreover, the proof shows that there always
exists an equilibrium (possibly discontinuous) with the property that V ( a) ≥ V̄ ( a) for all
a ≥ a. Thus, when this inequality holds, the agent in power never willingly ties himself
to the mast, so to speak, to adopt a budget balance commitment. This is not obvious,
since by adopting a commitment device today the agent trades off lower consumption
today with greater commitment in the future. Although our model has this somewhat
surprising feature, that an equilibrium with this property always exists, in some cases a
continuous equilibrium exists and features V ( a) < V̄ ( a) for large enough assets. In such
cases, the agent in power would like to commit to a balanced budget rule immediately to
raise utility to V̄ ( a). We conclude that immediate commitment to a balanced budget may
arise in some cases, but only when wealth is sufficiently high.
Even if V ( a) ≥ V̄ ( a), so that the current decision maker would not impose upon itself
a budget balance rule, whenever r ≥ ρ one can show that W ( a) < W̄ ( a) away from
steady states. This implies that agents out of power would like to bind those in power to
a budget balance rule to hold assets constant.18 Equivalently, the agent in power would
like to commit its successors to such a rule. There are two ways the agent in power can
achieve something similar. First, it may commit to a budget-balance rule that only comes
into effect in the future, after a grace period. Second, it may commit immediately to an
asset limit that is below the current asset level, so that this constraint binds in the future
but not immediately.

4.2

Saving

We now consider the opposite case, where disagreement is low enough and β > β̂. We
show that this ensures positive savings. Indeed, we establish that there is a unique equilibrium.
Theorem 4 (Saving). Suppose that β(c̄) > β̂ and that Assumption 1 and 2 hold. Then there
exists a unique equilibrium for all a ≥ â for some â ∈ [0, rc̄ ).
Indeed, there exists ā > rc̄ and a unique consumption function ĉ( a) for a ≥ â with the property
that ĉ is the unique equilibrium for any a ≥ â and ĉ( a) = ψa for a ≥ ā, with ψ given by Theorem
18 When r

< ρ then W > W̄ is possible since some dissaving is desirable even for a time-consistent agent.

20

2. The equilibrium features strict savings ĉ( a) < ra and ĉ0 ( a) > 0 for a ≥ a. Finally, if β(c) is
weakly increasing then either â = 0 or β(r â) ≤ β̂.
Proof. Appendix F.
Just as with Theorem 3, the proof of this result is constructive and works by solving
the differential system (6). We start the differential system at ā with initial conditions for
(V ( ā), W ( ā)) provided by the linear solution described in Theorem 2. Assumption 2 ensures that this is a valid boundary condition. We then solve downwards using the higher
root for V 0 ( a), which is associated with positive savings. Positive savings imply that ā
will be reached from below, justifying its use as a boundary condition for the differential
system. This construction comes to a stop when we reach zero or reach a point â where
ĉ( â) = r â; in this latter case we actually show that (V ( â), W ( â)) = (V̄ ( â), W̄ ( â)). By leveraging the hyperbolic results in Section 4.3, we show that this construction is the unique
equilibrium.
The last statement in the theorem implies that if β(c) is increasing and always above
β̂ then â = 0. This leaves open the possibility that if β(c) is decreasing but always above
β̂ then â > 0. We have been unable to develop such an example, but conjecture it may be
possible. Intuitively, wealth accumulation may be discouraged if disagreements rise with
spending, i.e. β(c) decreasing.19

4.3

Hyperbolic Discounting with Power Utility

This subsection explores the hyperbolic discounting case β(c) = β̄ with power utility:
U1 (c) = u(c)

and

U0 (c) = β̄u(c),

1 1− σ
c
.
1−σ
The differential system (6) can then be written as
u(c) =

ρV ( a) = u(ĉ( a)) + u0(ĉ( a)) (ra − ĉ( a)) + λ (W ( a) − V ( a)) ,

(10a)

ρW ( a) = β̄u (ĉ( a)) + W 0 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a)) ,

(10b)

V 0 ( a) = u0 (ĉ( a)).

(10c)

In accordance with our general approach, one can use equation (10a) to solve for ĉ( a)
at any asset a given any pair of values (V ( a), W ( a)) at this asset level satisfying (ρ +
19 If

â > 0 and a < â then equilibria can be constructed by restarting the system, analogously to the
construction in Theorem 3, to continue the solution for a < â. Theorem 8 actually involves a similar construction: solving for an interval where saving takes place to the left of a steady state under the condition
that β > β̂.

21

λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − u(ra) ≥ 0. Equation (10a) has one root satisfying ĉ( a) ≤ ra and one
root satisfying ĉ( a) ≥ ra; the roots coincide if and only if (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − u (ra) =
0. Selecting a root for ĉ( a) and plugging it into equations (10b)–(10c) gives a differential
system in V and W. One can solve for (V, W ), then back out the implied ĉ.
However, an equivalent way to proceed, which turns out to be particularly useful in
this hyperbolic context, is to change variables and solve for (ĉ, W ), backing out V when
needed. Indeed, differentiating the last equation and using the first equation gives


β̄u(ĉ( a)) − ρW ( a)
1
0
0
(ρ + λ − r )u (ĉ( a)) + λ
,
(11a)
ĉ ( a) = 00
u (ĉ( a)) (ra − ĉ( a))
ra − ĉ( a)

1
(11b)
W 0 ( a) =
ρW ( a) − β̄u (ĉ( a)) .
ra − ĉ( a)
Given a solution to (11) for ĉ and W one can back out V using equation (10a).
Next we exploit homogeneity to transform this non-autonomous differential system
(11) into an autonomous one. Define the functions (c, w, v) by
ĉ( a) ≡ ac( x ),
W ( a ) ≡ a 1− σ w ( x )
V ( a ) ≡ a 1− σ v ( x )
where x = log a. Define the constants v̄, w̄ analogously by V̄ ( a) = a1−σ v̄ and W̄ ( a) =
a1−σ w̄. Here c represents the consumption rate and r − c represents the savings rate.
Homogeneity has been widely exploited in the literature to study linear equilibria, when
c, w and v are constant. In contrast, we allow the functions (c, w, v) to be non constant, so
our renormalization is simply a change of variables: any (ĉ, W, V ) can be represented by
(c, w, v) and vice versa.
Rewriting system (11) in terms of (c, w) one observes that assets a drops out and we
obtain the autonomous system
λc( x )  ρw( x ) − β̄u(c( x ))
r 
1
c0 ( x ) =
−
β̂ − c( x ),
(12a)
σ (r − c( x ))
r − c( x )
u0 (c( x )) ρ
ρw( x ) − β̄u(c( x ))
− (1 − σ ) w ( x ).
(12b)
w0 ( x ) =
r − c( x )
Likewise condition (10a) gives v as a function of (c, w),
v( x ) =

1
(u(c( x )) + u0 (c( x ))(r − c( x )) − λw( x )),
ρ+λ

(12c)

The differential system (12) can be used to sharply characterize equilibria. Just as with
the original system, there is a singularity at c = r that requires some care. However,
because of the reduced dimension of the system we are able to prove the uniqueness of a
22

w

w
ċ = 0

ċ = 0

A

r

A

ẇ = 0
c

r

ẇ = 0
c

Figure 1: Phase diagrams for β̄ < β̂ and r > ρ. The equilibrium path shown in green
features dissavings. The left panel displays a case with a continuous equilibrium. In the
right panel no continuous equilibrium exists. A discontinuous equilibrium exists in both
cases, starting at (c, w) = (r, w̄) and resetting when reaching point A.
solution when β̄ < β̂ in the neighborhood of c = r despite the singularity. Moreover, the
autonomous system is more tractable and its dynamics can be grasped graphically, as we
now demonstrate. Taken together our results will provide a complete characterization of
equilibria in hyperbolic models. Current results provide existence of equilibria in some
cases, but do not fully characterize the set of Markov equilibria.
The case with β̄ < β̂. For this case we show that all regular equilibria involve dissaving.
We are also able to provide a complete and simple characterization. Figure 1 depicts two
phase diagrams (both for the case with r > ρ; the case with r ≤ ρ is similar). The loci
where ċ = 0 and ẇ = 0 are shown in solid blue; the dashed line shows the loci where
v = v̄, which peaks at (c, w) = (r, w̄). This point turns out to be critical in our construction,
serving as a boundary condition at a = a. There is a steady state with c > r and w < w̄
corresponding to the linear equilibrium with no asset limit, a = 0, from Theorem 2. There
are no other steady states. The system is singular at c = r, so (c, w) = (r, w̄) is not a steady
state despite the apparent intersection of the loci for ċ = 0 and ẇ = 0.
The green path in the left panel represents the unique continuous equilibrium. Starting from the asset limit a = a with initial conditions (c, w) = (r, w̄) this path is the unique
solution to the differential system and spans all a ≥ a. The right panel depicts a situation where no continuous equilibrium exists. The key difference is that the path leaving
(c, w) = (r, w̄) reaches c = r with w < w̄ at some finite asset level a > a. This is incompatible with an equilibrium. A discontinuous equilibrium can be constructed by starting
at (c, w) = (r, w̄), following the path to point A where v = v̄, and then restarting at (r, w̄),
23

and repeating this indefinitely. Similar arguments imply that a discontinuous equilibria
exists in the left panel, in addition to the continuous equilibrium.
In both panels, there are no other equilibrium paths. If c < r the dynamical system
either leads to c → 0 with w diverging, which is incompatible with the regular equilibrium refinement, or else it reaches c = r with w > w̄ at some finite asset level, which is
incompatible with a steady state, which requires w = w̄. Since c ≥ r in the neighborhood
of a, an equilibrium requires w = w̄, v = v̄, and, thus, c = r. Despite the singularity, we
prove that there is a unique solution starting from this point.20
These results are summarized in the next theorem.
Theorem 5. Consider the hyperbolic case, with β(c) = β̄ and U1 (c) = u(c) = 1−1 σ c1−σ .
Suppose β̄ < β̂ and assume a > 0. Then equilibria exist and must involve dissaving. More
specifically,
(a) there exists a unique solution (c, w) to the autonomous differential system (12) (with associated v) with initial condition c(0) = r, w(0) = w̄. This solution can be defined over the
interval (0, x̄ ) with c( x ) > r for x ∈ (0, x̄ ) and either x̄ = ∞ or limx→ x̄ c( x ) = r. Let
X ≡ { x ∈ (0, x̄ ) | v( x ) = v̄}, let x = inf X with the convention that x = ∞ if X is empty
(which requires x̄ = ∞). Finally, x > 0 and v( x ) > v̄ for all x ∈ (0, x ).
(b) the consumption function ĉ( a) forms an equilibrium if and only if
ĉ( a) = ac(log a − log an )

∀ a ∈ [ a n , a n +1 )

with a0 = a and for each n = 1, 2, . . . (i) if x̄ < ∞ then log( ana−n 1 ) ∈ X, or (ii) if x̄ = ∞ then
either log( ana−n 1 ) ∈ X or an = ∞.
Proof. Appendix G.
According to this theorem the set of regular equilibria is limited to paths generated by
the unique solution to our autonomous differential system (12). Moreover, properties of
this unique solution reveal important properties of the equilibria set. A few implications
follow immediately. First, for an interval around the asset limit, given by [ a, ae x ), the
consumption function must be continuous and coincide across all equilibria. Second,
there is at most one continuous regular equilibrium, which exists if and only if x̄ = ∞.
Third, discontinuous equilibria exists if and only if X is nonempty. Jumps occur at steady
state asset levels and they restart the normalized consumption function.
20 To simplify the exposition in the text we ignored jumps in ( c, w ) except for those used in the right panel

of Figure 1. Our equilibrium definition allows for jumps in c( a) and w( a) anywhere, as long as v( a) remains
continuous and r − c( a) switching signs. The complete proof in Appendix G takes all possible jumps into
account. However, they do not end up affecting the set of equilibria.

24

Equilibria in our continuous-time hyperbolic model are relatively well behaved, especially compared to their counterparts in the discrete-time quasi-hyperbolic model. Although, no complete characterization of equilibria has been offered in the literature, the
equilibrium must be discontinuous, including jumps outside steady states (Chatterjee and
Eyigungor, 2015), in addition to jumps at steady states. In contrast, in our continuoustime model, a continuous and differentiable equilibrium is possible here and equilibria
are always piecewise differentiable. In this sense, jumps are minimized by formulating
the model in continuous time. Section 7 provides sufficient conditions to ensure the existence of continuous equilibria in the more general model; providing conditions for the
hyperbolic model as a special case.
We also note that the equilibrium may be unique. This may occur for a continuous
equilibrium, if x̄ = ∞ and X is empty, which is necessarily true for β̄ near 1, or for λ near 0.
The unique equilibrium may also be discontinuous equilibrium, if x̄ < ∞ and X contains
a single point. Multiple equilibria are also possible, if X has more than one element or
if x̄ = ∞ and X is non-empty. When this is the case there exists a countable number of
equilibria, determined by the choice in positioning jumps. Numerically, however, we find
that a more typical configuration has X empty or X containing a single point.
This theorem requires a strictly positive asset limit, a > 0, however similar constructions work when a = 0. As is well known, when a = 0 there exists a linear equilibrium
with a constant dissaving rate. However, we argue that this is not necessarily the unique
equilibrium. Indeed, whenever X is non-empty there exists a continuum of equilibria.
For any a0 ∈ [1, e x ) use a two-sided periodic construction similar to that in Theorem 5, so
that
ĉ( a) = ac(log a − log an )
∀ a ∈ [ a n , a n +1 )
a

for n = . . . , −2, 1, 0, 1, 2, . . . and log( na+n 1 ) = x. Since this equilibrium is indexed by
the arbitrary steady state a0 there is a continuum of such equilibria. These equilibria are
discontinuous, but for some parameters there exists a continuum of continuous equilibria.
These equilibria feature cyclical patterns for the consumption rate.21 For all these reasons,
the degree of multiplicity of equilibria is greater when a = 0 than when a > 0. We
conclude that imposing a positive asset limit, rather than opening the door to multiple
21 This

occurs when the dynamical system features a limit cycle around the interior steady state. In these
cases the limit cycle and any other path inside the limit cycle serves as a possible equilibrium, starting at
any asset limit a0 and solving backwards and forwards along the path. Thus, each arc provides a continuum
of solutions and there are a continuum of arcs.
A limit cycle occurs for a wide set of parameters. Indeed, by the Hopf Bifurcation Theorem a limit cycle is
guaranteed to exist in a neighborhood of the parameter space where the interior steady state switches from
being locally stable to locally unstable, with complex eigenvalues. Numerically we find that such cycles are
supercritical, i.e. unstable in the direction of increasing assets.

25

w

ċ = 0
A

r

ẇ = 0
c

Figure 2: Phase diagrams for β̄ ∈ ( β̂, ρr β̂). The unique equilibrium features savings at a
constant savings rate, denoted by point A.
equilibria, contributes to restricting the set of equilibria.
The case with β̄ > β̂. For this case we show that a single equilibrium exists. Figure 2
depicts the phase diagram. The unique equilibrium is the steady state labeled A, corresponding to the linear equilibrium with a constant consumption rate. As shown in the
figure, there is a stable arm path from the neighborhood of this steady state to c = r and
w = w̄; we discuss this path below. For now, note that starting from any other point with
c < r leads to either c → 0 or hitting c = r and w > w̄ at some finite asset level. Both are
incompatible with an equilibrium.
Turning to paths with c > r, note that the lowest asset level featuring dissavings requires (c, w) = (r, w̄) to be compatible with a steady state. Unlike the case with β < β̂,
starting from this point either there are no solutions or there are a continuum of solutions.22 In the latter case all paths eventually hit c = r with w < w̄ at a finite asset
level. These paths are incompatible with an equilibrium since they enter the c < r region
(outside the stable arm path).
Finally, we discuss the stable arm path with c < r converging to (c, w) = (r, w̄).
Starting anywhere on this stable arm, the path reaches c = r at some finite asset level.
The path continues into the c > r region, but all such paths reach c = r and w < w̄ at
some finite asset level and, thus, are incompatible with an equilibrium.
We conclude that the interior steady state is the unique equilibrium. This characterization holds both for a > 0 and a = 0. These results are summarized in the next theorem.
22 When

β̄ >
(c, w) = (r, w̄).

r
ρ β̂

the loci for ċ = 0 slopes upward at c = r and there are no solutions starting from

26

Theorem 6. Consider the hyperbolic case, with β(c) = β̄ and U1 (c) = u(c) = 1−1 σ c1−σ .
Suppose β̄ > β̂ and a ≥ 0. Then there exists a unique equilibrium. The consumption function is
linear with strictly positive savings: ĉ( a) = ψa and ψ < r.
Proof. Appendix G.
The existing literature has noted and used the existence of the linear equilibrium with
positive savings. However, whether other equilibria exist has remained an open question. Our result settles this elusive question for the continuous-time hyperbolic setting.
The analysis relies on the properties of our differential system (12), which has not been
previously studied. In particular, the result rests on the instability of the steady state,
which is not an obvious property. If, instead, the interior steady state had paths converging towards it, then all such paths would constitute a regular equilibrium when a > 0.
Indeed, when β̄ < β̂ and a = 0 the steady state with dissaving c > r may be locally stable
or unstable and a continuum of equilibria exist in some cases (see discussion above). By
symmetry, the same would be true for β̄ > β̂ for the dissaving steady state c < r if we
considered β̄ > 1. Thus, uniqueness subtly depends on β̄ < 1 and is not inherent to
time-inconsistency models.
Finally, consider momentarily a variant of the saving game which incorporates an
ad hoc finite asset limit: we add the constraint a ∈ [ a, ā] on the decision maker. One
can then show that the unique equilibrium lies on the stable path emanating from the
interior steady state and leading to (r, w̄). The initial point (c( a), w( a)) is determined
by the requirement that at the end point (c( ā), w( ā)) = (r, w̄). As the ad hoc bound ā
is increased, then (c( a), w( a)) gets closer to the interior steady state and as ā → ∞ then
(c( a), w( a)) must converge to the steady state. Interestingly, these conclusions hold for
Markov equilibria without the regularity refinement. We conclude that the game with an
ad hoc upper asset limit converges to the unique equilibrium of the game without any
asset limit. Indeed, taking a limit of games with ā → ∞ provides an alternative to the
introduction of the regularity refinement.
Local Indeterminacy. The paths going through (r, w̄) in Figure 2 are worth further discussion, since they are the continuous-time analogs of the construction in Krusell and
Smith (2003). For any arbitrary a∗ ≥ a we can set (c( a∗ ), w( a∗ )) = (r, w̄) and let (c( a), w( a))
be given locally by any of the paths solving the differential system. The asset level a∗ is
then a stable steady state. Since a∗ was arbitrary this delivers a form of indeterminacy.
Indeed, since there are many paths to the right side leaving (r, w̄) there is a further dimension of indeterminacy. These constructions satisfies all the local requirements for an
27

equilibrium. However, we already know that, as a corollary to Theorem 6, they cannot be
part of a global equilibrium. Indeed, the next proposition shows that these constructions
cannot even be extended past some finite interval.23
Proposition 3. Consider the hyperbolic case, with β(c) = β̄ and U1 (c) = u(c) = 1−1 σ c1−σ .
Suppose β̄ ∈ ( β̂, β̂ ρr ) and any a ≥ 0.
For any a∗ > a there exists a continuum of local solutions to the differential system (6); each
solution (ĉ, V, W ) is defined over a maximal interval [ a, ā] that is bounded, ā < ∞, with the
property that the dynamics for wealth are contained within this interval (i.e. it is self-referential).
Moreover, for each solution, a∗ is the unique and stable steady state within the interval [ a, ā]:
ĉ( a∗ ) = ra∗ , ĉ( a) < ra for a ∈ [ a, a∗ ) and ĉ( a) > ra for a ∈ ( a∗ , ā].
These local constructions are not part of an equilibrium. Indeed, there is no equilibrium with
an interior steady state.
Proof. Appendix G.
The fact that local solutions that propose an interior and stable steady state cannot
be part of an equilibrium, the very last statement in the proposition, is a direct corollary
of Theorem 6, which rules out dissaving at any asset level. (We thus employ the term
’local solution’ or ’local construct’ to emphasize the distinction with an equilibrium.)
The proposition shows that a continuum of local solutions can be defined, each over a
bounded interval containing an interior and stable steady state. Moreover, this interval
is self referential, in the sense that the dynamics for wealth pointing “inward”, towards
the steady state. However, the proposition also states that none of these solutions can be
extended in the same way to cover a wider interval. These results are not corollaries of
Theorem 6.
23 In both the discrete- and continuous-time model there are two dimensions of indeterminacy.

First, and
most fundamentally, there are a continuum of steady states. Second, in discrete time, given a steady state
level, Krusell and Smith (2003) provide a continuum of constructions in the neighborhood to the left of the
steady state, but a single construction in the neighborhood to the right of the steady state. In continuous
time our results actually indicate that there is no indeterminacy to the left. This can be easily reconciled
with the aforementioned indeterminacy in discrete time. For a given steady state a∗ , one can show that all
the paths { at } in Krusell and Smith (2003) solve the same difference equation at+1 = h( at ), for a unique and
continuous function h; this implies at = ht ( a0 ) for t = 0, 1, . . . Each path satisfying this difference equation is
sustained by a policy function defined as a step function with jumps placed along the path { at } (i.e. for any
x < x ∗ in the neighborhood of x ∗ , the policy function is defined as g( a) ≡ ht ( x ) for all a ∈ [ht−1 ( x ), ht ( x ))
for t = 0, 1, . . . ). Thus, although there are many policy functions, one for each initial condition, all of them
are generated by the same function h. Moreover, the natural limit in continuous time of such a construction
cannot be expected to feature jumps or indeterminacy.
For our continuous time model, we find a continuum of local solutions to the right that has not been
reported in a discrete time setting. We conjecture, however, that this indeterminacy to the right of the
steady state is also present in the discrete-time setting.

28

In greater detail, the extension fails as follows. To the left of the steady state a∗ the path
is unique and actually can be defined for all a ∈ [ a, a∗ ); indeed, even if a = 0. However,
to the right of the steady state there exists a continuum of solutions starting from (r, w̄)
but all of these paths reach c = r and w < w̄ at some finite asset level ā > a∗ (the figure
illustrates the outermost of these paths). Such solutions over the finite range [ a, ā] can
only be interpreted as an equilibrium if we now modify the saving game to incorporate
a constraint on saving choices of agents, forcing them to keep wealth within the interval
[ a, ā]. Formally, one must change the problem faced by the agent in power, adding this
ad hoc constraint. Then, since the interval is self referential, these new constraints on the
agent’s optimization problem turn out not to bind. With the game modified this way, the
local solution becomes an equilibrium. Needless to say, ad hoc constraints of this kind are
unnatural and nonstandard in the literature, making this interpretation impractical.
As discussed already, any of these paths are incompatible with an equilibrium in the
sense that if one attempted to extend them indefinitely, for all a ≥ ā, then they would
violate some equilibrium condition. However, what happens if we attempt to extend the
local solution over a larger, but bounded, interval?
The answer is that none of these paths can be extended anywhere past ā. At this point
one can show that the agent in power is actually indifferent between following the prescribed path with dissavings versus holding assets constant while in power (of course,
doing so is not an equilibrium, since it would require w = w̄ but we have w < w̄). More
intuitively, this signals that although dissaving by future selves may make the current self
dissave, a strategic complementarity, it cannot do so indefinitely. At some high enough
asset level the current self will prefer to hold wealth constant or actually save, even if
future selves plan to dissave. The problem, it turns out, is that if the agent strictly prefers
to save, the equilibrium will unravel.
More formally, past ā the path enters the c < r region. If we attempt to define the
solution using this path over some bounded interval [ a, ā¯ ] with ā¯ > ā but close ā, then the
solution will satisfy the differential system (6). However, this construct will no longer be
self-referential: the dynamics for wealth now point “outward”: at a = ā¯ the agent wishes
to strictly save. The solution over such an interval then lacks any economic interpretation.24,25
24 This

is not to say that a self-referential solution does not exist, just that it cannot be the extension of the
original construct. Indeed, we can show that for any bounded interval a solution with saving exists, with
wealth converging to the upper bound and then remaining there. This solution has the interpretation of
being an equilibrium with an ad hoc bound on assets that binds.
25 Krusell and Smith (2003) considers weakly concave saving technologies. The standard case in the
hyperbolic discounting literature assumes that the decision maker faces a given market rate of interest, as
we have assumed here, which is equivalent to a linear savings technology. Our discussion, showing that

29

5

Non-Uniform Disagreement

We now turn to situations where disagreement varies sufficiently so that β(c) lies on both
sides of β̂, preventing the conditions for global saving or dissaving. We focus on two
polar cases. In the first case, disagreements decrease with spending. We show how this
creates conditions for a poverty trap: dissaving at lower wealth levels coexisting with
positive savings at high wealth levels. In the second case, disagreements increase with
spending. We show that this creates conditions for convergence of wealth to an interior
steady state.

5.1

Decreasing Disagreement: Poverty Traps

We start with the case where β(c) is increasing and lies on both sides of β̂. Note that,
given Assumption 1, this requires r > ρ.
Assumption 4. The disagreement index β(c) is nonconstant, weakly increasing and crosses β̂.
On the one hand, since β(c) > β̂ for high c, Theorem 4 suggests an equilibrium with
savings as long as the asset limit is high enough, so that a ≥ â. On the other hand, since
β(c) < β̂ for all c ≤ r â, dissaving seems like a natural outcome for lower wealth levels,
as in Theorem 3. This suggests the possibility of a poverty trap, with saving above a
cutoff and dissaving below this same cutoff. When wealth is low, consumption is low, so
disagreements are high; this leads to dissaving which perpetuates the time-inconsistency
problem. When wealth is high, consumption is high, so disagreements are low. This leads
to saving and the time-inconsistency problem is partly overcome. Indeed, an additional
incentive to save is the anticipation of reaching wealth levels where disagreements are
low and time-inconsistency problems are partly overcome.
The next result formalizes these ideas by combining the constructions underlying Theorems 3 and 4. The cutoff must be set at a point where the agent in power is indifferent
between following the saving path versus the dissaving path.
Theorem 7 (Poverty Trap). Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 hold. Then there exists a equilibrium with strict savings for a > a∗ and dissaving for a < a∗ for some cutoff a∗ < ∞, i.e.
ĉ( a) < ra for a > a∗ and ĉ( a) ≥ ra for a < a∗ . Moreover, all equilibria share these properties.
Proof. Appendix H.
the analog of their local construction cannot be extended globally, is limited to this linear case. We have
verified numerically that global indeterminacy is possible with sufficiently concave savings technologies.

30

1.8

1.8

1.8

1.4

1.4

1.4

1

1

1

17

19

a

21

17

19

a

21

17

19

a

21

Figure 3: Equilibrium consumption functions ĉ(ra) versus ra for three different interest
rates. The left panel shows a low interest rate implying dissavings. The center panel
shows an intermediate interest rate implying a poverty trap. The right panel shows a
high interest rate leading to savings.
This result still leaves open the possibility that a∗ = a, so that there is no region with
dissaving. Intuitively, this may occur if the incentives to save are very great, e.g. the
region over which β(c) < β̂ is small, β̂ − β(c) is small, or both. The next result provides
sufficient conditions for a∗ to be interior.
Proposition 4. Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 hold. Then there exists r̄ > r ≥ ρ and a > 0
such that for all r ∈ (r, r̄ ) the cutoff a∗ defined in Theorem 7 is interior: a < a∗ < ∞.
Proof. Appendix H.
This result requires a low enough interest rate, but high enough to induce savings at
the top, to make the benefit from saving relatively small and, thus, ensure dissavings at
the bottom. Indeed, r is set to that when r = r then β(c̄) = β̄ = β̂, which ensures that
savings is an equilibrium at the top. Then r̄ is set close enough to r to ensure that the
utility value from saving is not too high, so that V is close to V̄. This then implies that
dissavings dominates savings at low wealth levels, since dissaving gives V > V̄ for a
near a.
Example 1. We now illustrate the possibility of savings, dissavings and poverty traps. Let
the utility for the agent in power be
U1 (c) =

31

c1−σ̄
1 − σ̄

for σ̄ > 0 and let the disagreement be
( 
β̄ α
β(c) =


c γ
c̄

+1−α

β̄



if c ≤ c̄,
if c ≥ c̄.

with α, β̄ ≤ 1 and γ > 0. Under this specification β(c) is increasing for c < c̄ and constant
for c ≥ c̄; the implied U0 is concave as long as γα ≤ σ̄. We use the following parameters:
ρ = 0.05, σ̄ = 15 , β̄ = 1, α = 34 , γ = σ̄α , λ = 0.05, c̄ = 5 and a = 17.
Figure 3 depicts the consumption policy functions ĉ( a) (solid line) against ra (dotted
line) for three values for the interest rate. The left panel sets r = 0.05, the center panel
sets r = 0.55 and the right panel r = 0.56. In the left panel β(c) < β̂ so that Theorem
3 applies and ĉ( a) > ra so the agent dissaves and wealth declines ȧ < 0, reaching a
in finite time. In the right panel β(c) > β̂ so that Theorem 4 applies and ĉ( a) < ra
so the agent is saving and wealth rises without bound, ȧ > 0 and at → ∞. For high
enough wealth the consumption function coincides with the linear equilibrium provided
by Theorem 2 providing the boundary condition for our construction. The center panel
illustrates Theorem 7 and shows that a poverty trap emerges with ĉ ( a) ≥ ra for a < a∗
and ĉ ( a) < ra for a > a∗ , where a∗ ≈ 18.37.
Comparative Statics on Poverty Traps. We now discuss a few interesting comparative
statics. First, suppose we lower the asset limit. This may be due to better access to credit
which loosens the borrowing constraint (recall the connection in Section 2). We argue that
this may worsen the incentives to save and prompts the agent to dissave over a greater
range of asset levels. To see this, suppose initially that a ≥ â where â is defined by Theorem 4. An equilibrium with positive savings then exists, where wealth and consumption
rise over time starting from any initial wealth level a ≥ a. Next, suppose a is lowered and
that at its new level a < â, so that, according to Theorem 7, an equilibrium exists where
the agent dissaves below a cutoff a∗ > â. Then for wealth in the intermediate region [ â, a∗ )
the equilibrium switches from saving to dissaving when the asset limit is reduced. Thus,
when the borrowing constraint is loosened it may prompt an agent that was previously
saving to dissave.
Next, consider an increase in labor income y and suppose that, for the sake of the
present discussion, the borrowing limit is proportional to income. Recall that, for convenience, we work with the change of variables outlined in Section 2 that allows us to set
income to zero without loss of generality. According to this transformation, an increase
in y amounts to an upward adjustment in the asset limit, together with a parallel upward
shift in the initial transformed wealth level. As just argued, the asset limit and the cutoff
32

a∗ may move in opposite directions. When this is the case an increase in income decreases
the chances of being in a poverty trap, i.e. a ≤ a∗ . Indeed, a large enough increase in y
ensures a ≥ â leaving global savings as the only equilibrium. We conclude that labor income may help prevent poverty traps in wealth. Conversely, being poor in terms of labor
income makes accumulating wealth difficult.
Related Literature on Poverty Traps. Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010) study models
with disagreements over many goods, which imply nonuniform disagreements over total
spending, as discussed in our Section 2.3. They derive a result with decreasing disagreements that can be related to our poverty trap result. They work in a two-period model,
with a single saving decision in the first period, and show the possibility of a downward
discontinuity in the consumption function (i.e. an upward discontinuity in saving). Our
poverty trap result also features a discontinuity of this kind at the threshold a∗ .
There are some differences between their results and ours. First, since their model only
has two periods, this prevents them from studying the long-run dynamics for wealth; indeed, it is unclear whether their upward discontinuity produces a switch in savings from
negative to positive. In contrast, in our poverty trap equilibrium, we show that wealth
declines and remains trapped forever below the threshold. Second, discontinuities in the
consumption function are due to non-convexities in the optimization problem. However,
such a discontinuity never arises in a two-period version of our model. Indeed, if we maximize U1 ( a0 − a1 ) + e−ρ U0 (er a1 ) with respect to a1 then the solution is continuous, since
we assume U1 and U0 to be strictly concave. In contrast, their result implicitly hinges on
making U0 sufficiently convex. We conclude that for our result it is crucial to include a
longer horizon with future selves that also engage in savings choices. Unlike Banerjee
and Mullainathan (2010), poverty traps arise from the strategic interactions across different selves over longer horizons.
Our construction of equilibria with a poverty trap relied on nonuniform disagreements. Indeed, we also proved a converse: if β(c) is constant then poverty traps cannot
arise as part of an equilibrium. However, poverty traps may emerge with uniform disagreements if one relaxes the equilibrium requirement from Markov to subgame perfection, as shown by Bernheim et al. (2015). Poverty traps are sustained by trigger strategies
that punish deviations with overconsumption. Such punishments are not as effective near
the asset limit, so savings can only be sustained for high enough wealth levels.
There are various differences between their result and ours. The first two are mostly
of a technical nature. First, their main result provides conditions for the existence of two
thresholds which need not coincide: below the first threshold there is dissaving and above
33

the second savings becomes possible. Second, they require an endogenous condition on
the equilibrium set; in contrast, our results establish conditions on parameters for poverty
trap equilibria with a single threshold. These theoretical differences notwithstanding, in
practice, the numerical analysis in Bernheim et al. (2015) for a wide range of parameters
reveals that the condition they require is met and their two thresholds coincide.26 More
substantively, poverty traps are driven by different and complementary mechanisms in
the two frameworks. These differences are highlighted by differences in comparative statics. Bernheim et al. (2015) show that loosening the borrowing constraint makes poverty
traps less likely, since trigger punishments then become more severe. In addition, one
can show that higher labor income, fixing wealth, raises the chances of being in a poverty
trap in their setting. These predictions contrast with those of our model discussed above.

5.2

Increasing Disagreement: Convergence

We now consider the reverse situation, where disagreements are high for high spending and low for low spending. It is natural to expect the time-inconsistency problem
to be aggravated at higher wealth levels, providing a force for dissaving at high wealth
and saving at low wealth levels. These forces may imply the convergence of wealth to a
unique interior steady state.
We now provide one such result. To simplify, we assume a downward jump in β(c),
but later confirm that similar conclusions are obtained with continuous disagreements.
Assumption 5. There exists c∗ > 0 such that β(c) > β̂ for c < c∗ and β(c) < β̂ for c > c∗ .
Furthermore, β(c) is continuous except for a jump at c∗ satisfying
lim∗ β(c) > β̂ > lim∗ β(c).
c↑c

c↓c

This assumption requires β(c) to single cross β̂ from above with a jump, but does not
require β(c) to be decreasing.
26 In more detail, the main result in Bernheim et al. (2015) is as follows.

Suppose parameters are such that
the subgame perfect equilibrium set satisfies the following (“non-uniformity”): there exists some asset level
with strict dissavings for all equilibria (i.e. self-control fails) and, in addition, there exists another asset level
with strict savings for some equilibrium (i.e. self-control is possible). Then there exists a1 and a2 such that:
for low wealth a < a1 all equilibria feature strict dissaving with assets reaching the asset limit; for a > a2
there is at least one equilibrium with strict saving with assets rising without bound. In other words, they
show that if self control fails somewhere and if self control is possible somewhere, then the former occurs
at the bottom (with assets reaching the limit) and the latter occurs at the top (with assets accumulating
indefinitely).
Bernheim et al. (2015) report that it is not possible to provide conditions on primitives to ensure the
non-uniformity condition required for their main result. However, they perform convincing numerical
simulations showing that this condition holds for intermediate values of β; they also provide sufficient
conditions for a simplified model that only allows two savings choices and has assets lying on a fixed grid.

34

We now construct an equilibrium with a stable steady state at a∗ ≡
below a∗ and dissaving above a∗ .

c∗
r ,

with saving

Theorem 8 (Convergence). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 5 hold. Then there exists an asset limit
∗
a ≥ 0 and an equilibrium with a stable steady state at a∗ = cr > a, i.e. ĉ( a∗ ) = ra∗ , ĉ( a) < ra
for a < a∗ and ĉ( a) ≥ ra a ≥ a∗ . If, in addition β(c) is non-decreasing for c < c∗ , then a = 0.
Proof. Appendix I.
Intuitively, high wealth is associated with higher consumption, so lower β(c) leads to
dissaving. At low wealth levels consumption is low, so higher β(c) leads to positive savings. This variation in disagreements provide a force for convergence, despite a constant
interest rate.27
Convergence in the Literature. Battaglini and Coate (2008) study a political economy
model of debt and obtain a similar form of convergence.28 They study a legislative voting
game, where in each period, the legislature determines spending on two items, a valuable
public goods and group-specific “pork” transfers. As they show, the outcome each period
can be represented as a maximization over the two spending items and the continuation
value from future debt. Spending on both item is only a function of total spending, just
as in the many-good interpretation of our framework provided in Section 2.3.29 In their
model, pork spending hits corners when spending is low. As a result, in their model timeinconsistency is strongest when debt is low, wealth is high, because group-specific pork
transfers are then strictly positive (the “business-as-usual” regime); conversely, there is no
time-inconsistency when debt is high, wealth is low, and group-specific pork transfers are
absent (the “responsible policymaking” regime). In terms of our notation, this maps into
a specification where β(c) takes on two values, β̄ = 1 above some c̄ and β < 1 elsewhere.
Observational Non-Equivalence. Both the existence of equilibria with a poverty trap
and the convergence to an interior steady state illustrate behavior that is patently not
observationally equivalent to any time consistent consumer with additive utility and exponential discounting. A time-consistent agent would either save or dissave at all wealth
27 We

conjecture that a similar result is obtained for continuous β(c) as long as the function is sufficiently
decreasing. Indeed, this is consistent with Example 2 below.
28 Their model includes shocks, but their main result is a form of mean reversion that renders the dynamics of debt ergodic, similar to the forces implying convergence of wealth in our deterministic setup.
29 See their equation (18), which shows that spending on each item is determined, once one conditions
on current and future debt.

35

levels, depending on the sign of r − ρ. Morris and Postlewaite (1997) constructs an example where observational equivalence fails, based on discontinuities in the consumption
function, since discontinuities are never optimal for time-consistent agents with concave
utility. Our results provide counterexamples to observational equivalence without relying on discontinuities in the policy function. This is most obvious in the convergence
case, since no discontinuity in the consumption policy function is involved.

6

Inverting Consumption Functions to Disagreements

We now explore the model from a different angle, inverting it to solve for the disagreement index β(c) given an equilibrium policy function for consumption ĉ( a). It turns
out that, for sufficiently smooth consumption functions, this inverse mapping is very
tractable, indeed providing a closed form. This allows us to reveal the model from a
different angle.
Define the local curvature

−U100 (c)c
,
(13)
U10 (c)
which is strictly positive, since U1 is strictly increasing and strictly concave. We then have
the following result.
σ(c) ≡

Theorem 9. Suppose ĉ( a) is an equilibrium consumption function that is strictly monotone (increasing or decreasing) and twice differentiable within an interval ( a1 , a2 ). Let ζ (c) denote the
local inverse of ĉ( a) over the interval (ĉ( a1 ), ĉ( a2 )). Then
2


1 n
0
0 2
00 rζ − c
α1 ζ + α2 ζ + σcζ
β(c) =
λζ 0
c



rζ − c 2 o
0 rζ − c
2
0
+ σ 2 + (2ρ + λ − 3r )ζ
+ (σ + σ − cσ )
(14)
c
c
where α1 ≡ (ρ + λ − r ) and α2 ≡ (ρ − r )(ρ + λ − r ).
Proof. Appendix J.
We discuss two applications of this result.
Necessary Conditions.
This result can be used to derive necessary conditions on the
disagreement index β(c) for certain properties to emerge in equilibrium. We next state a
few examples.
36

First, suppose the equilibrium features dissaving for high enough wealth levels, so
that ra − ĉ( a) < 0. Suppose further that ĉ0 ( a) and and ĉ00 ( a) a converge as a → ∞ with
lima→∞ c0 ( a) > r. In addition, suppose U1 is such that σ and σ0 c converge as c → ∞.
Then it follows that β(c) → β̄ < β̂. This is a converse of sorts to Theorem 3. Similarly,
suppose the equilibrium features saving for high enough wealth levels, then it must be
that β(c) → β̄ > β̂.
Next, suppose that r > ρ and the equilibrium features an interior steady state ã with
ĉ( ã) = r ã that is locally stable, so that ĉ0 ( ã) > r. Then at this steady state
β(r ã) > β̂.
If, in addition, ĉ00 ( ã) ≤ 0, i.e. the marginal propensity to consume falls with wealth, then
β0 (r ã) < 0,
This is consistent with our convergence result, Theorem 8, which featured decreasing
β(c), although that result assumed a discontinuous jump, whereas the present characterization features a smooth β(c). Moreover, whether or not ĉ00 ( ã) ≤ 0, if ã is globally stable
with dissaving for all a ≥ ã then β(c) < β̂ as c → ∞, as discussed above. Since at the
steady state β(r ã) > β̂, we conclude that β must cross β̂ from above at some point. In this
sense, decreasing β that crosses β̂ is necessary for convergence of wealth to an interior
steady state.
Constructing Equilibria. This result can be used to construct smooth equilibria, by postulating any monotone and twice differentiable consumption function and backing out
the required disagreement index β(c). We only need to check that the disagreement index obtained from equation (14) satisfies β(c) > 0. The next example illustrates this
procedure.
1−σ̄

Example 2. Assume U1 (c) ≡ c1−σ̄ and ρ + λ > r. Consider a linear consumption function
ĉ( a) = r ã + Ψ( a − ã) with Ψ > r and ã > 0. This implies ȧ = −Ψ( a − ã) so that ã is a
stable steady state. Equation (14) then implies that β is quadratic in 1c ,


2

r ã
r ã
− 1 + β̄ 2
−1 ,
β(c) = β̄ 0 + β̄ 1
c
c
(ρ−r +Ψ)(ρ+λ−r )

with coefficients β̄ 0 =
, β̄ 1 =
λΨ
2
1
σ̄ (σ̄ + 1) λΨ
(Ψ − r ) . One confirms that

σ̄
λΨ

(λ + 2ρ + 2Ψ − 3r ) (Ψ − r ) and β̄ 2 =

1
< 0.
r ã
Figure 4 depicts an equilibrium with Ψ = 0.10 and ã = 10 and the implied β(c) using
β(r ã) = β̄ 0 > β̂

and

37

β0 (r ã) = − β̄ 1

2
1
8

10

12

14
a

16

20

18

1
0.5
0.6

0.8

1

c

1.2

1.4

1.6

Figure 4: A linear consumption function ĉ( a) with a stable interior steady state (top panel)
and the implied disagreement index β(c) (bottom panel).
parameters ρ = 0.05, σ̄ = 0.8, λ = 0.05 and r = 0.07. The upper panel shows the linear
consumption function, while the lower panel shows the implied disagreement function
β(c) that sustains this linear policy function as an equilibrium. Equation (14) produces a
β(c) that is everywhere decreasing with limc→∞ β(c) > 0 so that the condition β(c) > 0
is met in this case.

7

Continuous Dissaving Equilibria

This last section takes a closer look at the dissaving case and provides sufficient conditions for the continuous equilibrium to exist (recall that, under mild conditions, there is
at most one continuous equilibrium). As the Introduction explained, standard hyperbolic
discrete-time models are somewhat ill behaved. Equilibria display a plethora of discontinuities, which can be challenging to work with. The literature has explored a few ways to
overcome these issues and the objections they raise, especially by adding uncertainty.30
Although there are obvious benefits to including uncertainty, doing so creates its own
challenges and somewhat removes the focus from the time-inconsistency problem. Our
30 Harris

and Laibson (2001) introduce uncertain income in a discrete time model and provide a generalized Euler equation and existence results, allowing for jumps; they also show that continuous equilibria
exist when r < ρ if the time-inconsistency problem is not too severe so that β ≈ 1. Harris and Laibson (2013) introduced a continuous-time model allowing for uncertainty in asset returns and studied the
instantaneous-gratification limit, λ → ∞.

38

results indicate that casting the model in continuous time, following Harris and Laibson (2013), already affords substantial benefits even without uncertainty. In particular,
equilibria are relatively well behaved. For instance, Section 4.3 provided a complete characterization for the hyperbolic case, showing that equilibria are either continuous or have
limited jumps, only at interior steady states. Continuous time minimizes the discontinuities relative to discrete time.
We now investigate conditions for continuity of dissaving equilibria, allowing for
nonuniform disagreements but assuming β(c) < β̂ as in Section 4.1.31 Our first result
provides a simple yet powerful result: the continuous equilibrium exists for interest rates
below the discount rate.
Theorem 10 (Continuity I). Suppose Assumptions 1 holds and that r < ρ (implying β < β̂).
Then there exists a continuous equilibrium with dissaving, ĉ( a) > ra for a > a, and an increasing
consumption function, with ĉ0 ( a) > 0.
Proof. Appendix K.
Recall that discontinuities are limited, with jumps only occurring at interior steady
states. When r < ρ the forces for strict dissaving are sufficiently strong, even without the
time-inconsistency problem, to prevent such steady states.
When r ≥ ρ strict dissaving can be guaranteed if the time-inconsistency problem is
strong enough. Our next result provides sufficient conditions for this to be the case. Deρ
fine r̄ ≡ infc≥ra β(c) , so that r ≥ r̄ implies β(c) > β̂ for some c for all large enough λ; we
require r < r̄ and a condition on preferences.
Theorem 11 (Continuity II). Suppose Assumption 2 holds, r ∈ [ρ,r̄ ) and
1 − σ(c)
> 1,
c≥ra
β(c)
inf

(15)

Then a continuous equilibrium exists for λ large enough or r close enough to ρ. This equilibrium
features strict dissaving, ĉ( a) > ra for a > a, and an increasing consumption function, ĉ0 ( a) > 0.
When r = ρ these conclusions hold for any λ.
Proof. Appendix K.
This result requires the curvature of the utility function to be low relative to disagreements, so that 1 − σ(c) > β(c). In particular, since β(c) > 0 this requires σ (c) < 1. The
31 Equilibria

with savings, β > β̂, are naturally continuous, as we have already shown. Poverty traps
may feature a discontinuity at the threshold separating dissaving from saving, but such a discontinuity is
inherent to the economics of the situation. All other discontinuities we have encountered are associated
with a dissaving equilibrium or a region with dissaving.

39

conditions of the proposition ensure that β(c) < β̂, providing conditions for dissaving.
Low σ(c) then assures strict dissaving by heightening the strategic complementarity, so
that substitution effects dominate income effects, and greater dissaving by future selves
leads to greater dissaving by current selves.
These results on the existence of continuous equilibria can be contrasted with the
discrete-time results in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2015, Theorems 3 and 4). They show
that in the hyperbolic case with r ≤ ρ and power utility functions, a continuous equilibrium does not exist. In contrast, we obtain continuity for r < ρ for any β(c) and utility
functions; for r ≥ ρ we obtain continuity under some preference restrictions.32,33
Finally, we provide sufficient conditions for the existence of discontinuous equilibria.
The result relies on showing that eventually V ( a) < V̄ ( a) for any solution to the differential system (6).
Theorem 12 (Discontinuity). Suppose Assumptions 1–2 hold and r ∈ (ρ, r̄ ). Then there exists
an equilibrium with dissaving and a discontinuous policy function ĉ( a) for all large enough λ.
Proof. Appendix K.
When r > ρ the conditions in Theorems 11 and 12 are compatible. As a corollary,
multiple equilibria are possible, with continuous and discontinuous equilibria coexisting.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first result on multiplicity in the context of timeinconsistent saving games.
When multiple equilibria of this sort exist, which one is more reasonable, the continuous or discontinuous one? Is there a reasonable selection criterion? One possibility is to
introduce small amounts of uncertainty in income, returns or preferences. What happens
when small noise is introduced in cases where continuous equilibria do not exist? Does
the equilibrium become continuous or does it remain discontinuous? Or may an equilibrium even fail to exist? All these questions deserve further investigation, but are beyond
the scope of the current paper.
32 To understand the difference between continuous and discrete time in this regard note that Chatterjee
and Eyigungor (2015) rule out continuous equilibria by observing that there exists an interval of assets
near the debt limit where the decision maker chooses to go to the debt limit (the policy function is flat).
However, this is no longer true in continuous time because, since wealth moves continuously, it always
takes a positive amount of time to reach the debt limit.
33 In the hyperbolic discounting case with power utility functions condition (15) is the opposite of the
condition imposed by Harris and Laibson (2013) to guarantee the existence of an equilibrium in the instan1−σ̄
taneous gratification limit λ → ∞. Indeed, when U1 (c) = c1−σ̄ and U0 (c) = β̄U1 (c), Harris and Laibson
(2013) require 1 − β̄ < σ̄. Consistent with this observation, numerically we find that under condition (15)
the continuous equilibrium identified by our theorem diverges with ĉ( a) → ∞ as λ → ∞ for any a > a.
Intuitively, strategic complementarities are strong and when λ increases they are amplified. This suggests
that it may be reasonable to consider the limit of λ → ∞ while simultaneously raising β(c) to obtain a finite
limit for consumption.

40

8

Conclusion

We put forth a continuous-time saving game that allows for flexible forms of disagreement. We provided a general method for constructing equilibria and use it to provide
sharp characterizations.
We find that equilibria in our continuous-time framework are well behaved relative
to standard discrete-time settings. For example, a unique continuous equilibrium exists
under a wide range of conditions, even without the introduction of uncertainty. For the
special hyperbolic case, we provided a simple graphical analysis and delivered results
that address a number of open questions. Away from the hyperbolic case we found conditions for global saving or dissaving. We also showed that when disagreements vary
sufficiently richer wealth dynamics are possible. When disagreements fall with spending
poverty traps emerge; conversely, when disagreements rise with spending, the equilibrium may involve convergence to an interior wealth level.

References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson, “A Theory of Political Transitions,” American
Economic Review, September 2001, 91 (4), 938–963.
Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini, “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government Debt,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1990, 57 (3), pp. 403–414.
Amador, Manuel, “A Political Economy Model of Sovereign Debt Repayment,” 2002.
mimeo.
, Iván Werning, and George-Marios Angeletos, “Commitment vs. Flexibility,” Econometrica, 03 2006, 74 (2), 365–396.
Azzimonti, Marina, “Barriers to Investment in Polarized Societies,” American Economic
Review, 2011, 101 (5), 2182–2204.
Bai, Jinhui H. and Roger Lagunoff, “On the Faustian Dynamics of Policy and Political
Power,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (1), 17–48.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Sendhil Mullainathan, “The Shape of Temptation: Implications
for the Economic Lives of the Poor,” Working Paper 15973, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2010.
Battaglini, Marco and Stephen Coate, “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation,
and Debt,” American Economic Reviews, 2008, 98 (1), 201–236.

41

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Debraj Ray, “Markov Perfect Equilibria in Altruistic Growth
Economies with Production Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1989, (47), 195–
202.
, , and Sevin Yeltekin, “Poverty and Self-Control,” Econometrica, 2015, 83 (5), 1877–
1911.
Besley, Stephen Coate Timothy, “Sources of Inefficiency in a Representative Democracy:
A Dynamic Analysis,” The American Economic Review, 1998, 88 (1), 139–156.
Cao, Dan, “Racing under uncertainty: Boundary value problem approach,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 2014, 151, 508 – 527.
Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Continuous Markov Equilibria with QuasiGeometric Discounting,” 2015. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Harris, Christopher and David Laibson, “Dynamic Choices of Hyperbolic Consumers,”
Econometrica, 2001, 69 (4), pp. 935–957.
and , “Hyperbolic Discounting and Consumption,” in Dewatripont M, Hansen LP,
and Stephen Turnovsky, eds., Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Vol. 1 2002, pp. 258–298.
and
248.

, “Instantaneous Gratification,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (1), 205–

Hartman, P., Ordinary Differential Equations, second ed., Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, 2002.
Krusell, Per and Anthony Smith, “Consumption-Savings Decisions with QuasiGeometric Discounting,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (1), 53–73.
Laibson, David, “Hyperbolic Discount Functions, Undersaving, and Savings Policy,”
Working Paper 5635, National Bureau of Economic Research June 1996.
, “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112,
443–477.
Morris, Stephen, “Continuous Consumption Rules with Non-Exponential Discounting,”
2002. mimeo.
and Andrew Postlewaite, “Observational Implications of Non-Exponential Discounting,” 1997. mimeo.
Persson, Torsten and Lars E. O. Svensson, “Why a Stubborn Conservative would Run a
Deficit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1989, 104 (2), 325–345.
Phelps, E. S. and R. A. Pollak, “On Second-Best National Saving and Game Equilibrium
Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 1968, 35, 185–199.
42

Rabier, Patrick J. and Werner C. Rheinboldt, Theoretical and numerical analysis of
differential-algebraic equations, Vol. 8 of Handbook of Numerical Analysis, Elsevier, 2002.
Strotz, Robert H., “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review
of Economic Studies, 1956, XXIII, 193–205.

Appendix
A

General Properties

A.1

Proof of Proposition 1

We show existence and uniqueness at the same time. By the Envelope Theorem
U10 (c) = h0 (ĉ A (c)) = g0 (ĉ B (c)).
Moreover,
Therefore, ĉ0A (c) =

U00 (c) = h0 (ĉ A (c))ĉ0A (c).
U00 (c)
.
U10 (c)

Thus
ˆ
ĉ A (c) =

c

0

U00 (c̃)
dc̃,
U10 (c̃)

which is strictly increasing in c since U00 , U10 > 0. Furthermore,

ˆ c
U00 (c̃)
ĉ B (c) = c − ĉ A (c) =
dc̃,
1− 0
U1 (c̃)
0
U 0 (c̃)

which is also increasing in c because 1 − U00 (c̃) ≥ 0 by Assumption 1. So h(c A ) and g(c B )
1
are uniquely determined (up to constants) by
h0 (ĉ A (c)) = U10 (c)
and

g0 (ĉ B (c)) = U10 (c).
h and g are increasing because h0 , g0 > 0 and are concave because dˆ and ê are increasing
in c and U10 is decreasing in c.

A.2

Roots of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman Equations

Write the HJB equation (6a) as
where


(ρ + λ) V ( a) − λW ( a) = H V 0 ( a), a ,

(16)

H ( p, a) ≡ sup{U1 (c) + p (ra − c)}.

(17)

c

The next lemma characterizes the function H.
43

Lemma 3. For any a, the function H (·, a) defined by (17) is continuous, strictly convex and
continuously differentiable for p > 0; has a unique interior minimum at p = U 0 (ra); satisfies
lim p→∞ H ( p, a) = ∞ and H (0, a) = lim p→0 H ( p, a) = U1 (∞).
Proof. For any p > 0 a maximum is attained on the right hand side of (17) uniquely by
the first-order condition U10 (c) = p. This implies that H ( a, ·) differentiable with derivative
H p ( p, a) = ra − (U10 )−1 ( p). This derivative is continuous and strictly increasing. Thus,
H ( p, a) is strictly convex in p. Since H p (U10 (ra), a) = 0 then p = U10 (ra) is the unique
minimum. Since H ( a, ·) is strictly convex it follows that lim p→∞ H ( p, a) = ∞.
Finally, by definition H (0, a) ≡ supc U1 (c) = limc→∞ U1 (c). This also coincides with
lim p→0 H ( p, a) since

lim H ( p, a) = lim U1 (c) + U10 (c)(ra − c) ≤ lim U1 (c),
p →0

c→∞

c→∞

1

1

lim H ( p, a) ≥ lim (U1 ( p− 2 ) + p(ra − p− 2 )) = lim U1 (c).

p →0

c→∞

p →0

This has immediate implications for the possible solutions to equation (16).
Lemma 4. Consider solutions p = V 0 ( a) to equation (16), if
Case 1. (ρ + λ) V ( a) − λW ( a) < U1 (ra), then no solution exists;
Case 2. (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) = U1 (ra), then the unique solution is given by p = U10 (ra);
Case 3. U1 (ra) < (ρ + λ) V ( a) − λW ( a) ≤ U1 (∞), then exactly two solutions p1 and p2
exist and 0 ≤ p1 < U10 (ra) < p2 ;
Case 4. U1 (∞) < (ρ + λ) V ( a) − λW ( a), then a unique solution exists and U10 (ra) < p.
Given Lemma 4, we define the following subsets of R3 :
E ≡ {( a, V, W ) | a > 0 and (ρ + λ) V − λW > U1 (ra) } ,
E0 ≡ {( a, V, W ) | a > 0 and U1 (∞) > (ρ + λ) V − λW > U1 (ra) } ,
Es ≡ {( a, V, W ) | a > 0 and (ρ + λ) V − λW = U1 (ra) }
Lastly Ē = E ∪ Es , and Ē0 = E0 ∪ Es . Notice that Es corresponds to the set of singular
points of the differential (6) as an implicit ODE.
Using Lemma 4 we now rewrite system (6) as explicit ODEs. There are two systems
to consider, depending on whether we consider the high or lower root.
Definition 2. Let Rl ( a, V, W ) denote the lower root p = V 0 ( a) of equation (16). By Lemma
4, Rl is well-defined over Ē0 and is continuous in a, V, W. Let Sl ( a, V, W ) denote the
associated solution to W 0 in equation (6b), so that
Sl ( a, V, W ) =
−1

U0 (ĉ( a)) − ρW
ĉ( a) − ra

−1

with ĉ( a) = (U10 ) (V 0 ( a)) = (U10 ) ( Rl ( a, V, W )) > ra, defined over E0 . By the Implicit
Function Theorem, Rl and Sl are continuously differentiable in a, V, W over E0 .
Using Rl and Sl , system (6) can be represented as an explicit ODE
 0
 

V ( a)
Rl ( a, V, W )
=
.
W 0 ( a)
Sl ( a, V, W )
44

(18)

This ODE is regular around ( a, V, W ) ∈ E0 . Around any regular point we can apply
standard extension results (for example, Picard–Lindelöf theorem or Cauchy–Lipschitz
theorem; see Hartman (2002) for a comprehensive exposition) to show that, the ODE (18)
admits a unique solution (V, W ) defined over a neighborhood of a, ( a − e, a + e), and
is twice continuously differentiable (because Rl and Sl are continuously differentiable),
such that (V ( a), W ( a)) = (v, w) .34
The next definition is analogous, but using the higher root of equation (16).
Definition 3. Let Rh ( a, V, W ) be the higher root for p = V 0 ( a) of equation (16). By Lemma
4, Rh is well-defined over Ē and is continuous in a, V, W. Let Sh ( a, V, W ) be the associated
value W 0 in equation (6b), so that
Sh ( a, V, W ) =
−1

ρW − U0 (ĉ( a))
,
ra − ĉ( a)

−1

where ĉ( a) = (U10 ) (V 0 ( a)) = (U10 ) ( Rh ( a, V, W )) < ra, defined over E. By the Implicit Function Theorem, Rh and Sh are continuously differentiable in ( a, V, W ) over E.
Using Rh and Sh , system (6) can be represented as an explicit ODE
 0
 

V ( a)
Rh ( a, V, W )
=
.
W 0 ( a)
Sh ( a, V, W )

(19)

This ODE is regular around any ( a, V, W ) ∈ E. Just as with (18), standard extension
results apply whenever ( a, V, W ) is regular.

A.3

Useful Observations

The following general properties of the solutions to system (6) is also important for their
characterization.
Lemma 5. Assume that V, W and ĉ constitutes a solution to the system (6). If V and W are
continuously differentiable and V is twice differentiable at a, then

(ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) = V 00 ( a) (ra − cb ( a))

(20)

and if ĉ( a) 6= ra:
ĉ0 ( a) =

1
V 00 ( a)
(ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a)
=
U100 (ĉ( a))
U100 (ĉ( a))
ra − ĉ( a)

(21)

Proof. Differentiating (6a) with respect to a, we obtain

(ρ + λ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) = U10 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) + V 0 ( a)(r − ĉ0 ( a)) + V 00 ( a) (ra − cb ( a)) .
Combining this with (6c) and rearranging yield (20). Now differentiating (6c) with respect
to a,
U100 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) = V 00 ( a),
or equivalently ĉ0 ( a) =

V 00 ( a)
,
U100 (ĉ( a))

which together with (20) yields (21).

34 For

any solution x ( a) to an ODE x 0 ( a) = F ( x ( a)). If F is continuously differentiable then x is twice
continuously differentiable, and x 00 ( a) = ∇ F ( x ) · x 0 = ∇ F ( x ) · F ( x ).

45

Lastly, we will also use the follow result to connect the comparison between β(.) and
β̂ to the comparison between the slopes of V and U10 .
Lemma 6. For a > 0, β(ra) < β̂ if and only if
0

V ( a) < U10 (ra).

(22)

0

And β(ra) = β̂ if and only if V ( a) = U10 (ra).
Proof. Using the definition (8) for V, we have
0

V ( a) =

r
λr
U10 (ra) +
U 0 (ra).
ρ+λ
(ρ + λ)ρ 0

The condition that β̂(ra) < β̂ is equivalent to
λr
r
U10 (ra) +
U 0 (ra) < U10 (ra).
ρ+λ
(ρ + λ)ρ 0
The result then follows. Likewise, for the case with β(ra) = β̂.

A.4

Proof of Lemma 1

Since σ < 1, the utility function U1 is bounded from below and Assumption 2 is satisfied,
we can find constants u, ū0 , ū1 such that
c 1− σ
+ ū1 .
1−σ
This implies that the commitment solution is bounded above by
u ≤ U0 (c), U1 (c) ≤ ū0

Vsp ( a) ≤ v̄0

a 1− σ
+ v̄1
1−σ

for some v̄0 , v̄1 .35
From the HJB for V, (6a), we have
V ( a) = U1 (ĉ( a)) + U10 (ĉ( a))(ra − ĉ( a)) + λW ( a) ≤ (ρ + λ)Vsp ( a).
´∞
In addition, W ( a) = 0 e−ρt U0 (ct )dt ≥ uρ and U1 (ĉ( a)) > u.
Consequently, there exist v0∗ > 0 and v1∗ such that
U10 (ĉ( a))(ra − ĉ( a)) < v0∗

a 1− σ
+ v1∗
1−σ

(23)

for all a ≥ a.
We first choose ā such that
U10 (c̄)(ra − c̄) > v0∗
and
v0∗
35 V ( a )
sp

is defined by max{ct ,at }

´∞
0

a 1− σ
+ v1∗
1−σ

a 1− σ
> v1∗
1−σ


e−ρt (1 − e−λt )U1 (ct ) + e−λt U0 (ct ) s.t. ȧt = rat − ct and a0 = a.

46

for all a ≥ ā.
We then choose ν1 sufficiently small so that
v0∗
.
1−σ
We now show by contradiction that ĉ( a) > v1 a for all a ≥ ā. Indeed, if ĉ( a) ≤ c̄ then
ν1−σ (r − ν1 ) > 2

U10 (ĉ( a))(ra − ĉ( a)) ≥ U10 (c̄)(ra − c̄) > v0∗

a 1− σ
+ v1∗
1−σ

which contradicts (23). Therefore ĉ( a) ≥ c̄ for all a ≥ ā. In this case, U10 (ĉ( a)) = (ĉ( a))−σ .
If ĉ( a) ≤ v1 a, then
U10 (ĉ( a))(ra − ĉ( a)) > ν1−σ (r − ν1 ) a1−σ > 2v0∗

a 1− σ
a 1− σ
> v0∗
+ v1∗
1−σ
1−σ

which also contradicts (23). So

ĉ( a) > ν1 a ∀ a ≥ ā
Because of the Inada condition on U1 , there exists

ra
2

> e > 0 such that

1
ā1−σ
U10 (e) ra > v0∗
+ v1∗ .
2
1−σ
We show that ĉ( a) > e for all a ∈ [ a, a]. Assume by contradiction that ĉ( a) ≤ e for some
a ∈ [ a, ā]:
ā1−σ
1
U10 (ĉ( a))(ra − ĉ( a)) > U10 (e) ra > v0∗
+ v1∗ ,
2
1−σ
which contradicts (23). So
ĉ( a) > e ∀ a ∈ [ a, ā]

From the two inequalities for ĉ and let ν = min ν1 , eā , it is immediate that ĉ( a) > νa
for all a ≥ a. Q.E.D.

B

A Single-Crossing Property

The following simple result on the comparison between two functions plays a crucial role
in the characterization of the solutions to system (6). Although this result is very simple,
we do not know of any reference, so include it here for completeness.36
Lemma 7. Let f and g be two continuously differentiable functions defined over [ a, a]. Consider
the subset satisfying the requirements that (1) f ( a) ≥ g( a); and (2) if f ( a) = g( a) for some
a ∈ [ a, a] then f 0 ( a) > g0 ( a). Then f ( a) > g( a) for all a ∈ ( a, a].
Proof. First, observe that, if f ( a) = g( a), by property 2. f 0 ( a) > g0 ( a), therefore f ( a) >
g( a) in a neighborhood to the right of a. If f ( a) > g( a), we obtain the same result
by continuity. Now, we prove the lemma by contradiction. Assume that, there exists
ã ∈ [ a, a] such that f ( ã) ≤ g( ã). By the Intermediate Value Theorem, we can assume that
36 See

Cao (2014) for an earlier application of this result in the context of two-agent dynamic games.

47

f ( ã) = g( ã), without loss of generality. Now let a∗ = inf { a ∈ [ a, a] : f ( a) = g( a)} . By
continuity f ( a∗ ) = g( a∗ ). Moreover, a∗ > a because f ( a) > g( a) in the right neighborhood of a. By property 2), f 0 ( a∗ ) > g0 ( a∗ ). Together with f ( a∗ ) = g( a∗ ), this implies,
f ( a) < g( a) in a neighborhood to the left of a∗ . Therefore by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists a∗∗ ∈ ( a, a∗ ) such that f ( a∗∗ ) = g( a∗∗ ). This contradicts the definition
of a∗ which is the infimum.
We also use a few variations of this lemma.
Variation 1. if 1) f ( a) ≥ g( a), and 2) if f ( a) = g( a), for some a < ā, then f 0 ( a) < g0 ( a),
we have f ( a) > g( a) for all a ∈ [ a, a] .
Variation 2. We can also relax condition 2, by the condition that if f ( a) = g( a) then
0
f ( ã) > g0 ( ã) in a neighborhood to the left of a. Indeed, in the proof above, if f ( a∗ ) =
g( a∗ ) and f 0 ( ã) > g0 ( ã) in the left neighborhood of a∗ , then for a in the left neighborhood
of a∗ ,
ˆ a∗
∗
f ( a) = f ( a ) −
f 0 ( ã)d ã
ˆ

a

∗

= g( a ) −
ˆ

a

∗

< g( a ) −

a∗

a∗

a

f 0 ( ã)d ã
g0 ( ã)d ã = g( a).

We can then proceed as in the remaining of the proof. This variation is useful when f 0 or
g0 are not well-defined at some a.

C
C.1

Local Existence
Proof of Lemma 2

For any e > 0 sufficiently small, indeed satisfying
limc→+∞ U1 (c) − U1 (ra0 )
,
λ
consider the solution (Ve , We ) to the ODE (18) satisfying the initial condition

(Ve ( a0 ) , We ( a0 )) = V ( a0 ), W ( a0 ) − e .
e<

(24)

Given that (18) is regular around a0 , we can apply standard ODE existence results to show
that (Ve , We ) exists and is unique over some interval [ a0 , a0 + ωe ] that depends on e. We
will use (Ve , We ), together with the supporting results, Lemmas 8-11 in Subsection C.2, to
construct the equilibrium described in Lemma 2 as follows:
First, Lemma 8 shows that there exists an ω > 0 and ē > 0 such that for 0 < e < ē such
that (Ve , We ) are defined over [ a0 , a0 + ω ]. Second, Lemma 10 shows that for 0 < e < ē,
the slopes of Ve and We are uniformly bounded over [ a0 , a0 + ω ]. Finally, using these
two results and applying the Dominated Convergence Theorem, we show that (Ve , We )
converges to (V, W ) for a subsequence e N → 0 and (V, W ) is a solution to system (6).
48

We now describe this last step in detail. Lemma 8 shows that there exist ω > 0 and ē >
0 such that: for any e < ē the solution (Ve ( a) , We ( a)) are defined over [ a0 , a0 + ω ] and
that Ve ( a) > V ( a) for all a ∈ ( a0 , a0 + ω ]. Lemma 10 implies that for all a ∈ [ a0 , a0 + ω ],
ρ
0 ≤ We0 ( a) ≤ U00 (ra) + U10 (ra) ,
λ
0 ≤ Ve0 ( a) ≤ U10 (ra) .
Because the derivatives Ve0 and We0 are uniformly bounded, the families of functions {Ve }
and {We } defined over [ a0 , a0 + ω ] are uniformly bounded and equicontinuous. By the
Arzela-Ascoli theorem, there exists a sequence e N such that (VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) converges
uniformly to continuous functions (V, W ). We now show that this candidate (V, W ) is a
solution to (6).
Because (Ve , We ) is a solution to the ODE (18), for any two points a1 < a2 in the interval
[ a0 , a0 + ω ],
ˆa2
VeN ( a1 ) − VeN ( a2 ) = Rl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) da.
a1

Since Rl is continuous
lim Rl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) = Rl ( a, V ( a), W ( a)) .

N →∞

Moreover, by Lemma 10, Rl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) is uniformly bounded over [ a1 , a2 ]: 0 ≤
Rl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) = Ve0N ( a) ≤ U10 (ra) < U10 (ra0 ). Therefore, by the Dominated
Convergence Theorem,
ˆa2
lim

N →∞

ˆa2
Rl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) da =

a1

lim Rl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) da

a1
ˆa2

N →∞

Rl ( a, V ( a), W ( a)) da.

=
a1

Thus,
V ( a1 ) − V ( a2 ) = lim (VeN ( a1 ) − VeN ( a2 ))
N →∞

ˆa2

= lim

N →∞

Rl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) da
a1

ˆa2
Rl ( a, V ( a) , W ( a)) da.

=

(25)

a1

Because Rl is continuous in a, V, W and V, W are continuous in a, the last equality implies
that V 0 ( a) = Rl ( a, V ( a), W ( a)) for all a ∈ [ a0 , a0 + ω ] (with V 0 standing for the right
derivative of V at a = a0 ) .

49

Similarly, for any two points a1 < a2 in the interval [ a0 , a0 + ω ],
ˆa2
WeN ( a1 ) − WeN ( a2 ) = Sl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) da.
a1

By choosing ω sufficiently small, the last property in Lemma 8 applies for each a ∈
( a0 , a0 + ω ]. We show that, ( a, V ( a), W ( a)) ∈ E0 for each a ∈ ( a0 , a0 + ω ] and
lim Sl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) = Sl ( a, V ( a), W ( a)) .

(26)

N →∞

Indeed, from the definition of VeN , WeN , (ρ + λ)VeN ( a) − λWeN ( a) > U1 (ra). Therefore, by
pointwise convergence, (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) ≥ U1 (ra). We show by contradiction that
(ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) > U1 (ra). Assume to the contrary that (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) =
U1 (ra). From the last property of Lemma 8, VeN ( a) ≥ V ( a) + γa for e N < ea . Therefore, by pointwise convergence, V ( a) ≥ V ( a) + γa . This, together with the contradiction
assumption, implies that
ρ+λ
W ( a) < W ( a) −
γa .
λ
In addition, by the continuity of Rl and by pointwise convergence,
 −1
 −1
ĉeN ( a) = U10
( Rl ( a, VeN ( a), WeN ( a))) → U10
( Rl ( a, V ( a), W ( a))) = ra
as N → ∞. Consequently, there exists δ ∈ (0, 1) such that for N sufficiently high,
ρW ( a) −
ρWeN ( a) − U0 (ĉeN ( a))
Sl ( a, VeN ( a), WeN ( a)) =
>
ra − ĉeN ( a)
ρW ( a) −

ρ(ρ+λ)
(1 − δ ) γ a
λ

ρ(ρ+λ)
(1 − δ ) γ a
λ

− U0 (ra)

ra − ĉeN ( a)

− U0 (ra)

= +∞,
ra − ra
as N → ∞, which contradicts the boundedness of Sl ( a, VeN ( a), WeN ( a)) shown in Lemma
10. Therefore, we have shown by contradiction that (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) > U1 (ra). By
the continuity of Sl in E0 , we obtain the limit (26).
ρ
ρ
Since 0 < Sl ( a, VeN ( a) , WeN ( a)) < U00 (ra) + λ U10 (ra) < U00 (ra1 ) + λ U10 (ra1 ), by the
Dominated Convergence Theorem, we can take the limit and conclude that
→

ˆa2
W ( a1 ) − W ( a2 ) = Sl ( a, V ( a) , W ( a)) da.

(27)

a1

In addition, Rl , Sl are continuous over E0 , therefore (25) and (27) imply that (V, W ) is
a solution to ODE (18) over ( a0 , a0 + ω0 ]; this immediately implies that (6) holds for all
a ∈ ( a 0 , a 0 + ω0 ] .
Next we show that (6) holds at a = a0 . We showed that V 0 ( a0 ) = Rl ( a0 , V ( a0 ) , W ( a0 )),
so equation (6a)
 holds at a = a0 . Since (V ( a0 ), W ( a0 )) = lim N →∞ (VeN ( a0 ), WeN ( a0 )) =
V ( a0 ), W ( a0 ) this implies that V 0 ( a0 ) = U10 (ra0 ). Since V 0 ( a0 ) = U10 (ra0 ), this gives
ĉ( a0 ) = ra0 , and so equation (6b) holds.
Having established the existence of (V, W ), we turn to showing Properties 1) and 2).

Property 1: Notice that the right derivative of V at a0 , V 0 ( a0 ) = Rl a0 , V ( a0 ), W ( a0 ) =
50

U10 (ra0 ) > V̄ 0 ( a0 ), by Lemma 6. Together with V ( a0 ) = V ( a0 ), we have V ( a) > V ( a) in
a neighborhood to the right of a0 . Restricting ω so that a0 + ω lies in this neighborhood,
we obtain the first property in Lemma 2.
−1
Property 2: Because ĉ( a) = (U10 ) (V 0 ( a)) and lima↓a0 V 0 ( a) = lima↓a0 Rl ( a, V ( a), W ( a)) =
U10 (ra0 ), lima↓a0 ĉ( a) = ra0 .
By (21) in Lemma 5,
ĉ0 ( a) =

1
(ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a)
.
U100 (ĉ( a))
ra − ĉ( a)

From the derivation (30) in Lemma 10,


ρ
ρ
W 0 ( a) = lim We0 ( a) ≤ lim U0 (ra) + U10 (ra) − Ve0 ( a) ,
e →0
e →0
λ
λ
0
0
and V ( a) = lime→0 Ve ( a). Therefore
ĉ0 ( a) ≥

lime→0 ((2ρ + λ − r )Ve0 ( a) − λU0 (ra) − ρU10 (ra))
1
.
U100 (ĉ( a))
ra − ĉ( a)

Because ĉ( a) → ra0 as a → a0 , lima→ a0 (ra − ĉ( a)) = 0. Moreover,

lim
(2ρ + λ − r )Ve0 ( a) − λU0 (ra) − ρU10 (ra) = (ρ + λ − r ) U10 (ra0 ) − λU00 (ra0 ) > 0,
( a,e)→( a0 ,0)

where the last inequality comes from the fact that


U00 (ra0 )
ρ λ+ρ−r
λ+ρ−r
= β(ra0 ) <
≤
,
0
U1 (ra0 )
r
λ
λ
if r ≥ ρ and

U00 (ra0 )
ρ+λ−r
= β(ra0 ) ≤ 1 <
,
0
U1 (ra0 )
λ
if r < ρ. As a result, lima→a0 ĉ0 ( a) = +∞. We have established the second property in
Lemma 2.

C.2

Supporting Results for Lemma 2

The proof of Lemma 2 given above draws on the following results.
The first lemma below shows that there exists ω > 0 and e such that for each e ∈ (0, e),
the solution (Ve , We ) to ODE (18) are defined over [ a0 , a0 + ω ] and Ve ( a) > V ( a). The
proof of this lemma uses Lemma 9 that follow.
Lemma 8. There exist ω > 0 and ē > 0 such that for every e ∈ (0, ē), (Ve ( a) , We ( a))
constructed in the proof of Lemma 2 is defined on [ a0 , a0 + ω ]. Moreover, Ve ( a) > V ( a) for all
a ∈ ( a0 , a0 + ω ] . Lastly, there exists ω0 < ω such that for each a ∈ ( a0 , a0 + ω0 ] , there exist
ea , γa > 0 such that Ve ( a) > V ( a) + γa for all 0 < e < ea .
Proof. Let ē1 =

1
λ (U1 ( ∞ )

− U1 (ra0 )) > 0. For 0 < e < ē1 , let [ a0 , ãe ) denote the (right)

51

maximal interval of existence for (Ve , We ).37 Lemma 9 shows that if ãe < ∞ then

( ãe , Ve ( ãe ), We ( ãe )) ∈ Es .
In addition, Ve ( ãe ) ≤ V ( ãe ).
Because Rl is continuous,

0
lim Rl ( a0 , Ve ( a0 ), We ( a0 )) = Rl a0 , V ( a0 ), W ( a0 ) = U10 (ra0 ) > V ( a0 ),

e →0

where the last inequality is an application of Lemma 6 at a0 . Therefore, there exists ē2 > 0,
0
such that Ve0 ( a0 ) = Rl ( a0 , Ve ( a0 ), We ( a0 )) > V ( a0 ) for 0 < e < ē2 . In this case, Ve ( a) >
V ( a) in some neighborhood to the right of a0 .
For 0 < e < min (ē1 , ē2 ), let

āe = sup a ∈ ( a0 , ãe ) : Ve ( a0 ) > V̄ ( a0 ) for all a0 ∈ ( a0 , a) .
Because Ve ( a) > V ( a) in some neighborhood to the right of a0 , as shown above, āe > a0 .
We show by contradiction that there exist ω > 0 and 0 < ē < min(ē1 , ē2 ), such that
āe > a0 + ω for all e < ē. Assume that this is not true, then there exists a sequence e N → 0
such that lim N →∞ āeN = a0 .
Because VeN is continuous, VeN ( āeN ) ≥ V ( āeN ) (otherwise, VeN ( a) < V ( a) in the some
neighborhood to the left of āeN , which contradicts the definition of āe ). If VeN ( āeN ) >
V ( āeN ), then āeN < ãeN , because if ãeN < ∞ then VeN ( ãeN ) ≤ V ( ãeN ) as shown in Lemma
9. This also contradicts the definition of āeN , because VeN ( a) is defined and is strictly
greater than V ( a) in a neighborhood of āeN . Therefore VeN ( āeN ) = V ( āeN ).
By the Mean Value Theorem, there exists a∗eN ∈ [ a0 , āeN ] such that

V ( āeN ) − V ( a0 )
VeN ( āeN ) − VeN ( a0 )
= Ve0N a∗eN =
āeN − a0
āeN − a0

(28)

and by the definition of Ve , We :



Ve0N a∗eN = Rl a∗eN , VeN a∗eN , WeN a∗eN .
By the monotonicity of Ve and We shown in Lemma 10,

V ( a0 ) < VeN a∗eN < V ( āeN ) ,
and


WeN ( a0 ) = W ( a0 ) − e N < WeN a∗eN .

Moreover, from the upper bound on We0 shown in Lemma 10 (using VeN ( a) ≥ V ( a) for
a ∈ ( a0 , āeN ) ):




ρ 0
∗
0
WeN aeN ≤WeN ( a0 ) + U0 (ra0 ) + U1 (ra0 ) a∗eN − a0 .
λ
Besides, by the contradiction assumption, lim N →∞ a∗eN = lim N →∞ āeN = a0 . Therefore, by
37 The

definition of the maximal interval of existence is standard in the ODE literature. See, for example,
Hartman (2002).

52

the Squeeze Principle, using the four inequalities above, we obtain

lim VeN a∗eN = V ( a0 )
N →∞

lim WeN a∗eN = W ( a0 ) .
N →∞

Thus, together with the continuity of Rl and (28), we obtain

lim Rl ( a∗e , Ve ( a∗e ) , We ( a∗e )) = Rl a0 , V ( a0 ) , W ( a0 ) = U10 (ra0 )

N →∞

V ( āeN ) − V ( a0 )
0
= V ( a0 ) .
āeN − a0
N →∞

= lim

0

This leads to the desired contradiction because Lemma 6 for a = a0 implies that V ( a0 ) <
U10 (ra0 ).
Finally, we show the last property by contradiction. Assume that it does not hold.
Then there exists a sequence a N → a0 such that for each N, there exists a sequence e N,M →
0 such that VeN,M ( a N ) → V ( a N ). By choosing M sufficiently high, we have 0 < e N,M < N1
and
VeN,M ( a N ) − V ( a N )
1
< .
a N − a0
N
By the Mean Value Theorem, there exists ã N ∈ [ a0 , a N ] such that
VeN,M ( a N ) − V ( a N )
Ve ( a N ) − VeN,M ( a0 ) + V eN,M ( a0 ) − V ( a N )
= N,M
a N − a0
a N − a0
0

= Ve0N,M ( ã N,M ) − V ( ã N,M ) .
Therefore
0

Ve0N,M ( ã N,M ) − V ( ã N,M ) <
However,

1
.
N

(29)


Ve0N,M ( ã N,M ) = Rl ã N,M , VeN,M ( ã N,M ), WeN,M ( ã N,M ) ,

and by Lemma 10, as N, M → ∞ VeN,M ( ã N,M ) → V ( a0 ) and WeN,M ( ã N,M ) → W ( a0 ).
Therefore by the continuity of Rl ,

Ve0N,M ( ã N,M ) → Rl a0 , V ( a0 ), W ( a0 ) = U10 (ra0 ).
Because ã N,M → a0

0

0

V ( ã N,M ) → V ( a0 ).
0

Combining the last two limits with (29), we have U10 (ra0 ) = V ( a0 ), which contradicts
0
condition (22) for a = a0 that U10 (ra0 ) > V ( a0 ). Therefore by contradiction, the last
property holds.
Lemma 9. Consider the (right) maximal interval of existence, [ a0 , ã) for the solution (Ve , We )
to the ODE (18) with the initial condition (24) and 0 ≤ e < λ1 (U1 (∞) − U1 (ra0 )). If ã < ∞,
then lima↑ã Ve ( a) = V ( ã) and lima↑ã We ( a) = We ( ã) and ( ã, Ve ( ã), We ( ã)) ∈ Es . In addition,
Ve (e
a ) ≤ V (e
a ).
Proof. By Lemma 10, Ve0 ( a), We0 ( a) > 0. Therefore, the limits lima↑ã Ve ( a) = Ve ( ã) and
53

lima↑ã We ( a) = We ( ã) exist. In addition, since Ve0 ( a) = U10 (ĉe ( a)) < U10 (ra), Ve ( ã) <
´ ã
(ρ+λ)Ve ( ã)−U1 (r ã)
Ve ( a0 ) + a0 U10 (ra)da < ∞ and We ( ã) ≤
< ∞. By Hartman (2002, Theλ
orem 3.1), ( ã,Ve ( ã), We ( ã)) must lie in the boundary of E0 , i.e. Case 1: (ρ + λ) Ve (e
a) −
λWe (e
a) = U1 (∞) or Case 2: (ρ + λ) Ve (e
a) − λWe (e
a) = U1 (r ã). We first rule out Case 1
by showing that (ρ + λ) Ve (e
a) − λWe (e
a) < U1 (∞).
If U1 (∞) = ∞, this is obvious. Now if U1 (∞) < ∞. Let a(t) denote the solution to the
−1
da(t)
ODE, a(0) = ã and dt = ra(t) − ĉe ( a(t)) where ĉe ( a) = (U10 ) ( Rl ( a, Ve ( a), We ( a)) >
ra. Consider the derivative:


d e−(ρ+λ)t Ve ( a(t))

=e−(ρ+λ)t −(ρ + λ)Ve ( a(t)) + Ve0 ( a(t))(ra(t) − ĉe ( a(t)))
dt
=e−(ρ+λ)t (U1 (ĉe ( a(t))) + λWe ( a(t))) ,
where the second equality comes from the fact that Ve is the solution of ODE (18). Let T
denote the time at which a(t) reaches a0 (T can be +∞), then
ˆ T
Ve ( ã) =
e−(ρ+λ)t (U1 (ĉe ( a(t))) + λWe ( a(t)))dt + e−(ρ+λ)T V ( a0 ).
0

Notice that, by Lemma 10, We ( a) is strictly increasing in a and at is strictly decreasing in
t because ĉe ( a(t)) > ra(t). Therefore We ( a(t)) < We ( a(0)) = We ( ã). This implies
ˆ T
Ve ( ã) =<
e−(ρ+λ)t (U1 (∞) + λWe ( ã))dt + e−(ρ+λ)T V ( a0 )
0

= (1 − e−(ρ+λ)T )

1
λ
U1 (∞) +
(1 − e−(ρ+λ)T )We ( ã) + e−(ρ+λ)T V ( a0 ).
ρ+λ
ρ+λ

By the definition of V ( a),
1
λ
1
λ
U1 (ra0 ) +
W ( a0 ) =
U1 (ra0 ) +
(We ( a0 ) + e)
ρ+λ
ρ+λ
ρ+λ
ρ+λ
1
λ
<
U1 (∞) +
We ( a0 ),
ρ+λ
ρ+λ

V ( a0 ) =

since e < λ1 (U1 (∞) − U1 (ra0 )). Thus
1
λ
U1 (∞) +
(1 − e−(ρ+λ)T )We ( ã) + e−(ρ+λ)T V ( a0 )
ρ+λ
ρ+λ
1
λ
< (1 − e−(ρ+λ)T )
U1 (∞) +
(1 − e−(ρ+λ)T )We ( ã)
ρ+λ
ρ+λ


1
λ
1
λ
−(ρ+λ) T
U1 (∞) +
We ( ã) =
U1 (∞) +
We ( ã).
+e
ρ+λ
ρ+λ
ρ+λ
ρ+λ

Ve ( ã) < (1 − e−(ρ+λ)T )

Therefore (ρ + λ)Ve ( ã) < U1 (∞) + λWe ( ã) which is equivalent to the desired inequality.
As we have ruled out Case 1, we must be in Case 2, i.e. ( ã, V ( ã), W ( ã)) ∈ Es .
Next, we show by contradiction that Ve (e
a ) ≤ V (e
a). Assume to the contrary that
Ve (e
a ) > V (e
a) . Then We (e
a ) > W (e
a) because (ρ + λ) V (e
a) − λW (e
a) = U1 (r ã).

54

Since Rl is continuous over Ē0 , lima↑ã Ve0 ( a) = U10 (r ã) and lima↑ã ĉe ( a) = r ã. Therefore
lim We0 ( a) = lim
a↑ ã

a↑ ã

U (r ã) − ρWe ( ã)
U0 (ĉe ( a)) − ρWe ( a)
= 0
= −∞,
ĉe ( a) − ra
r ã − r ã

which contradicts the property that We0 > 0 established in Lemma 10. So by contradiction,
We ( ã) ≤ W ( ã), and Ve ( ã) ≤ V ( ã).
The following lemma establishes the bounds on the derivative of Ve and We that are
important to apply the Dominated Convergence Theorem in Lemma 2. To prove this
result, we use Lemma 11.
Lemma 10. Consider the solution (Ve , We ) to ODE (18) with the initial condition (24) defined
over some interval [ a0 , ā]. We have 0 < Ve0 ( a) ≤ U10 (ra) and 0 < We0 ( a) for all a ∈ [ a0 , ā].
ρ
Moreover, if Ve ( a) ≥ V ( a), We0 ( a) < U00 (ra) + λ U10 (ra) .
Proof. Since cbe ( a) > ra and Ve0 ( a) = U10 (cbe ( a)), we have 0 < Ve0 ( a) ≤ U10 (ra) due to the
concavity of U1 . If r ≥ ρ, from Lemma 11, We ( a) < W ( a). Therefore,
We0 ( a) =

U (ra) − ρW ( a)
U0 (cbe ( a)) − ρWe ( a)
> 0
= 0.
cbe ( a) − ra
cbe ( a) − ra

If r < ρ, Lemma 11 immediately implies that We0 ( a) > 0.
To show the upper bound on We0 ( a) when Ve ( a) ≥ V ( a), we use the facts that

(ρ + λ) Ve ( a) − λWe ( a) = U1 (cbe ( a)) + Ve0 ( a) (ra − cbe ( a))
and

(ρ + λ) V ( a) − λW ( a) = U1 (ra) .
By subtracting the two equalities side by side and rearranging,


λ W ( a) − We ( a) = − (ρ + λ) Ve ( a) − V ( a)
+ U1 (cbe ( a)) − U1 (ra) + Ve0 ( a) (ra − cbe ( a))
≤ U1 (cbe ( a)) − U1 (ra) + Ve0 ( a) (ra − cbe ( a)) .

where the last inequality comes from Ve ( a) ≥ V ( a). It follows that
We0 ( a)

=
≤
=
<


U0 (cbe ( a)) − U0 (ra) + ρ W ( a) − We ( a)
U0 (cbe ( a)) − ρWe ( a)
=
cbe ( a) − ra
cbe ( a) − ra
ρ
U0 (cbe ( a)) − U0 (ra) + λ (U1 (cbe ( a)) − U1 (ra) + Ve0 ( a) (ra − cbe ( a)))
cbe ( a) − ra
ρ
U0 (cbe ( a)) − U0 (ra) + λ (U1 (cbe ( a)) − U1 (ra)) ρ 0
− Ve ( a)
cbe ( a) − ra
λ
U0 (cbe ( a)) − U0 (ra)
ρ U1 (cbe ( a)) − U1 (ra)
ρ
+
< U00 (ra) + U10 (ra) ,
cbe ( a) − ra
λ
cbe ( a) − ra
λ

(30)

where the last inequality comes from the concavity of U1 and U0 and cbe ( a) > ra.
Lemma 11. Consider the solution (Ve , We ) to ODE (18) with the initial condition (24) defined
over some interval [ a0 , ā]. We have
55

1) If r ≥ ρ, We ( a) < W ( a) ∀ a > a0 .
2) If r < ρ, We ( a) < U0 (ĉe ( a)) ∀ a > a0 .
Proof. 1) r ≥ ρ: We use Lemma 7 to show property 1). We just need to verify conditions
1) and 2) in Lemma 7. First by definition, We ( a0 ) < W ( a0 ), so condition 1) Lemma 7 is
satisfied. For condition 2) in Lemma 7, we show that if We ( a) = W ( a), for some ∀ a > a0
0
then We0 ( a) < W ( a). Indeed,
U (cbe ( a)) − ρW ( a)
U0 (cbe ( a)) − ρWe ( a)
= 0
cbe ( a) − ra
cbe ( a) − ra
U (cbe ( a)) − U0 (ra)
= 0
< U00 (ra) ,
cbe ( a) − ra

We0 ( a) =

where the last inequality comes from the fact that U0 is strictly concave and cbe ( a) > ra.
On the other hand, we also have
r
0
W ( a) = U00 (ra) ≥ U00 (ra),
ρ
0

because r ≥ ρ. Therefore, W ( a) > We0 ( a).
2) r < ρ: We also use Lemma 7 to show property 2). By the definition of Ve , We :
We ( a0 ) = U0 (ra0 ) − e < U0 (ra0 ) < U0 (ĉe ( a0 )).
So condition 1) in Lemma 7 is satisfied. Now we show that condition 2) in Lemma 7 is also
d
satisfied, i.e. if at some a > a0 , We ( a) = U0 (ĉe ( a)), we show that We0 ( a) < da
(U00 (ĉe ( a))).
Indeed,
U0 (ĉe ( a)) − ρWe ( a)
= 0.
We0 ( a) =
ĉe ( a) − ra
Moreover,
d
(U0 (ĉe ( a))) = U00 (ĉe ( a))ĉ0e ( a).
da
By (21), in addition to We0 ( a) = 0,
ĉ0e ( a)

Therefore We0 ( a) = 0 <

D

d
da

1
(ρ + λ − r ) Ve0 ( a) − λWe0 ( a)
= 00
U1 (ĉe ( a))
ra − ĉe ( a)
(ρ + λ − r ) U10 (ĉe ( a))
1
=
> 0.
−U100 (ĉe ( a))
ĉe ( a) − ra

(U00 (ĉe ( a))).

Proof of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2

Proof of Theorem 1. Once we verify the differential system (6) all the equilibrium condi0
tions in Subsection 3.1 are met. By Lemma 6, we have V ( a) = U10 (ra), therefore ĉ( a) = ra
and equations (6) are satisfied by the definitions of V and W.

56

Proof of Theorem 2. Assume σ 6= 1; the case with σ = 1 is similar. To proceed, we guess
V ( a) = v̄

a 1− σ
1−σ

W ( a) = w̄

a 1− σ
,
1−σ

and find v̄, w̄ to verify that V, W satisfy (6).38 To show the uniqueness of the linear equilibrium, notice that in any linear equilibrium, V, W must have the functional form above.
Given the conjectured functional form, the first-order condition (6a) implies
ĉ ( a) = ψa,
1

where ψ = v̄− σ . Plugging this back into (6a) gives




 1
 1 1− σ

1
a 1− σ
a 1− σ
−σ − σ
−σ − σ
−σ
=
v̄a
ra − v̄a
+ λw̄
+ v̄a
(ρ + λ) v̄
1−σ
1−σ
1−σ

− 1−σ σ
σ
a 1− σ
=
v̄a−σ
+ v̄a−σ ra + λw̄
.
1−σ
1−σ
Canceling the

a1− σ
1− σ

terms and rearranging we obtain
1

(λ + ∆) v̄ = σv̄1− σ + λw̄,

(31)

where ∆ is defined by

∆ ≡ ρ − r (1 − σ) > 0,
(32)
where the inequality comes from the restriction that value functions V, W are finite.
From the second equation in system (6) we have




 1 1− σ

 1
a 1− σ
1
−σ − σ
−σ
−σ − σ
ρw̄
= β̄
v̄a
+ w̄a
ra − v̄a
.
1−σ
1−σ

Canceling the

a1− σ
1− σ

terms gives
1

w̄ =

β̄v̄1− σ
1

∆ + (1 − σ) v̄− σ

.

(33)

Combining equations (31) and (33), we obtain
λ + ∆ = σ v̄

− σ1

1

+ λ β̄

β̄v̄− σ
1

∆ + (1 − σ) v̄− σ

,

1

a single equation in v̄. Define ψ ≡ v̄− σ . We then have a quadratic equation in ψ:
P (ψ) ≡ Q2 ψ2 + Q1 ψ + Q0 = 0,
38 If

σ=1
1
V ( a) = Av +
ρ+λ
W ( a) = Aw +



β̄
log a.
ρ

57

β̄
1+λ
ρ



log a

(34)

with
Q2 ≡ (1 − σ ) σ

Q1 ≡ σ + β̄ − 1 λ + ∆ (2σ − 1)
Q0 ≡ − (λ + ∆) ∆.
If σ < 1 then Q2 > 0 and Q0 < 0. This implies that there exists a unique strictly
positive ψ that is the solution to (34). The implied consumption rule yields finite utility.
If σ > 1 we have that Q2 < 0. This implies that



 ∆
∆
σ
P
=−
∆2 + σ + β̄ − 1 λ + ∆ (2σ − 1)
− (λ + ∆) ∆
σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
β̄
∆
=
λ
> 0.
σ−1 σ−1
∆
Therefore, there exists two solutions 0 < ψ1 < σ−
1 < ψ2 such that P ( ψ ) = 0. To know
which root corresponds to a solution to (6), we observe that ct = ψat so ȧt = (r − ψ) at
´
´∞
or at = e(r−ψ)t a0 . Thus V ∝ e−ρt e(1−σ)(r−ψ)t dt = 0 e(−∆+ψ(σ−1))t dt. For V to finite, we
∆
require ψ < σ−
1 . So only the smaller root to (34), ψ1 , yields finite value functions, and
corresponds to a solution to (6).
Lastly, the derivations above directly imply the uniqueness of the linear equilibrium.
Now, we turn to the second part of the theorem. Given that ĉ( a) = ψa, ĉ( a) < ra if and
only if ψ < r. For σ < 1 we have r > 0 so that 0 < ψ < r if and only if P(r ) > P(ψ) = 0.
ρ −r (1− σ )
∆
∆
For σ > 1, because ρ > 0, r < σ−1 = σ−
1 . Given that P ( σ −1 ) > 0 and P ( ψ1 ) = 0,
r > ψ if and only if P(r ) > P(ψ) = 0. Thus, we need to establish that P (r ) > 0. This is
equivalent to


r−ρ
ρ
1−
= β̂.
β>
r
λ

Similarly, ĉ( a) > ra, i.e. ψ > r if and only if β̄ < β̂.

E
E.1

Proofs for Dissaving Equilibria
Proof of Theorem 3

Proof of Theorem 3 (Existence). We prove the existence of an equilibrium by construction.
Lemma 2 shows that starting from a0 = a, ODE (18) with the boundary condition

(V ( a0 ), W ( a0 )) = (V ( a0 ), W ( a0 ))
admits a solution defined over [ a, a + ω ) for some ω > 0. Let (V0 , W0 ) denote this solution. In addition, let [ a, a∗ ) be the right maximal interval of existence for this solution. It is
immediate that a∗ ≥ a + ω. If a∗ = ∞, we have found a (continuous) Markov equilibrium,
with (V, W ) = (V0 , W0 ).
If a∗ < ∞ , following the steps in the proof of Lemma 9, we can show that
lim∗ V0 ( a) ≤ V ( a∗ ).
a↑ a

58

Moreover, as shown in Lemma 2, V0 ( a) > V̄ ( a) in a neighborhood to the right of a. Thus,
by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists a1 ∈ ( a, a∗ ] such that V0 ( a1 ) = V ( a1 ).
Starting from a1 , we apply Lemma 2 again with a1 standing for a0 and construct the a
solution (V1 , W1 ) to ODE (18) with the boundary condition

(V1 ( a1 ), W1 ( a1 )) = (V ( a1 ), W ( a1 )).
Following this procedure, we obtain a sequence a0 = a < a1 < ... with limn→∞ an = +∞
and a sequence of value functions (Vn , Wn ) defined over [ an , an+1 ] with the boundary
condition
(Vn ( an ), Wn ( an )) = (V ( an ), W ( an )).
The divergence of { an } is shown in Lemma 12 below.
We define the value and consumption functions (V, W, ĉ) over the whole interval
[ a, ∞) as
(V ( a), W ( a), ĉ) = (Vn ( a), Wn ( a), ĉn ( a)) for a ∈ [ an , an+1 ) .
We verify that this construction satisfies all the conditions in Subsection 3.1 for an
equilibrium. Conditions (a)-(e) are satisfied by the construction of (V, W ). Condition
(f) on the existence of at is satisfied because by construction ĉ( a) is differentiable and
ĉ( a) > ra outside steady-states { an }. Indeed, if a(0) = an then a(t) ≡ an for all t ≥ 0
satisfies ODE (7) for all t ≥ 0. If a(0) ∈ ( an , an+1 ), the solution a(t) to ODE (7) with the
initial condition a(t) = a(0) exists and is unique over a small interval [0, e] because ĉ( a) is
continuously differentiable over ( an , an+1 ). In addition, because ĉ( a) > ra, a(t) is strictly
decreasing in t. Let [0, T ) denote the right maximal interval of existence for a(t) to ODE
(7). If T = ∞, we obtain the existence of a(t) to ODE (7) over the whole time interval
[0, ∞). If T < ∞ (Indeed, we can show that this is always the case in the equilibrium that
we just constructed), by Hartman (2002, Theorem 3.1), a( T ) = an . Defining a(t) = an for
all t ≥ T, we also obtain the existence of a(t) to ODE (7) over the whole time interval
[0, ∞). Finally, the limits limt→∞ e−(ρ+λ)t V ( at ) and limt→t e−ρt W ( at ) are both equal to 0
because ȧt ≤ 0, V and W are increasing over [ an , an+1 ) and at ≥ an .
Proof of Theorem 3 (Characterization). Under Assumption 2, we show that there cannot be
strict saving at any asset level.
We use Lemma 14 to show this result. In order to apply the lemma, we need to rule
out the possibility that for some ã,
 ĉ( a) < ra for all a ≥ ã. Assume by contradiction that
c̄
this is the case. Let ā = max ã, ν . Then for all a ≥ ā, c̄ < ĉ( a) < ra. Therefore, the equilibrium consumption always stay in the homogenous portion of the utility function above
ā. Therefore, (V ( a), W ( a), ĉ( a)) is an equilibrium for the homogenous system (11) over
[ ā, ∞). However, Theorem 5 implies that ĉ( a) ≥ ra for all a ≥ ā, which is a contradiction.
Lemma 14 then implies that there cannot be strict saving at any asset level.
Now, under Assumption 3, we show that there is at most one continuous equilibrium with strict dissavings. Indeed, Lemma 21 for the homogenous system (12) (with
σ = σ̃) shows that there exists a unique solution to (6) with dissavings determined
over a neighborhood [ a, a + e] to the right of a. Outside this neighborhood the solution to to (6) with dissavings is uniquely determined since the ODE (18) is regular over
E = {(V, W, a) : (ρ + λ) V − λW − U1 (ra) > 0}.
59

E.2

Supporting Results for the Proof of Theorem 3

Lemma 12. If the sequence { an } constructed in Theorem 3 has an infinite number of elements
then
lim an = +∞.
n→∞

Proof. The result is shown by contradiction. Assume that the sequence is infinite and
is bounded above. By construction { an }∞
=0 is strictly increasing, thus the sequence con∞
verges to some a . We assume by contradiction that a∞ is finite. By construction, Vn ( an ) =
V ( an ), W ( an ) = W ( an ) and Vn ( an+1 ) = V ( an+1 ) and Vn ( a) > V̄ ( a) for a ∈ ( an , an+1 ).
We can then apply Lemma 10 to show that 0 ≤ Vn0 ( a) ≤ U10 (ra) and 0 ≤ Wn0 ( a) ≤
ρ
U00 (ra) + λ U10 (ra). By the Mean Value Theorem, there exists a∗n ∈ [ an , an+1 ] such that
Vn0 ( a∗n ) =

Vn ( an+1 ) − Vn ( an )
V ( a n +1 ) − V ( a n )
=
.
a n +1 − a n
a n +1 − a n

Since { an } converges to a∞ ,

0

lim Vn0 ( a∗n ) = V ( a∞ ) .

n→∞
0
∗
∗
On the other hand Vn ( an ) = Rl ( a∗n , Vn ( a∗n ) , Wn ( a∗n )). Since
 V ( an ) ≤ Vn ( an ) ≤
ρ 0
∗
∗
0
and W ( an ) ≤ Wn ( an ) ≤ W ( an ) + U0 (ran ) + λ U1 (ran ) ( an+1 − an ) and Rl is

ous, by the Squeeze Principle,

(35)
V ( a n +1 )
continu-

lim Vn0 ( a∗n ) = lim Rl ( a∗n , Vn ( a∗n ) , Wn ( a∗n ))
i→∞

= lim Rl a∞ , V ( a∞ ) , W ( a∞ )

n→∞

=

i→∞
U10 (ra∞ ) .

(36)

The desired contradiction follows from the fact that (35) and (36) cannot happen at the
0
same time given that V ( a∞ ) < U10 (ra∞ ) by condition (22) at a = a∞ .
Lemma 13. If at a = ã, ĉ( a) ≤ ra in some neighborhood to the left of ã and ĉ( ã) ≥ r ã then
ĉ( ã) = r ã and V ( ã) ≤ V̄ ( ã).
Similarly, if ĉ( a) ≥ ra in some neighborhood to the right of ã and ĉ( ã) ≤ r ã then ĉ( ã) = r ã
and V ( ã) ≤ V̄ ( ã).
Proof. Case 1: ĉ( a) ≤ ra in some neighborhood to the left of ã and ĉ( ã) ≥ r ã.
By the definition of an equilibrium, there exists a solution { ât } to the ODE: ddtât =
r ât − ĉ( ât ) with the initial condition â0 = ã. Since ĉ( a) ≤ ra in the left neighborhood of ã,
ã
we have ât ≥ ã for all t ≥ 0. Therefore r ã − ĉ( ã) = limt→0 at −
t ≥ 0. So ĉ ( ã ) = r ã.
Now we show that V ( ã) ≤ V̄ ( ã). Indeed, if there exists a sequence { an } such that
an > ã and an ↓ ã and ĉ( an ) > ran , then ât ≤ an for all t, n so ât = ã for all t ≥ 0. Therefore,
by the equilibrium definition in Subsection 3.1, W ( ã) = W̄ ( ã) and hence, V ( ã) = V̄ ( ã),
which is ≤ V̄ ( ã) as desired.
Otherwise, ĉ( a) ≤ ra in some neighborhood to the right of ã, therefore ât is nondecreasing.
In this case, if ât = ã for all t ≥ 0, then V ( ã) = V̄ ( ã).
60

Otherwise, there exists T such that â T > ã. Therefore, (V, W, ĉ) are continuous over
[ ã, â T ]. Assume by contradiction that V ( ã) > V̄ ( ã), then W ( ã) > W̄ ( ã). As a ↓ ã, we have
ρW ( a)−U 0 (ĉ( a))
→ +∞ since ĉ( a) − ra → 0 when a ↓ ã.
W 0 ( a) =
ra−ĉ( a)
Now
d
((ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra))
da
= (ρ + λ)V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) − rU10 (ra)

= (ρ + λ)U10 (ĉ( a)) − λW 0 ( a) − rU10 (ra)
As a → ã, ĉ( a) → r ã, therefore at a = ã
d
((ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra)) = −∞,
da
which contradicts the property that (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra) ≥ 0 for a ≥ ã and
(ρ + λ)V ( ã) − λW ( ã) − U1 (r ã) = 0.
Case 2: ĉ( a) ≥ ra in some neighborhood to the right of ã and ĉ( ã) ≤ r ã. Similar to the
proof of Case 1, we have ĉ( ã) = r ã and V ( ã) ≤ V̄ ( ã).
Lemma 14. Assume that β(c) ≤ β̂ for all c. There cannot be strict saving at any asset level if for
any a, there exists a0 > a such that ĉ( a0 ) ≥ ra0 .
Proof. Suppose by contradiction that, at a = ă, ĉ( ă) < r ă. Let ã = sup{ a > ă : ĉ(b) <
rb for b ∈ [ ă, a]}. Let { at }∞
t=0 denote the solution of the ODE ȧt = rat − ĉ ( at ) with the
initial condition a0 = ă (at exists by the equilibrium definition in Subsection 3.1). Since
da(0)
= r ă − ĉ( ă) > 0, at > ă for t > 0. Also by the equilibrium definition (W, ĉ) is
dt
continuous on path at , thus in a neighborhood to the right of ă. Therefore, ĉ( a) > ra in
the neighborhood, which implies ã > ă. Because there exists a0 > ă such that ĉ( a0 ) ≥ ra0 ,
ã < ∞.
Now, going back to the main proof. At ã, ĉ( ã) ≥ r ã, otherwise the solution to the
ODE ȧt = rat − ĉ( at ) with the initial condition a0 = ã admits a solution that extends to
a neighborhood the right of ã, and by continuity, in this neighborhood ĉ( a) < ra which
contradicts the definition of ã. Consequently, by Lemma 13, we must have ĉ( ã) = r ã.
There are two cases:
Case 1: ĉ( an ) > ran for some sequence an ↓ ã in a neighborhood to the right of ã then
V ( ã) = V̄ ( ã), W ( ã) = W̄ ( ã). Case 2: ĉ( a) ≤ ra in a neighborhood to the right of ã, then
by Lemma 13, V ( ã) ≤ V̄ ( ã). In either case, we have V ( ã) ≤ V̄ ( ã).
For a < ã,
V 0 ( a) = U10 (ĉ( a)) ≥ U10 (ra) ≥ V̄ 0 ( a),
since β < β̂. Therefore, V ( a) ≤ V̄ ( a) for all a < ã. Consequently W ( a) < W̄ ( a) for a < ã,
since ĉ( a) < ra. Therefore, for a < ã,
W 0 ( a) =

ρW ( a) − U0 (ĉ( a))
U (ra) − U0 (ĉ( a))
< 0
< U00 (ra).
ra − ĉ( a)
ra − ĉ( a)

61

Now
d
((ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra))
da
= (ρ + λ)V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) − rU10 (ra)

> (ρ + λ)U10 (ĉ( a)) − λU00 (ra) − rU10 (ra)
Now as a → ã, ĉ( a) → r ã, therefore at a = ã
d
((ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra)) ≥ (ρ + λ − r )U10 (ra) − λU00 (ra),
da
If r > ρ, since β ≤ β̂ =

ρ ρ + λ −r
r
λ

<

ρ + λ −r
λ ,

we have

(ρ + λ − r )U10 (r ã) − λU00 (r ã) > 0.
If r ≤ ρ,

(ρ + λ − r )U10 (r ã) − λU00 (r ã) ≥ λ(U10 (r ã) − U00 (r ã)) > 0.
Either way, we have
d
((ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra))
da

a= ã

> 0.

This is a contradiction since (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra) > 0 for a > ã and (ρ +
λ)V ( ã) − λW ( ã) − U1 (r ã) = 0.

F

Proofs for Saving Equilibria

F.1

Proof of Theorem 4

Proof of Theorem 4 (Existence). We prove the existence of equilibrium by construction.
We define an wealth level au , and the value functions (Vu , Wu ) over [ au , ∞) satisfying the differential
 as following. In Theorem 2, we show that for a ≥ au ,
 equations (6)
1− σ

1− σ

(Vu ( a), Wu ( a)) = v̄ a1−σ , w̄ a1−σ and ĉu ( a) = ψa satisfy the differential equations (6) over

[ au , ∞) where au = ψc̄ . It is immediate that ĉ0u ( a) = ψ > 0. Moreover, because β̄ > β̂,
ψ < r, so ĉu ( a) < ra.
Having determined the value and policy functions at and beyond au , we construct the
value and policy functions below au . Noticing that the initial values ( au , Vu ( au ), Wu ( au )) ∈
E, a solution (Vd , Wd ) to the ODE (19) with the initial condition
(Vd ( au ), Wd ( au )) = (Vu ( au ), Wu ( au ))
exists and is unique locally over an interval ( au − e, au + e).39 Let ( â, au + e) denote the
(left) maximal interval of existence for this solution. We will show that â < rc̄ .
If â = 0, this is immediate. If â > 0, by Lemma 15, Vd0 ( a), Wd0 ( a) > 0 for all a > â.
So the limits lima↓â Vd ( a) = Vd ( â) and lima↓ â Wd ( a) = Wd ( â) exist.40 By Hartman (2002,
39 Because

40 We

of the uniqueness of the solution, (Vd ( a), Wd ( a)) = (Vu ( a), Wu ( a)) for all a ∈ [ au , au + e).
also show that lima↓ â Wd ( a) > −∞ and lima↓ â Vd ( a) > −∞. This is immediate if U1 is bounded

62

Theorem 3.1), ( â, Vd ( â), Wd ( â)) ∈ Es . Therefore ĉd ( â) = r â. As shown in Lemma 15,
Vd00 ( a) < 0. This implies ĉ0d ( a) =

Vd00 ( a)
U100 (ĉd ( a))

> 0. Thus,

r â = ĉd ( â) < ĉd ( au ) = c̄.
So â < rc̄ .
Given the value and policy functions (Vu , Wu , ĉu ) and (Vd , Wd , ĉd ), for a > â, we define
the value and policy functions (V, W, ĉ) over [ a, ∞) as follows
(
(Vd , Wd , ĉd ) if a ≤ a < au
(V, W, ĉ) =
(Vu , Wu , ĉu ) if a ≥ au .
As in the proof of Theorem 3, we can verify that this construction satisfies all the conditions in Subsection 3.1 for an equilibrium. In addition, ĉ( a) < ra and ĉ0 ( a) > 0.
If â > 0, Lemma 30 below shows that (V ( â), W ( â)) = (V̄ ( â), W̄ ( â)) and ĉ( â) = r â.
In addition, when β(c) is increasing, Lemma 31 shows that V ( a) > V̄ ( a) for all a > â.
Therefore, V 0 ( â) = U10 (r â) ≥ V̄ 0 ( â). By Lemma 6, β(r â) ≤ β̂.
Proof of Theorem 4 (Uniqueness). As shown in Lemma 18, ĉ( a) ≤ ra for all a ≥ a. Theorem
6 shows that the linear equilibrium is the unique equilibrium above νc̄ . Let a∗ = inf{ a :
ĉ(b) < rb ∀ b ≥ a}. As we show in the existence proof, V ( a) > V̄ ( a) for all a ≥ a∗ . If
a∗ > a, then there exists a sequence { an } converges to a∗ to the left such that ĉ( an ) =
ran . Therefore, by Lemma 13, V ( an ) ≤ V̄ ( an ). So V ( a∗ ) = lim V ( an ) ≤ V̄ ( a∗ ), which
contradicts the earlier result that V ( a∗ ) > V̄ ( a∗ ). Therefore ĉ( a) < ra for all a ≥ a, the
solution then is uniquely determined as a global solution to the ODE (19) with the initial
condition at au given by the linear solution.

F.2

Supporting Results for Proof of Theorem 4

Lemma 15. Assume ρ < r. Consider a solution (V, W ) to ODE (19) defined over ( â, au ] with
the initial condition (V ( au ), W ( au ) = (Vu ( au ), Wu ( au )) with au , Vu , Wu defined in Subsection
F.1. Then for all a < au
1) (ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) < 0 and W 0 ( a) > 0
2) V 00 ( a) < 0
3) V 0 ( a) > W 0 ( a).
from below, and consequently U0 is bounded from below by some u, because β(c) ≤ 1. Because Wd0 ( a) > 0
and ĉd ( a) < ra for a > â, (6b) implies that Wd ( a) > 1ρ u for a > â. If U1 is unbounded from below, we make
the additional technical assumption that σ = infc σ(U1 , c) > 1 − r . We have
ρ

(ρ + λ − r )Vd0 ( a) − λWd0 ( a)
(ρ − r )Vd0 ( a)
<
U100 (ĉd ( a))(ra − ĉd ( a))
U100 (ĉd ( a))(ra − ĉd ( a))
0
(ρ − r )U1 (ĉd ( a))
r − ρ ĉd ( a)
= 00
<
,
U1 (ĉd ( a))(ra − ĉd ( a))
σ ra − ĉd ( a)

ĉ0d ( a) =

because Wd0 ( a) < Vd0 ( a) as shown in Lemma 15. Therefore ĉd ( a) > c∗ ( a) > 0 where c∗ ( a) is the solution to
the ODE c∗0 ( a) =

r −ρ c∗ ( a)
σ ra−c∗ ( a)

and c∗ ( au ) = ĉd ( au ) < rau (c∗ ( a) can be solved in closed form). Therefore,

lima↓ â Wd ( a) > 1ρ U0 (c∗ ( â)) > −∞ for all a ≥ â. Finally, lima↓ â Vd ( a) >

63

λ U ( c∗ ( â ))+U ( â )
1
ρ 0

ρ+λ

> −∞.

Proof. We prove this lemma in two steps. Step 1: If properties 1),2) and 3) hold in a
neighborhood to the left of au then they hold for all a < â. Step 2: Verify that properties
1),2) and 3) hold in a neighborhood to the left of au separately under Assumption 2 with
β̄ = 1 or β̄ < 1.
Step 1: Assume that properties 1),2) and 3) hold in a neighborhood to the left of au , We
show that 1),2), and 3) hold for all a < au .
We prove 1) separately for two cases: Case 1: ρ + λ − r > 0 and Case 2: ρ + λ − r ≤ 0.
Case 1: By construction, V 0 ( a) = U10 (ĉ( a)) > 0. Therefore if (ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( a) −
λW 0 ( a) < 0, W 0 ( a) > 0. We just need to show the first inequality.
We prove this inequality using Lemma 7 (Variation 1). Condition 1) of Lemma 7 (at
au ) is satisfied by assumption. We just need to verify Condition 2) of Lemma 7, i.e. if there
exists ă < au such that
(37)
(ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( ă) − λW 0 ( ă) = 0.
then
(ρ + λ − r ) V 00 ( ă) > λW 00 ( ă) .
By Lemma 5,
(38)
(ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) = V 00 ( a) (ra − cb ( a)) .
00
At a = ă, because of (37), and r ă > ĉ( ă), V ( ă) = 0.
Differentiating the second equation, (6b), in system (6), and using (21), we have
ρW 0 ( a) =

U00 (cb ( a)) 00
V ( a)
U100 (cb ( a))

(39)


1
00
+ W ( a) (ra − cb ( a)) + W ( a) r − 00
V ( a) .
U1 (cb ( a))
00

0



At a = ă, using the previous result that V 00 ( ă) = 0, and rearranging, we arrive at
W 00 ( ă) (r ă − cb ( ă)) =(ρ − r )W 0 ( ă) .
(ρ+λ−r )V 0 ( ă)

> 0 and ρ − r < 0, the right hand side is strictly negative.
Because, W 0 ( ă) =
λ
Moreover ra − ĉ( a) > 0, therefore W 00 ( ă) < 0. Thus,
W 00 ( ă) < 0 = V 00 ( ă),
i.e. we have verified the second condition in Lemma 7. Given that the two conditions of
Lemma 7 are satisfied, this lemma implies the first property.
Case 2: Because ρ + λ ≤ r and V 0 ( a) > 0, (ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) < 0 if W 0 ( a) > 0.
Therefore we just need to show the last inequality. Again we prove this inequality using
Lemma 7 (Variation 1). Condition 1) of Lemma 7 (at au ) is shown in the proof of Theorem
4.We now verify Condition 2). If there exists ă < au such that W 0 ( ă) = 0 we show that
W 00 ( ă) < 0. From equation (38) at ă, (ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( ă) = V 00 ( â) (r ă − cb ( ă)). This implies
V 00 ( ă) < 0. From (39), since W 0 ( ă) = 0,
0=

U00 (cb ( ă)) 00
V ( ă) + W 00 ( ă) (r ă − cb ( ă)) .
U100 (cb ( ă))

Therefore W 00 ( ă) < 0. Given that the two conditions of Lemma 7 are satisfied, this lemma
implies W 0 ( a) > 0 for all a.
64

The second property immediately follows using (38) and ra − ĉ( a) > 0.
We also prove the third property similarly by using Lemma 7. Condition 1) in Lemma
7 is satisfied. We now verify that condition 2) is also satisfied. Indeed, if there exists
ă < au such that W 0 ( ă) = V 0 ( ă) . By (38), at a = ă,
V 00 ( ă) =

(ρ − r )V 0 ( ă)
< 0.
r ă − ĉ( ă)

Again by equation (39),

1
V 00 ( ă)
(r ă − cb ( ă)) W 00 ( ă) = (ρ − r ) W 0 ( ă) − U00 (cb ( ă)) − W 0 ( ă)
00
U1 (cb ( ă))
{z
}
|
<0

0

0

> (ρ − r ) W ( ă) = (ρ − r ) V ( ă) ,
The second line comes from the assumption that W 0 ( ă) = V 0 ( ă) = U10 (ĉ( ă)) > U00 (ĉ( ă))
(by properties 1) and 2), ĉ0 ( a) > 0 therefore ĉ( ă) < ĉ( au ) = c̄ and that U10 (c) > U00 (c) for
all c < c̄ by Assumption 1). So
W 00 ( ă) >

(ρ − r ) V 0 ( ă)
= V 00 ( ă) .
r ă − cb ( ă)

So by Lemma 7, we obtain the third property.
Step 2: We show that properties 1),2) and 3) hold in a neighborhood to the left of au .
We treat the two cases associated with Assumption 2 with β̄ < 1 or β̄ = 1 separately.
Under Assumption 2 with β̄ < 1, given the closed form solution given in Appendix
D, we show that properties 1), 2), 3) are satisfied at au in Lemma 16 below. By continuity,
properties 1), 2), 3) hold in a neighborhood to the left of au .
Under Assumption 2 with β̄ = 1. It is easy to verify that properties 1) and 2) are
also satisfied from the close form solution. By continuity, properties 1) and 2) hold in a
neighborhood to the left of au . Properties 3) is not satisfied at au because Vu0 ( au ) = Wu0 ( au )
so V 0 ( au ) = W 0 ( au ). WOLG, by defining c̄ and au such that β(c) < 1, β(c) = 1 for
all c ≥ c̄ = ĉ( au ) (above au , V and W differ only by a constant and both are the value
functions of a time-consistent consumer with utility U1 up to some constant; properties
1) and 2) also hold because of this property). We show that V 0 ( a) < W 0 ( a) in some
neighborhood to the left of au .
Indeed, consider the solution (Ve , We ) to ODE (19) with the initial condition


e
e
, Wu ( au ) −
.
(Ve ( au ), We ( au )) = Vu ( au ) −
ρ+λ
λ
Because ( au , Vu ( au ), Wu ( au )) ∈ E, by Hartman (2002, Theorem 3.2), there exists ω > 0
such that (Ve , We ) are defined over, [ au − ω, au ] and (Ve , We ) → (V, W ) uniformly over
[ au − ω, au ] as e → 0.
It easy to verify that Ve0 ( au ) > We0 ( au ). Indeed, from the initial conditions, we have

65

ĉe ( au ) = ĉu ( au ), and Vu0 ( au ) = U10 (ĉu ( au )) = U10 (ĉe ( au )) = Ve0 ( au ),

e
ρ
W
(
a
)
−
ρWu ( au ) − U0 (ĉu ( au ))
u
u
λ − U0 ( ĉe ( au ))
We0 ( au ) =
<
rau − ĉe ( au )
rau − ĉu ( au )
0
0
0
= Wu ( au ) = Vu ( au ) = Ve ( au ).
In addition, when e sufficiently small, we also have properties 1) and 2) holds for Ve , We
at au . Therefore, following the proofs in Step 1 above, we can show that properties
1),2),3) hold for all a ∈ [ au − ω, au ] for (Ve , We ). In particular, Ve0 ( a) > We0 ( a) for all
a ∈ [ au − ω, au ].
Now as e → 0, (Ve , We ) → (V, W ). So V 0 ( a) ≥ W 0 ( a) for all a ∈ [ au − ω, au ]. We show
by contradiction that V 0 ( a) > W 0 ( a) for all a ∈ ( au − ω, au ). Assume to the contrary that
V 0 ( ă) = W 0 ( ă) for some ă < au . As in Step 1, this implies that V 00 ( ă) < W 00 ( ă) strictly,
because β(ĉ( ă)) < 1 given that ĉ( ă) < ĉ( au ) = c̄. Therefore in the right neighborhood of
ă, V 0 ( a) < W 0 ( a), which contradicts the earlier result that V 0 ( a) ≥ W 0 ( a). Thus, V 0 ( a) >
W 0 ( a) for all a ∈ ( au − ω, au ).
Lemma 16. The linear equilibria in Theorem 2 with β̂ < β̄ < 1 satisfies, for all a > 0
1) (λ + ρ − r )V 0 ( a) < λW 0 ( a)
2) V 00 ( a) > 0
3) W 0 ( a) < V 0 ( a)
Proof. As shown in Theorem 2, because β̄ > β̂, ĉ( a) < ra. By Lemma 5,

(ρ + λ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) = V 00 ( a) (ra − cb ( a)) .
Because V 00 ( a) = −v̄σa−σ−1 < 0, and ĉ( a) < ra,

(λ + ρ − r )V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) < 0.
The second inequality 2) is immediate because V 00 ( a) = −v̄σa−σ−1 < 0.
The last inequality 3) is equivalent to

< 1. After algebra manipulation, this
inequality holds if and only if (σ + β̄ − 1)ψ < ∆. This obviously
 holds if σ + β̄ ≤ 1,
β̄(1− β̄)
because ∆, ψ > 0. If σ + β̄ > 1, we show that ψ < σ+∆β̄−1 . Indeed, P σ+∆β̄−1 = (σ+ β̄−1)2 >
0. Therefore, ψ <

β̄ψ
∆+(1−σ )ψ

∆
.
σ + β̄−1

Lemma 17. Assume Assumption 2 and that β(c) > β̂ for all c > 0 and β is non-decreasing. In
any equilibrium, for any a > a, there exists a0 > a such that ĉ( a0 ) ≤ ra0 .
Proof. Assume that there exists a∗ such that ĉ( a) > ra for all a ≥ a∗ .
Let ã = inf{ a∗ > a > a : ĉ(b) > rb for b ∈ [ a, a∗ ]}. Follow the argument in the
beginning of Lemma 14, we have ã < a∗ .
If ã = a, then by the limit on assets, ĉ( ã) = r ã. If ã > a, by Lemma 13, ĉ( ã) = r ã
(similar to the argument in Lemma 14, we must have ĉ( ã) ≤ r ã). Either way we have
ĉ( ã) = r ã. Also by Lemma 13, V ( ã) ≤ V̄ ( ã). By the definition of ã, ĉ( a) > ra for all a > ã.
Since V 0 ( a) = U10 (ĉ( a)) < U10 (ra) < V̄ 0 ( a), we have V ( a) < V̄ ( a) for all a > ã.

66

Now for ă = max( ã, rc̄ ), by choosing e > 0 sufficiently small, we have V ( ă) < V̄ ( ă) −
e ( ă)1−σ and V 0 ( a) < V̄ 0 ( a) − e ( ă)−σ for all a ≥ ã. Therefore, for all a > ă
V ( a)
< v̄ − e.
a 1− σ
As in the proof of Lemma 28, using the phase diagram, any solution to the differenρ+λ
tial system (12), with the initial condition c( x ∗ ) > r and w0 (c( x ∗ )) − λ e > w(c( x ∗ )),
reaches a point where c( x ∗∗ ) = r, at some x ∗∗ > x ∗ . This contradicts the assumption that
ĉ( a) > ra for all a ≥ a∗ .
Lemma 18. Assume Assumption 2 and that β(c) > β̂ for all c > 0 and β is non-decreasing. In
any equilibrium, there cannot be strict dissaving at any asset level.
Proof. Suppose by contradiction that there is strict dissaving at a = ă > a. Let ã = inf{ ă >
a > a : ĉ(b) > rb for b ∈ [ a, ă]}. If ã = a, then by borrowing constraint, ĉ( ã) = r ã. If ã > a,
following the arguments in the proof of Lemma 14, we have ã < ă and ĉ( ã) ≤ r ã. By
Lemma 13, V ( ã) ≤ V̄ ( ã).
Let ã˜ = sup{ a > ă : ĉ(b) > rb for b ∈ [ ă, a]}. By Lemma 17, ã˜ < ∞. Since for a ∈ ( ã, ã˜ ),
V 0 ( a) = U10 (ĉ( a)) < U10 (ra) < V̄ 0 ( a)
we have V ( a) < V̄ ( a) for all ã < a < ã˜ .
Also by Lemma 17, there exists a∗ > ã˜ and a∗ > νc̄ such that ĉ( a∗ ) ≤ ra∗ . Above a∗ ,
ĉ( a) > c̄, so the equilibrium stays in homogenous portion of the utility function starting
above a∗ in addition starting from any asset level a ≥ a∗ , asset never goes below a∗ since
ĉ( a∗ ) ≤ ra∗ . Therefore, by Theorem 6, ĉ( a) = ψa for all a ≥ a∗ .
Let a0 = inf{ a ∈ [ a, a∗ ] : ĉ(b) < rb for all b ∈ [ a, a∗ ]}. By definition, a0 ≥ ã˜ . As shown
in the existence proof of Theorem 4, V ( a) > V̄ ( a) for all a ≥ a0 .
We show by contradiction that a0 = ã˜ . Assuming that this is not true, i.e. a0 > ã˜ .
There are two cases:

˜ 0 such that an ↑ a0 and ĉ( an ) > ran .
Case 1: There exists a sequence { an }∞
n=1 ∈ ã, a
Applying the arguments for an = ă above, we must have V ( an ) < V̄ ( an ). Therefore
V ( a0 ) = limn→∞ V ( an ) ≤ V̄ ( a0 ) which contradicts the property that V ( a0 ) > V̄ ( a0 )
shown earlier.

Case 2: There exists e > 0 such that ĉ( a) ≤ ra for all a ∈ a0 − e, a0 . Then ĉ( a0 ) ≤ ra0 .
Since V ( a0 ) > V̄ ( a0 ), ĉ( a0 ) < ra0 . Now, by the definition of a0 , there exists a sequence
0
0 such that a → a0 and ĉ ( a ) = ra . By Lemma 13, V ( a ) ≤ V̄ ( a ).
{ an }∞
n
n
n
n
n
n=1 ∈ a − e, a
Therefore V ( a0 ) = limn→∞ V ( an ) ≤ limn→∞ V̄ ( an ) = V̄ ( a0 ). This contradicts V ( a0 ) >
V̄ ( a0 ).
So either in Case 1 or Case 2, we have a contradiction. Therefore a0 = ã˜ . But as we
show above, V ( a) < V̄ ( a) for a < ã˜ = a0 and V ( a0 ) > V̄ ( a0 ). This contradicts the
continuity of V.
Thus we have shown by contradiction that there cannot be strict dissaving at any asset
level.
Following the arguments above, we can show that there cannot be an asset level without strict saving. Therefore ĉ( a) < ra for all a ≥ a. By Theorem 6, ĉ( a) = ψa for all
a ≥ max{ a, νc̄ }. Since the equilibrium features strict dissaving for all a ≤ a ≤ max{ a, νc̄ },
67

the equilibrium is uniquely determined given the boundary condition provided by the
linear equilibrium above max{ a, νc̄ }.

G

Proofs for Subsection 4.3

G.1

Phase Diagram and Loci

The proofs for the results in Subsection 4.3 rely on the phase diagram. In this subsection,
we analyze the preliminary properties of the phase diagram, in particular, the behaviors
of the loci c0 = 0, w0 = 0, and v = v̄.
Loci c0 ( x ) = 0

The loci of points where c0 ( x ) = 0 is given by

λρw = (ρ + λ)u0 (c)(r − c) + λβu (c) − (1 − σ) (r − c) u(c) + u0 (c)(r − c)



or
w = w1 ( c ) =

(ρ + λ)u0 (c)(r − c) + λβu (c) − (1 − σ) (r − c) (u(c) + u0 (c)(r − c))
λρ

Lemma 19. In the relevant regions, w ≥ 0 for σ < 1 and w < 0 for σ > 1, w1 has U-shape.
Proof. The derivative of w1 (c) is equal to


00
2
u ( c ) A0 + A1 c + A2 c
where
A0 = ( ρ − (1 − σ )r + λ )r
(ρ − (1 − σ)r + λ) (1 − σ) − λβ + r (1 − σ)σ
A1 =
σ
A2 = −(2 − σ )
After simplifying


1 0
c
2
u (c) (ρ − (1 − σ )r + λ)(r − c) + λβ
− rσc + σc
w1 ( c ) =
λρ
1−σ
when c → 0, the right hand side goes to ∞ and when c → ∞, the right-hand side goes to
σ
+∞ if 2 < σ and goes to 0 if 2 < σ and to λρ
if σ = 2.
Local optima of w1 (c): It is easy to see that A0 > 0.
If σ < 2 then A2 < 0. The roots of w0 (c) = 0 are
q
q
− A1 + A21 − 4A2 A0 − A1 − A21 − 4A2 A0
,
2A2
2A2
with one root negative and the other one positive. Therefore since w1 (c) → +∞ as c → 0
and w1 (c) → +∞ as c → +∞, the positive root is a global minimum.
If σ > 2, then A2 > 0. Since w1 (c) → +∞ as c → 0 and w1 (c) → 0 as c → +∞,
and w1 (c∗ ) < 0, where c∗ is the interior steady-state. At local minimum of w100 (c) exists.
68

Therefore

A21 − 4A0 A2 > 0

The two local optima of w1 are then
q
q
2
− A1 − A21 − 4A2 A0
− A1 + A1 − 4A2 A0
, c2 =
c1 =
2A2
2A2
Consider the second derivative at these local optima:


w100 (c) = w1000 (c) A0 + A1 c + A2 c2 + u00 (c)( A1 + 2A2 c)

= u00 (c)( A1 + 2A2 c)
At the lower root, w100 (c) > 0 and at the higher root w100 (c) < 0. Therefore c1 is a local
minimum and c2 is a local optimum. In addition limc→∞ w1 (c) = 0, therefore w1 (c2 ) > 0
and w1 (c) > 0 for all c > c2 .
Now since in equilibrium w < 0 , we can ignore the part of the phase diagram in
which w1 > 0, i.e. c ≥ c2 . So restricting attention to (0, c2 ), w1 has U-shape with the local
minimum at c1 .
Loci w0 ( x ) = 0

Loci of points where w0 ( x ) = 0 is determined by
w = w2 ( c ) =

βu(c)
ρ − (1 − σ )(r − c)

Lemma 20. w2 has inverted U-shape.
Proof. If σ < 1, since c > 0, and ρ − (1 − σ )r > 0, ρ − (1 − σ)(r − c) > 0, so w2 (c) > 0 for
all c > 0.
ρ−(1−σ )r
ρ−(1−σ )r
If σ > 1, ρ − (σ − 1)(c − r ) < 0 if c > σ−1 . Therefore, w2 (c) < 0 if c < σ−1
ρ−(1−σ )r

and w2 (c) > 0 if c > σ−1 .
In any Markov equilibrium, w ≤ 0, therefore the positive part of w2 (c) is not relevant
for the study the Markov equilibria. In particular,
ẇ = (ρ − (1 − σ)(r − c)) w − βu(c),
ρ−(1−σ )r

therefore, ẇ > 0 for all c > σ−1 and w ≥ 0.
Differentiate w2 (c), we arrive at
w20 (c)

=

βu0 (c)σ(

Therefore w2 (c) has single peak at c =
Lastly,
w2 ( c ) =

ρ−(1−σ )r
σ

− c)

(ρ − (1 − σ)(r − c))2
ρ−(1−σ )r
σ

β
ρ−(1−σ )r
(1− σ ) c

=r+

ρ −r
σ .

u(c)
→c→∞ 0
+ 1 (1 − σ ) c

69

and if σ > 1
w2 ( c ) =
On



ρ−(1−σ )r
σ −1 , + ∞



β
1−

ρ−(1−σ )r
( σ −1) c

u(c)
→ ρ−(1−σ)r −∞
( 1 − σ ) c c → σ −1

, w(c) > 0.

As c → 0, the limit of w2 (c) depends on whether σ < 1 or σ ≥ 1:
w2 ( c ) =

βu(c)
βu(c)
∝ c →0
.
ρ − (1 − σ)(r − c)
ρ − (1 − σ )r

The relationship between c0 = 0 and w0 = 0 At c = r, the loci of c0 = 0 and c0 = 0, are
both equal to w̄. Here we compare the slopes of the two loci at this point.
The slope of the loci of c0 = 0 is given by
w10 (r ) =

−(ρ + λ)u0 (r ) + λβu0 (r ) + ru0 (r )
λρ

and the slope of the loci of w0 = 0 is given by
w20 (r ) =

βu0 (r )(ρ − r )
ρ2

Therefore the comparison between the two slopes is equivalent to comparing
β(ρ − r )
λβ − (ρ + λ − r )
≶
λ
ρ
which is also equivalent to
β ≶ β̂.
This also implies that depending on β versus β̂, c0 = 0 and w0 = 0 loci intersects at a
unique steady state to the left (β > β̂) or to the right (β < β̂) of c = r.
Now we turn to the slopes of the loci at the interior steady-states. Assume that β > β̂,
ρ−(1−σ )r
=
and consequently r > ρ. Therefore the loci w0 = 0 has single peak at c̆ =
σ
ρ −r
r + σ < r.
We show that w1 (c̆) > w2 (c̆). Indeed, this is equivalent to
βu(c̆)
(ρ + λ)u0 (c̆)(r − c̆) + λβu (c̆) − (1 − σ) (r − c) (u(c̆) + u0 (c̆)(r − c))
<
ρ − (1 − σ )(r − c̆)
λρ
after algebra manipulations, this is equivalent to
ρ < (ρ + λ(1 − β))
which is obviously true since β < 1.
Therefore, w1 and w2 intersects at c∗ where w2 is strictly decreasing. Since, w1 (c) <
w2 (c) in the left neighborhood of c = r and the interior steady-state is unique, we must
have w10 (c∗ ) < 0 (otherwise, w1 (c) ≥ w1 (c∗ ) = w2 (c∗ ) > w2 (c) in the right neighborhood
of c∗ , which implies that there is another steady-state between c∗ and r). Now by Lemma
20, w1 is U-shaped. Therefore, w1 is decreasing from 0 until c∗∗ > c∗ and increasing from
70

β > β̂

β < β̂

40
31.5

ċ = 0
ẇ = 0
v = v̄

39.5

ċ = 0
ẇ = 0
v = v̄

31

30.5
39
30
38.5

w

w

29.5
38

29

28.5
37.5
28
37
27.5
36.5

0.03

27
0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.03

c

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

c

Figure 5: Loci for ċ = 0 and ẇ = 0
c∗∗ on (as long as w1 stays in the relevant region). We can show that c∗∗ > r if and only if
ρ −r + λ
> β.
λ
V = V̄ curve Another important set of points is the set of points at which V ( a) = V̄ ( a).
This is equivalent to
V̄ ( a)
v = v̄ = 1−σ
a
Since
(ρ + λ)v − λw = u(c) + u0 (c)(r − c),
this leads to
(ρ + λ)v − u(c) − u0 (c)(r − c)
.
w = w0 ( c ) =
λ
It is immediate that w is single-peaked with the peak exactly at c = r.
Figure 5 presents two examples of the loci, for β > β̂ and β < β̂.

G.2

Local Dynamics

Before tackling the global dynamics of system (12), the following results establish the
local properties of the system, including existence and uniqueness.
Lemma 21. Assume that β 
< β̂, the differential
system (12) admits a unique solution which

βu(r )
with the property that c > r and c0 < 0 near the
converges to the steady state r, w̄ = ρ
steady state.
Proof. The local existence is a corollary of Lemma 2. Now we show uniqueness.

71

Indeed, since ċ < 0, c decreases as the solution converges to the steady state (r, w̄).
Therefore, we can find a function ŵ such that
w( x ) = ŵ(z( x )) + w̄
where c = r + z( x ). We show that the function ŵ is uniquely determined.
Indeed, from (12), we obtain the following differential equation for ŵ:
ŵ0 (z) =

−u00 (r + z)z (ρŵ − βzũ(z) + (1 − σ)z(w̄ + ŵ))
, (40)
−(ρ + λ)u0 (r + z)z + λβzũ(z) + (1 − σ)z (u(r + z) − u0 (r + z)z) − λρŵ

where ũ(z) =

u(r +z)−u(r )
.
z

We simplify this equation as:
ŵ0 (z) = F (z) +

G (z)
K (z) + λρŵ

where
F (z) = u00 (r + z)z

ρ − (1 − σ ) z
λρ

G (z) = u00 (r + z)z2 ∗ {− βũ(z) + (1 − σ )w̄−

(ρ + λ)u0 (r + z) − λβũ(z) − (1 − σ) (u(r + z) − u0 (r + z)z)
( ρ − (1 − σ ) z )
λρ

K (z) = (ρ + λ)u0 (r + z)z − λβzũ(z) − (1 − σ)z u(r + z) − u0 (r + z)z


(ρ+λ−r )−λβ
G (z)
r
u0 (r ) < 0, since
First, we observe that, as z → 0, u00 (r+z)z2 → − β + β ρ −
λ
β < β̂. Therefore G (z) > 0 in a neighborhood to the right of z = 0, i.e. G (z) > 0 for all
z ∈ (0, z∗ ) for some z∗ > 0.
We assume by contradiction that the ODE (40) has to distinct solutions ŵ1 and ŵ2 .
From the phase diagram, the two solutions cannot intersect when z > 0. Without loss of
generality, we assume that ŵ1 < ŵ2 for all 0 < z < z∗ . Then
λρ(ŵ1 (z) − ŵ2 (z))
d
< 0,
(ŵ2 − ŵ1 ) = G (z)
dz
(K (z) + λρŵ2 (z)) (K (z) + λρŵ1 (z))
since, K (z) + λρŵ2 (z) > 0 and K (z) + λρŵ1 (z) > 0 because ċ < 0 in the two solutions.
Therefore
lim (ŵ2 (z) − ŵ1 (z)) > ŵ2 (z∗ ) − ŵ1 (z∗ ) > 0.
z →0

This is a contradiction since, limz→0 ŵ2 (z) = limz→0 ŵ1 (z) = 0.
Lemma 22. Assume that β > β̂, the differential
system (12) admits a unique solution which

βu(r )
converges to the steady state r, w̄ = ρ
with the property that c < r and c0 ( x ) > 0 near the
steady state.
Proof. Similar to the proof of the last result. The proof of Theorem 8 below shows the
existence of a solution, with the properties that c( x ) ≥ ν and w( x ) ≥ w for
 all t
First, we observe that, as z → 0,

G (z)
u00 (r +z)z2

→ − β + β ρr −

72

(ρ+λ−r )−λβ
λ

u0 (r ) > 0, since

β > β̂. Therefore G (z) < 0 in a neighborhood to the right of z = 0, i.e. G (z) < 0 for all
z ∈ (0, z∗ ) for some z∗ > 0.
We assume by contradiction that the ODE (40) has to distinct solutions ŵ1 and ŵ2 .
From the phase diagram, the two solutions cannot intersect when z < 0. Without loss of
generality, we assume that ŵ1 < ŵ2 for all 0 > z > z∗ . Then
λρ(ŵ1 (z) − ŵ2 (z))
d
> 0,
(ŵ2 − ŵ1 ) = G (z)
dz
(K (z) + λρŵ2 (z)) (K (z) + λρŵ1 (z))
since, K (z) + λρŵ2 (z) > 0 and K (z) + λρŵ1 (z) > 0 because ċ > 0 in the two solutions.
Therefore
lim (ŵ2 (z) − ŵ1 (z)) > ŵ2 (z∗ ) − ŵ1 (z∗ ) > 0.
z →0

This is a contradiction since, limz→0 ŵ2 (z) = limz→0 ŵ1 (z) = 0.
Lemma 23. Consider the ODE (12) and a singular point (r, w∗ ) at x = x ∗
If w∗ > w̄, locally there exists a unique solution to (12) defined in finite intervals ( x ∗ − e, x ∗ )
and ( x ∗ , x ∗ + e) continuous at the boundaries of the interval and with the property that c0 ( x ) > 0.
If w∗ < w̄, locally there exists a unique solution to (12) defined in finite intervals ( x ∗ − e, x ∗ )
and ( x ∗ , x ∗ + e) continuous at the boundaries of the interval and with the property that c0 ( x ) < 0.
Proof. We use the tools from the DAE literature, in particular Rabier and Rheinboldt
(2002), to show this result. First, we use a change of variable from x to t such that
dx
dt = r − c ( xt ). Then the system (12) becomes

w0 (t) = ρw (t) − β̄u (c (t)) − (1 − σ )w(t) (r − c (t))
(41a)



λ
1
ρw (t) − β̄u (c (t)) − c(t) (r − c (t))
(ρ + λ − r )u0 (c (t)) −
c0 (t) = 00
u (c (t))
r − c (t)
(41b)
 
c
To use the DAE tools, let y =
and we write this ODE system as
w
A(y)ẏ = G (y),
where

u00 (c)(r − c) 0
A(y) =
0
1




and

(ρ + λ)u0 (c)(r − c) + λβu (c) − (1 − σ) (r − c) (u(c) + u0 (c)(r − c)) − λρw
G (y) =
ρw − βu (c) − (1 − σ) (r − c) w


We have
where
Let

det( A(y))ẏ = adj( A(y)) G (y),
1
0
adj( A(y)) =
00
0 u (c)(r − c)




γ0 (y) = det( A(y)) = u00 (c)(r − c)
73



and

(ρ + λ)u0 (c)(r − c) + λβu (c) − (1 − σ) (r − c) (u(c) + u0 (c)(r − c)) − λρw
G̃ (y) =
(ρw − βu (c) − (1 − σ) (r − c) w) u00 (c)(r − c)


In addition



γ1 (y) = Dγ0 (y) G̃ (y)


Dγ0 (y) = u000 (c)(r − c) − u00 (c) 0

Therefore at y∗ = (r, w∗ )
γ1 (y∗ ) = −u00 (r ) (λβu(r ) − λρw∗ ) .
By Rabier and Rheinboldt (2002, Theorem 39.1), if w∗ > w̄, γ1 (y∗ ) < 0, then y∗ is attractive
and there are two solutions y1 and y2 defined over [− T, 0], such that (41) is satisfied over
[− T, 0) and limt→0 yi (t) = y∗ . It is easy to see that one solution has r > ct and the other
´0
one has r < ct . Since yit is continuous, cit also is. Let xt = x ∗ + t (r − cs )ds, we can verify

that ci ( xt ) = cit , wi ( xt ) = wit , i = 1, 2 are the desired solution to (12) over [ x T + x ∗ , x ∗ ].
Similarly if w∗ < w̄, γ1 (y∗ ) < 0 so y∗ is repulsive, we obtain the desired solutions
similarly.

G.3

Proofs for Theorem 5

G.3.1

Proof of Theorem 5

Part a. is a direct application of Lemma 27.
Now we prove the complete characterization in Part b. Consider an equilibrium. By
Lemma 24, we have ĉ( a) ≥ ra for all a ≥ a. We first show that if a < ã < ã˜ such that
˜
ĉ( ã) = r ã and ĉ( ã˜ ) = r ã˜ then ãã > δ > 1 where δ is defined in Lemma 24.
Indeed, if this is not the case then
!
  1− σ
  1− σ

ã
a
ã
a ã
a
Ṽ ( a), W̃ ( a), c̃( a) =
V ( a ),
W ( a ), ĉ( a )
a
ã
a
ã a
ã
with a ≥ ã is an equilibrium defined over [ ã, ∞) with Ṽ ( ã˜ ) = V̄ ( ã˜ ), which contradicts the
result in Lemma 24 with ã stands for a.
Given this result, we can define the sequence { an } with a0 = a and
an+1 = inf { a > an : ĉ( a) = ra} .
We have ĉ( an+1 ) = ran+1 and

a n +1
an > δ. In addition ĉ ( a ) > ra for all a
ĉ( a)
a where x = log a − log an and w ( x )

∈ ( an , an+1 ). Now
W ( a)

for a ∈ [ an , an+1 ), let c( x ) =
= a1−σ . We have
limx→log an+1 −log an v( x ) = v̄ and (c( x ), w( x )) is a solution to 12, with c( x ) > r. By Lemma
27, c( x ) corresponds to the solution defined in that lemma. In addition, log an+1 − log an ∈
X.

74

G.3.2

Supporting Results for Theorem 5

Lemma 24. All equilibria must feature dissaving at all assets. In addition, there exists δ =
δ(ρ, r, β, σ) > 1 such that for any a > 0, all equilibria must have the same consumption and
value functions over [ a, aδ] and V ( a) > V̄ ( a) for all a ∈ ( a, aδ]. In addition, if a continuous
(regular) equilibrium exists, it is unique.
Proof. Consider a regular equilibrium. By Lemma 25, ĉ( a) ≥ ra for all a ≥ a. Therefore at
the debt limit, ĉ( a) = ra.
Given γ > r define in Lemma 26 (depending on whether r ≥ ρ or r < ρ). Let δ be
defined by
γ
δ=
,
2∆
where
γ−r

.
∆=

γ 
2 −u00 ( γ2 ) (ρ + λ − r )u0 ( γ2 ) + γ2λ
ρ
ŵ
−
β̄u
−r
2
ĉ( a)
a

< γ for all a ≤ aδ. If there exists ã ∈ ( a, aδ) such
> γ. Let c( x ) =
that
and x̃ = log ã and x = inf{ x ≥ log a : c(z) > r ∀ z ∈ ( x, x̃ )}.
So c( x ) is continuous over [ x, x̃ ] and c( x ) = r.
o
n
r
We have c( x̃ ) > γ and c( x ) = r < γ. Let x ∗ = inf x ∈ [ x, x̃ ] : c(z) ≥ γ+
∀
z
∈
x,
x̃
.
[
]
2
We first show by contradiction that
ĉ( ã)
ã

ĉ(e x )
ex

γ +r
r
∗
By the continuity of c(.), c( x ∗ ) = γ+
2 and c ( x ) ≥ 2 for all x ∈ [ x , x̃ ]. Therefore,



1
λ
0
0
c ( x ) = 00
(ρ + λ − r )u (c ( x )) −
ρw ( x ) − β̄u (c ( x )) − c( x )
u (c ( x )) (r − c ( x ))
r − c (x)

 γ  γ
1
2λ 
0 γ
<
ρŵ − β̄u
−
 r (ρ + λ − r )u ( ) +
2
γ
−
r
2
2
−u00 γ2 γ−
2

< ∆.
Consequently,
∆ ( x̃ − x ∗ ) > c( x̃ ) − c( x ∗ ) >
So

γ
2

γ
< x̃ − x ∗ < δ,
2∆
ĉ( a)
which contradicts the definition of δ. Therefore a < γ for all a ≤ a ≤ aδ.
Consider two equilibria with consumption and policy functions (V1 ( a), W1 ( a), ĉ1 ( a))
and (V2 ( a), W2 ( a), ĉ2 ( a)). Let (c1 ( x ), w1 ( x )) and (c2 ( x ), w2 ( x )) be the associated homogenized functions, defined over [log a, log a + log δ]. By choosing one of the two equilibria,
say V2 , W2 , ĉ2 as the one constructed in Lemma 2, lowering δ if necessary, we can assume
that V2 ( a) > V̄ ( a) for all a < a < δa. There are two cases:
Case 1: ĉ1 ( aδ) ≥ ĉ2 ( aδ) > r. There exists x̃ ∈ (log a, log a + log δ] such that c1 ( x̃ ) =
c2 (log a + log δ) (c1 is continuous from some x̃˜ ≥ log a up until aδ, where c1 ( x̃˜ ) = r).
By Lemma 26, we have w1 ( x̃ ) = w2 (log a + log δ). Therefore, since system (12) is autonomous: (c1 ( x ), w1 ( x )) = (c2 ( x + log a + log δ − x̃ ), w2 ( x + log a + log δ − x̃ )) for all

75

x ∈ [log a, x̃ ]. If x̃ < log a + log δ, then

(c2 (log a + log a + log δ − x̃ ), w2 (log a + log a + log δ − x̃ )) = (r, w̄)
and therefore V2 ( a expaδ( x̃) ) = V̄ ( a expaδ( x̃) ), which contradicts the property that V2 > V̄ over
( a, aδ). Therefore x̃ = log a + log δ, so (c1 , w1 ) ≡ (c2 , w2 ) over [log a, log a + log δ].
Case 2: ĉ1 ( aδ) < ĉ2 ( aδ). There exists x̃ ∈ (log a, log a + log δ) such that c2 ( x̃ ) =
c1 (log a + log δ). Similar to Case 1, we can show that at x ∗ = a expaδ( x̃) , V1 ( x ∗ ) = V̄ ( x ∗ )
and c1 ( x ∗ ) = r. Now there must exits a sequence log a < x ∗∗ < x ∗ such that c1 ( x ∗∗ ) > r.
Let ( x1 , x2 ) denote the maximum interval containing x ∗∗ such that c( x ) > r inside the
interval. Then x1 ≥ a and x2 ≤ x ∗ . In addition V1 ( x1 ) = V̄ ( x1 ) and V1 ( x2 ) = V̄ ( x2 ).
Lemma 26 then implies that c1 ( x ) = c2 ( x − x1 + log a) for all x ∈ ( x1 , x2 ). But this means
V2 ( a exp( x2 − x1 )) = V̄ ( a exp( x2 − x1 )), which contradicts the assumption V2 > V̄ over
( a, aδ).
So the only possibility is in Case 1, which implies (c1 , w1 ) ≡ (c2 , w2 ), which in turn is
equivalent to (V1 , W1 , ĉ1 ) ≡ (V2 , W2 , ĉ2 ).
Now we show by contradiction that if a continuous equilibrium exists, it must be
unique. Assume that this is not the case, i.e. there exist two distinct continuous equilibria
with the consumption and policy functions (V1 ( a), W1 ( a), ĉ1 ( a)) and (V2 ( a), W2 ( a), ĉ2 ( a)).
The associated homogenized functions (c1 ( x ), w1 ( x )) and (c2 ( x ), w2 ( x )) are defined over
[log a, +∞).
Let x ∗ = inf{ x ≥ log a : c1 6= c2 }. By the contradiction assumption x ∗ < +∞. By
continuity c1 ( x ) = c2 ( x ) for all x ∈ [log a, x ∗ ]. If c1 ( x ∗ ) = c2 ( x ∗ ) > r, then (c1 ( x ∗ ), w1 ( x ∗ ))
is not a singular point of the system (12). Therefore, (c1 , w1 ) ≡ (c2 , w2 ) in a neighborhood
to the right of x ∗ , which contradicts the definition of x ∗ . Therefore, c1 ( x ∗ ) = r.
Now applying the result in the first part of this theorem for a = exp( x ∗ ), there exists
δ > 1 such that c1 ( x ) = c2 ( x ) over ( x ∗ , x ∗ + log δ), which also contradicts the definition
of x ∗ .
In all cases, we obtain a contradiction. Therefore, a continuous equilibrium is unique
if it exists.
Lemma 25. In any equilibrium, ĉ( a) ≥ ra for all a ≥ a.
Proof. We show this result by contradiction. Assume that there exists ã such that ĉ( ã) <
r ã.
Consider the unique 
solution to 
the differential system (12), {c( x ), w( x )} with the ini-

tial condition (c̃, w̃) =

ĉ( ã) W ( ã)
ã , ( ã)1−σ

at x = log ã. Let ( x̃, x̃˜ ) denote the right maximal

interval of existence of this solution, as defined in Hartman (2002). There are three cases:
Case 1: w̃ ≥ w1 (c̃). From the phase diagram, there exists e such that c0 ( x ) > 0 and
w( x ) > 0 for all x ∈ [ x̃, x̃ + e]. We show that c0 ( x ) > 0 for all x > x̃. If this is not
the case, let x̂ denote the first time c0 ( x ) reaches 0 after x̃ + e i.e. w( x̂ ) = w1 (c( x̂ )) and
w( x ) > w1 (c( x )) for all x̃ < x < x̂. Since w( x ) > w1 (c( x )) > w2 (c( x )), w0 ( x ) > 0.
However, since w10 < 0 for all c < r, we have w( x̂ ) > w̃ > w1 (c( x̃ )) > w1 (c( x̃ )), which
contradicts w( x̂ ) = w1 (c( x̂ )). Therefore c0 ( x ) > 0 and w0 ( x ) > 0 for all x ≥ x̃. As shown
in Case 1-i) of Lemma 29, x̃˜ is finite and ĉ( x̃˜ ) = r. We also have w̃˜ > w̃ > w1 (w̃) > w1 (r ) =
76

1− σ
> W̄ ( ã˜ ). However ĉ( ã˜ ) = r ã˜
w̄. Therefore, at ã˜ = exp( x̃˜ ), we have W ( ã˜ ) = w̃˜ ( ã˜ )
and ĉ( a) < ra for a < ã˜ , therefore by Lemma 13, W ( ã˜ ) ≤ W̄ ( ã˜ ), which contradicts the
preceding inequality.
ρ−(1−σ )r
Case 2: w2 (c̃) > w̃. If c̃ >
, then by Lemma 20 w2 (c) is decreasing in c.
σ
ρ−(1−σ )r
,
σ

w0 ( x ) < 0, and consequently, c0 ( x ) < 0, since w( x ) <
´
(1− σ ) t
(1− σ )
w̃ < w2 (c̃) < w2 (c( x )). Since Wt ≥ u(ν)e−ρt at
dt > a0
w for some w, we have

So as long as c( x ) >

ρ−(1−σ )r
}. Therefore c∗ ≥ ρ−(1σ−σ)r .
σ
(c∗ , w∗ ) is regular, c∗ , w∗ is reached at

w( x ) ≥ w for all x ≥ x̃. Let c∗ = infx≥ x̃ {c( x ) : c( x ) >
If c∗ >

ρ−(1−σ )r
,
σ

c( x ) ↓ c∗ and w( x ) ↓ w∗ . Since

ρ−(1−σ )r

< c( x ) <
some x ∗ > x̃. However, c0 ( x ∗ ) < 0, so there exists x > x ∗ such that
σ
∗
∗
∗
c( x ) = c , which contradicts the definition of c .
ρ−(1−σ )r
Therefore c( x ) goes below
for some x. By letting this x standing for x̃, we
σ
ρ−(1−σ )r

can assume that c̃ ≤
. If w0 ( x ) < 0 for all x ≥ x̃. Since w( x ) ≥ w. Let w∗ =
σ
infx> x̃ w( x ) ≥ w. Since w2 (c) < w1 (c), c0 ( x ) < 0, let c∗ = infx> x̃ c( x ) ≥ ν. (c∗ , w∗ ) is
regular and must be reached at some x ∗ . So c0 ( x ∗ ) < 0, which implies c( x ) < c( x ∗ ) for
some x > x ∗ . This contradicts the definition of c∗ .
Consequently, w0 ( x ) = 0 for some x ≥ x̃, or w( x ) = w2 (c( x )). By letting this x stand
for x̃, we are in Case 3.
ρ−(1−σ )r
, then c0 ( x ) < 0 and w0 ( x ) > 0 for all x > x̃.
Case 3: w1 (c̃) > w̃ ≥ w2 (c̃). If c̃ ≤
σ
∗
Since w( x ) < ŵ < ∞ defined in (42), let w = supx> x̃ w( x ) and c∗ = infx> x̃ c( x ) ≥ ν.
(c∗ , w∗ ) must be reached at some x ∗ . So c0 ( x ∗ ) < 0, which implies c( x ) < c( x ∗ ) for some
x > x ∗ . This contradicts the definition of c∗ .
ρ−(1−σ )r
We end up with the case c̃ >
. If w0 ( x ) = 0 at some x, we are back to Case 2,
σ
which leads to a contradiction (after c̃goes below

ρ −r (1− σ )
).
σ

If w0 ( x ) > 0 for all x > x̃, we
ρ−(1−σ )r

. We then
can show by contradiction that c0 ( x ) < 0 for all x > x̃ and goes below
σ
get a contradiction as in the first part of this case.
In all cases, we get a contradiction. Therefore, in any regular equilibrium, ĉ( a) ≥ ra
for all a ≥ a.
Lemma 26. Consider the system (12) over c( x ) ≥ r for all x ≥ 0. There exists γ = γ(ρ, r, β, σ) >
r such that: for any c̃ ∈ (r, γ] there exists a unique w̃ such that the solution (c( x ), w( x )) to system (12) with the initial condition (c̃, w̃) at some x̃ and the left maximal interval of existence ( x̃˜ , x̃ )
satisfies r < c( x ) < γ for all x̃˜ < x < x̃ and w( x̃˜ ) = w̄ if c( x̃˜ ) = r.
Proof. First of all, the existence result in Lemma 1 in the main paper shows that, there
exists a solution (ce , we ) to 12 defined over [ x1 = log a, x2 ] such that ce ( x1 ) = r and
ce ( x2 ) = γe with r < ce ≤ γe for all x ∈ ( x1 , x2 ).
We show the result in this lemma for two cases separately, r ≥
n ρ and r < ρ.
o
Case 1: If r > ρ. Let φ = arg minc>r w1 (c) and γ = min ψ, φ,

ρ −r (1− σ )
, γe
σ

> r.

Fixing c̃ ∈ (r, γ]:
i) If w̃ ≥ w2 (c̃), then following the phase diagrams of (12) as in the proof of Lemma
28, we have c0 ( x ) > 0 and w0 ( x ) < 0. Therefore by Lemma 23, the solutions hits (r, w∗ )
for some w∗ > w̄ at some finite x̃˜ < x̃.
77

ii) If w̃ ≤ w1 (c̃), then following the phase diagrams of (12) as in the proof of Lemma
28, we have c( x ) > γ for some x < x̃.
iii) If w1 (c̃) < w̃ < w2 (c̃). If w0 ( x ) = 0 at some x < x̃, then we are in case i), this cannot
leads to a solution. If c0 ( x ) = 0 at some x < x̃, then we are in case ii), this cannot leads to
a solution either. Therefore, a solution must have c0 ( x ) < 0 and w0 ( x ) < 0 for all x < x̃.
Given the solution (ce , we ), there exists x0 ∈ ( x1 , x2 ) such that ce ( x0 ) = c̃. It is immediate that (ce ( x + x0 − x̃ ), we ( x + x0 − x̃ )) is a solution satisfies the desired properties. By
Lemma 21, this solution is unique. Therefore, w̃ = we ( x0 ) is the unique w̃ which gives
rise to the solution with the desired properties stated in the lemma.
Case 2: If r < ρ. The proof is exactly the same, exact for γ = min{ψ, φ} and now the
solutions converging to (r, w̄) has ċ < 0 and ẇ > 0.
Lemma 27. There exists a unique solution (c, w) to the autonomous differential system (12) (with
associated v) defined over [0, x̄ ) with initial condition c(0) = r, w(0) = w̄. This solution features
c( x ) > r for x ∈ (0, x̄ ) and either x̄ = ∞ or limx→ x̄ c( x ) = r. Let X ≡ { x ∈ (0, x̄ ) | v( x ) = v̄},
let x = inf X with the convention that x = ∞ if X is empty. Then x > 0 and v( x ) > v̄ for all
x ∈ (0, x ).
Proof. Similar to the proof of Lemma 25, a solution to the autonomous differential system
(12) must have c( x ) ≥ r for all x ≥ 0. Lemma 26 implies that (12) has a unique solution
defined over [0, e] for some e > 0 such that c( x ) > r for all x ∈ (0, e). Let [0, x̄ ) denote
the right maximal interval of existence for this solution. If x̄ = ∞ then we immediately
obtain the desired result. If x̄ < ∞. Then by Hartman (2002, Theorem 3.1) and Lemma 23,
we have limx→ x̄ c( x ) = r.
Now, we turn to the characterization of X. First of all by the existence result in Lemma
1 of the main paper, we have v( x ) > v̄ for all x ∈ (0, e1 ) for some e1 > 0 . Therefore
x ≥ e1 > 0. By definition of x if x ∈ (0, x ), we have v( x ) 6= v̄. If v( x ) < v̄, then by the
Intermediate Value Theorem, v( x̃ ) = v̄ for some x̃ ∈ (0, x ) which again contradicts the
definition of x. Therefore, v( x ) > v̄ for all x ∈ (0, x ) .

G.4

Proofs for Theorem 6

G.4.1

Proof of Theorem 6

First we rule out the possibility that ĉ( a) > ra at some asset level a.
Assume by contradiction that there exists a∗ such that ĉ( a) > ra for all a ≥ a∗ . Let
[ ã, a∗ ] denote the maximal interval containing a∗ such that ĉ( a) > ra in this interval: ã =
inf{ a∗ > a > a : ĉ(b) > rb for b ∈ [ a, a∗ ]} and ă = sup{ a > a∗ : ĉ(b) > rb for b ∈ [ a∗ , a]}.
Because of the asset limit ã ≥ a and by Lemma 28, there exists a0 > ã such that ĉ( a0 ) ≤ ra0 ,
so ă < +∞.
If ã = a, then by borrowing constraint, ĉ( ã) = r ã. If ã > a, by the definition of
Markov equilibrium we also have ĉ( ã) = r ã (otherwise the ODE for asset ȧt = rat − ĉ( at )
would not have a solution). Either way we have ĉ( ã) = r ã. Therefore V ( ã) = V̄ ( ã)
and W ( ã) = W̄ ( ã). For a ∈ ( ã, ă), since V 0 ( a) = U10 (ĉ( a)) < U10 (ra) < V̄ 0 ( a), we have
V ( a) < V̄ ( a) for all ă ≥ a > ã. One direct implication of this is that ĉ( ă) 6= r ă. By
78

the definition of ă, there exists a sequence an ↓ ă such that ĉ( an ) ≤ ran . By Lemma 29,
V ( an ) ≥ V̄ ( an ). Therefore limn→∞ V ( an ) = V ( ă) ≥ V̄ ( ă). This is a contradiction.
Therefore, ĉ( a) ≤ ra for all a ≥ a. ĉ( a) ≡ ra is obviously not an equilibrium. Now if
ĉ( ã) < r ã and ĉ( ã) 6= ψ ã for some ã. Lemma 29 shows that there exists a∗ > a such that
(V ( a∗ ), W ( a∗ ), ĉ( a∗ )) = (V̄ ( a∗ ), V̄ ( a∗ ), ra∗ ) and ĉ( a) < ra for all a ∈ ( ã, a∗ ).
If there exists a∗∗ > a∗ such that ĉ( a∗∗ ) = ra∗∗ . There exists â ∈ ( a∗ , a∗∗ ) such that
ĉ( â) < r â (otherwise ĉ( a) ≡ ra for all a ∈ ( a∗ , a∗∗ ) which is clearly not an equilibrium).
Let â1 = sup{ a > â : ĉ(b) < rb ∀ b ∈ [ â, a]}. By definition â1 ≤ a∗∗ and ĉ( â1 ) = r â1 .
Let â2 = sup{ a < â : ĉ(b) < rb ∀ b ∈ [ a, â]}. By definition, â2 ≥ a∗ . In addition, there
exists a sequence{ an }, an ↑ â2 such that ĉ( an ) = ran . Therefore lim V ( an ) = lim V̄ ( an ) =
V̄ ( â2 ) = V̄ ( â2 ). Lemma 29 shows that V ( â2 ) > V̄ ( â2 ) which contradicts the earlier result
that V ( â2 ) = V̄ ( â2 ).
If ĉ( a) > ra for all a > a∗ , Lemma 29 shows that ĉ( a) = ψa for all a > a∗ . However,
this implies lima↓a∗ V ( a) > V̄ ( a∗ ) = V ( a∗ ) which contradicts the continuity of V.
In all cases, we obtain a contradiction. Therefore ĉ( a) ≡ ψa for all a ≥ a.
G.4.2

Proof of Proposition 3

Let x ∗ = log a∗ .
To the left of x ∗ , Lemma 22 shows that existence and uniqueness of a solution to the
system (12) over [ x ∗ − e, x ∗ ] with the initial condition (c, w) = (r, w̄) at x = x ∗ and c( x ) <
r for all x < x ∗ . The proof of Theorem 8 below also implies that the solution can be
extended over [log a, x ∗ ].
To the right of x ∗ , using the limiting arguments similar to the ones in the existence
proofs for Lemma 2 and Theorem 8, we can show the existence of a solution to the system
(12) over [ x ∗ , x ∗ + e] with the initial condition (c, w) = (r, w̄) at x = x ∗ and c( x ) > r for
all x > x ∗ . Let ( x ∗ , x̃ ) denote the right maximal interval of existence for this solution.
Lemma 28 shows that x̃ < ∞ and c( x̃ ) = r, w( x̃ ) < w̄.
Let ā = exp( x̃ ) and (V ( a), W ( a), ĉ( a)) = (v(log a), w(log a), c(log a)), we obtain an
equilibrium defined over [ a, ā]. Since ( x ∗ , x̃ ) is a maximal interval of existence, this equilibrium cannot be extended past ā.
The phase diagram in Figure 2 also implies that there exists a continuum of solution
c̃,
w̃
(
) to the system (12) over [ x ∗ , x ∗ + e] with the initial condition (c̃, w̃) = (r, w̄) at x = x ∗
and c̃( x ) > r for all x > x ∗ and the trajectories of (c̃, w̃) lie below and are bounded by the
one generated by (c, w).
G.4.3

Supporting Results for the Proofs of Theorem 6 and Proposition 3

Let ŵ be the maximal value for an agent with utility βu(c):
ˆ ∞
ŵ = max
e−ρt βu(ct )dt
0

(42)

subject to a0 = 1 and ȧt = rat − ct .
Lemma 28. In any equilibrium, at any asset level, a, there exists a0 > a such that ĉ( a0 ) ≤ ra0 .
79

Proof. We prove this result by contradiction. Assume that there exists a∗ such that ĉ( a) >
ra for all a ≥ a∗ .
Let ã = inf{ a∗ > a > a : ĉ(b) > rb for b ∈ [ a, a∗ ]}. If ã = a, then by borrowing
constraint, ĉ( ã) = r ã. If ã > a, by the definition of Markov equilibrium we also have
ĉ( ã) = r ã, otherwise we can extend to left of ã. Either way we have ĉ( ã) = r ã. Therefore
V ( ã) = V̄ ( ã) and W ( ã) = W̄ ( ã). By the definition of ã, ĉ( a) > ra for all a > ã. Since
V 0 ( a) = U10 (ĉ( a)) < U10 (ra) < V̄ 0 ( a), we have V ( a) < V̄ ( a) for all a ≥ ã.
W ( a∗ )

ĉ( a∗ )

Let a∗ be any asset level such that a∗ > ã. Let w∗ = a∗ and c∗ = a∗ > r.
By choosing e > 0 sufficiently small, we have V ( ă) < V̄ ( ă) − e ( ă)1−σ and V 0 ( a) <
V̄ 0 ( a) − e ( ă)−σ for all a ≥ ã. Therefore, for all a > a∗
V ( a)
< v̄ − e.
a 1− σ
which implies
w(log a) < w̄ −

ρ+λ
e
λ

for all a > a∗ .
We consider two cases separately:
ρ + λ −r
Case 1: β ≥ λ . In this case, by Lemma 19 and Lemma 20, w1 is strictly increasing
in c when c > r and w0 (c), w2 (c) are strictly decreasing in c when c > r.
Since V ( a) < V̄ ( a), we have w∗ < w0 (c∗ ) < w1 (c∗ ). Consider the unique solution to
the differential system (12), {c( x ), w( x )} with the initial condition (c∗ , w∗ ) at x = log a∗ .
Let ( x ∗ , x̃ ) denote the right maximal interval of existence of this solution, as defined in
Hartman (2002).
Since w( x ) ≤ w0 (c) − e < w1 (c) for all c > r, c0 ( x ) < 0 for all x > x ∗ . Now we
have, r < c( x ) < c( x ∗ ) = c∗ for all x > x ∗ . First we show that, w( x ) > w2 (c∗ ) for
all x ∈ ( x ∗ , x̃ ). Indeed, if w( x ) ≥ w2 (c( x )) then w( x ) ≥ w2 (c( x )) > w2 (c( x ∗ )) since
w2 is decreasing in c and c( x ) < c( x ∗ ). If w( x ) < w2 (c( x )), then w0 ( x ) > 0, therefore
ρ+λ
w( x ) > w( x − e) < w2 (c∗ ). We have shown that w2 (c∗ ) < w( x ) < w0 (c∗ ) − λ e <
ρ+λ
w̄ − λ e. By Hartman (2002, Theorem 3.1), there exists { xn } ↑ x̃ such that {c( xn ), w( xn )}
converges to some point (c̃, w̃) and (c̃, w̃) must lies in the boundary of the region where
the differential system (12) is well-defined and Lipschitz continuous. Since c∗ > c( x ) > r
ρ+λ
and w2 (c∗ ) < w( x ) < w̄ − λ e, we must have (c̃, w̃) = (r, w̃). However, Lemma 23
shows that x̃ is finite, so c( x̃ ) = r, which contradicts the property that ĉ( a) > ra for all
a > a∗ .
ρ + λ −r
Case 2: β < λ . In this case, by Lemma 20, w1 is decreasing in c from r until c̃ and
increasing for all c ≥ c̃. As before w2 is decreasing for all c > r and w1 (c) > w2 (c) for all
c > r.
Again, consider the unique solution to the system (12), {c( x ), w( x )} with the initial
condition (c∗ , w∗ ) at x = log( a∗ ). We show that there exists x̂ > 0, such that for all x > x̂,
c0 ( x ) < 0 i.e. w( x ) < w1 (c( x )). To show this, we consider three possibilities:
i) w∗ > w1 (c∗ ): so w0 ( x ∗ ) < 0 and c0 ( x ∗ ) > 0. From the phase diagram, there
exists e > 0 such that w0 ( x ) < 0 and c0 ( x ) > 0 for all x ∈ ( x ∗ , x ∗ + e]. Let x̂ =
sup { x ≥ x ∗ + e : ẇs < 0, ċs > 0 ∀s ∈ [ x ∗ , x ]}. Since c is increasing and w is decreasing,
80

and w1 (c( x )) < w( x ) < w0 (c( x )). It is obvious from the phase diagram that w(c( x̂ )) =
w2 (c( x̂ )). By letting x̂ standing for x ∗ , we arrive as Case ii)
ii) w∗ ≤ w1 (c∗ ). From the phase diagram, there exists e > 0 such that c0 ( x ) < 0
for all x ∈ ( x ∗ , x ∗ + e]. We show by contradiction that c0 ( x ) < 0 for all x > x ∗ + e. If
c0 ( x ) ≥ 0 for some x = x ∗∗ > x ∗ + e. Let x̂ = sup { x ≥ x ∗ + e : c0 (s) < 0 ∀s ∈ [ x ∗ , x ]}.
ρ+λ
By definition x̂ < x ∗∗ . As in Case 1 we can show that w2 (c∗ ) < w( x ) < w̄ − λ e for all
x < x̂. Therefore c( x̂ ) and w( x̂ ) are well-defined. By the definition of x̂, we must have
c0 ( x̂ ) = 0 or equivalently, w( x̂ ) = w1 (ĉ( x̂ )).
Now, consider the function w̆ defined over (c( x̂ ), c( x ∗ )) such that w̆(c( x )) = w( x ).
Then w̆(c) < w1 (c) and w̆(c( x̂ )) = w1 (c( x̂ )). Therefore w̆0 (c( x̂ )+ ) ≤ w1 (c( x̂ )+ ). However
w0 ( x )
= +∞,
w̆ (c( x̂ ) ) = lim 0
x → x̂ c ( x )
0

+

since c0 ( x̂ ) = 0 and w0 ( x̂ ) < 0 since w( x ) = w1 ( x ) > w2 ( x ) which is a contradiction.
Therefore, c0 ( x ) < 0 for all x > x ∗ . Following the steps in Case 1. we obtain a contradiction.
In all cases, a contradiction arises. Therefore, we obtain the result in this lemma.
Lemma 29. In any equilibrium, if at an asset level ã, ĉ( ã) < r ã, then V ( ã) > V̄ ( ã). In addition,
either:
1) There exists a∗ > a such that (V ( a∗ ), W ( a∗ ), ĉ( a∗ )) = (V̄ ( a∗ ), W̄ ( a∗ ), ra∗ ) and ĉ( a) <
ra for all a ∈ ( ã, a∗ ).
2) ĉ( a) = ψa for all a ≥ ã.
Proof. Let â = sup{ a > ã : ĉ(b) < rb ∀ b ∈ [ ã, a]}. By definition, â > ã. There are two
cases, â = ∞ or â < ∞.
Case 1: â = ∞. We show that ĉ( a) = ψa for all a ≥ ã, where ψ is the linear equilibrium.
Assume by contradiction that this is not the case.
Consider the unique 
solution to 
the differential system (12), {c( x ), w( x )} with the initial condition (c̃, w̃) =

ĉ( ã) W ( ã)
ã , ( ã)1−σ

at x = log ã. Let ( x̃, x̃˜ ) denote the right maximal

interval of existence of this solution, as defined in Hartman (2002).
From the analysis of the phase diagram and the loci above, we know that w1 (ψ) =
w2 (ψ), w1 (c) > w2 (c) for all c < ψ and w1 (c) < w2 (c) for all c < ψ. In addition, we also
know that w20 (c) < 0 for all c ≤ ψ and w10 (c) < 0 for all c ≥ ψ. We obtain contradiction in
different sub-cases.
1-i) If c̃ > ψ and w0 ≥ w2 (c̃): the phase diagram, there exists e > 0 such that w0 ( x ) > 0
and c0 ( x ) > 0 for all x ∈ ( x̃, x̃ + e]. We show that w0 ( x ) > 0 and c0 ( x ) > 0 for all x > x̃.
Indeed, w( x ) > w( x̃ ) ≥ w2 (c̃) > w2 (c( x )) since c( x ) > c( x̃ ) and w2 is strictly decreasing
over [ψ, r ]. Therefore w0 ( x ) > 0. Similarly, we have c0 ( x ) > 0. In addition c( x ) is bounded
above by r and w( x ) ≤ ŵ where ŵ is defined in (42). So (c( x ), w( x )) → (c∗ , w∗ ). By
Hartman (2002, Theorem 3.1), (c∗ , w∗ ) must lie at the boundary, i.e. c∗ = r. In addition,
w∗ ≥ w( x̃ ) > w1 (c̃) > w1 (r ) = w̄. Lemma 23 also implies that (c∗ , w∗ ) is reached in
1− σ
finite asset. i.e x̃˜ < ∞. Therefore, at ã˜ = exp( x̃˜ ), we have W ( ã˜ ) = w̃˜ ( ã˜ )
> W̄ ( ã˜ ).
˜
˜
˜
˜
˜
However ĉ( ã) = r ã and c( a) < ra for a < ã, therefore by Lemma 13, W ( ã) ≤ W̄ ( ã), which
contradicts the preceding inequality.
81

1-ii) If c̃ > ψ and w1 (c̃) < w̃ < w2 (c̃). In this case, there are three possibilities. First,
w( x ) = w2 (c( x )) for some x > x̃, by letting x standing for x̃, we are back to case i) which
implies a contradiction. Second w( x ) = w1 (c( x )) for some x, we arrive at Case 1-iii) below
which also leads to a contradiction. Lastly, w1 (c( x )) < w( x ) < w2 (c( x )) for all x ≥ x̃. In
this case, we have w0 ( x ) < 0 and c0 ( x ) > 0 for all x > x̃. Lemma 22 shows that there exists
a unique solution. This solution is defined over some [ x1 , x2 ] with (c( x2 ), w( x2 )) = (r, w̄).
This contradicts the property that â = +∞.
1-iii) If c̃ > ψ and w1 (c̃) ≥ w̃. From the phase diagram, there exists e > 0 such that
w0 ( x ) < 0 and c0 ( x ) < 0 for all x ∈ ( x̃, x̃ + e]. If c( x ) < ψ for all x > x̃, then c0 ( x ) < 0
´
(1− σ ) t
(1− σ )
and w0 ( x ) < 0 for all x ≥ x̃. Since Wt ≥ u(ν)e−ρt at
dt > a0
w for some w, we
have w( x ) ≥ w for all x ≥ x̃. Let c∗ = infx≥ x̃ c( x ) ≥ ψ and w∗ = infx≥ x̃ w( x ). We must
reach (c∗ , w∗ ) in finite asset x̂. Therefore c( x̂ ) < c∗ for all x > x̂, which contradicts the
definition of c∗ . So c( x ) = ψ at some x and w( x ) < w̃ ≤ w2 (w̃) ≤ w2 (ψ). By letting x
standing for x̃, we arrive at Case 1-iv) below.
1-iv) If c̃ ≤ ψ and w̃ < w2 (c̃). If c0 ( x ) < 0 for all x ≥ x̃, since w ≤ w < ŵ, this implies
that c( x ) = ν for some x, which violates the regularity condition. Therefore, c0 ( x ) = 0 at
some x̂ > x̃. At x̂, w( x̂ ) = w1 (c( x̂ )) and c( x̂ ) < ψ. Let x̂ standing for x̃, we show that
w0 ( x ) > 0 and c0 ( x ) > 0 for all x > x̃. Similar to Case 1-i). we obtain a contradiction.
In all sub-cases i)-iv), we obtain a contradiction, therefore it must be that c( x ) = ψ and
w( x ) = w1 (ψ) = w2 (ψ) for all t. In particular V ( ã) > V̄ ( ã).
Case 2: â < ∞. By the definition of Markov equilibrium, we must have ĉ( â) = r â, and
V ( â) = V̄ ( â) and W ( â) = W̄ ( â). Again consider the unique 
solution to 
the differential

system (12), {c( x ), w( x )} with the initial condition (c̃, w̃) =

ĉ( ã) W ( ã)
ã , ( ã)1−σ

at x = log ã.

Going through the sub-cases as in Case 1, we can show that {c( x ), w( x )} must coincide
with the solution in Lemma 22. Therefore, V ( ã) > V̄ ( ã).

H
H.1

Proofs for Poverty Trap Equilibria
Proof of Theorem 7

Proof of Theorem 7 (Existence). We prove the existence by construction.
As shown in the proof of Theorem 4, there exists a unique solution (Vd , Wd ) to ODE
(19) that satisfies (Vd ( au ), Wd ( au )) = (Vu ( au ), Wu ( au )) defined over a maximal interval
of existence ( â, au ] , where â < rc̄ . We also show in the proof of Theorem 4 that Vd , Wd is
defined and is continuous at â, i.e. the limits lima↓â Vd ( a) = Vd ( â) and lima↓â Wd ( a) =
Wd ( â) exist, and ĉd ( â) = r â.
If â ≤ a, let
(
(Vd , Wd , ĉd ) if a ≤ a < â
(V, W, ĉ) =
(Vu , Wu , ĉu ) if a ≥ â.
If a < â, Lemma 30 below shows that Vd ( â) = V ( â). In addition, Lemma 31 shows that

82

Vd ( a) > V ( a) for all a > â. Therefore,
0

Vd0 ( â) = U10 (r â) ≥ V ( â).
By Lemma 6, β(r â) ≤ β̂.

If β(r â) = β̂. Let ã = min a ≥ a : β(ra) = β̂ . Because β is weakly increasing, β(ra) =
β̂ for all a ∈ [ ã, â] (Assumption 4). We define Vh , Wh over [ ã, ∞) such that


(Vu ( a), Wu ( a), ĉu ( a)) if au ≤ a
(Vh ( a), Wh ( a), ĉh ) = (Vd ( a), Wd ( a), ĉd ( a)) if â ≤ a < au



V ( a), W ( a), ra
if ã ≤ a < â.
By Theorems 1 and 4, Vu , Wu satisfy (6) over [ ã, ∞). Replacing â by ã if β(r â) = β̂, without
loss of generality, we can assume that β(ra) < β̂ for a < â.
Iteratively, we construct a sequence { ai } starting with a0 = a , and for each i ≥ 0,
ai < â and β(rai ) < β̂ and the value and policy functions (Vi , Wi , ĉi ) are determined as
following:
Iteration i: Starting from ai < â, because β(rai ) < β̂, using Lemma 2, we show
that ODE (18)
 admits a solution (Vi , Wi ), with the initial condition (Vi ( ai), Wi ( ai )) =
V ( ai ), W ( ai ) , defined over a (right) maximal interval of existence ai , ai∗ . Moreover
Vi ( a) > V ( a) in a neighborhood to right of ai . There are three possibilities:
i-1) ai∗ < â. Then following the steps in Lemma 9, we can shows that Vi ( ai∗ ) ≤ V ( ai∗ ).
By the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists ai < ai+1 < â, such that Vi ( ai+1 ) =
V ( ai+1 ) and Vi ( a) > V ( a) for a ∈ ( ai , ai+1 ). Because ai+1 < â, β(rai+1 ) < β̂. Go to
iteration i + 1 with ai+1 standing for ai .
i-2) ai∗ ≥ â and Vi ( a) ≤ V ( a) for some a < â. By the Intermediate Value Theorem, there
exists ai ≤ ai+1 < â, such that Vi ( ai+1 ) = V ( ai+1 ) and Vi ( a) > V ( a) for a ∈ ( ai , ai+1 ). Go
to iteration i + 1 with ai+1 standing for ai .
i-3) ai∗ ≥ â and Vi ( a) > V ( a) for all a < â. We stop the construction.
Following this procedure, we produce a strictly increasing sequence { ai } such that for
each i ≥ 0, ai < â and β(rai ) < β̂ and the value functions (Vi , Wi ) satisfies (Vi ( ai ), Wi ( ai )) =
(V ( ai ), V ( ai )) and Vi ( ai+1 ) = V ( ai+1 ) and Vi ( a) > V ( a) for all a ∈ ( ai , ai+1 ). Let

(Vl ( a), Wl ( a), ĉl ) = (Vi ( a), Wi ( a), ĉi ( a)) for a ∈ [ ai , ai+1 ) ,
with an+1 = a∗n if possibility n-3) is reached at some iteration n.
There are two possible cases:
Case 1: The sequence { ai } is finite, i.e. possibility n-3) is reached at some iteration n:
We obtain a sequence a0 < a1 < ... < an < â.
If a∗n = ∞, we define the value and consumption functions (V, W, ĉ) over the whole
interval [ a, ∞) as
(V ( a), W ( a), ĉ( a)) = (Vl ( a), Wl ( a), ĉl ( a)) .
If a∗n < ∞, following the steps in the proof of Lemma 9, we can show that Vn ( a∗n ) ≤ V ( a∗n ).
Therefore, both Vn and Vh are defined over [ â, a∗n ] and
Vh ( â) = V ( â) ≤ Vn ( â)
Vh ( a∗n ) ≥ V ( a∗n+1 ) ≥ Vn ( a∗n+1 ).
83

By the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists a∗ ∈ [ â, a∗n ] such that
Vn ( a∗ ) = Vh ( a∗ ).
We define (V, W, ĉ) as
(

(V, W, ĉ) =

(Vl , Wl , ĉl )
(Vh , Wh , ĉh )

if a < a∗
if a ≥ a∗ .

Case 2: The sequence { ai } is infinite (possibility i-3 is never reached). Then limi→∞ ai =
a∞ ≤ â and β(ra∞ ) = β̂. Because β(ra) < β̂ for a < â. We have a∞ = â. In this case
(
if a < a∞ = â
(Vl , Wl , ĉl )
(V, W, ĉ) =
(Vh , Wh , ĉh ) if a ≥ â.
In all cases we can construct the value and policy functions (V, W, ĉ) over [ a, ∞). As in
the proof of Theorem 3, we can verify that this construction satisfies all the conditions
in Subsection 3.1 for a Markov equilibrium. In addition, ĉ( a) < ra for all a ≥ a∗ and
ĉ( a) ≥ ra for all a < a∗ .
It remains to show that a∗ < ∞. Above au , ĉl ( a) > ra > ψa = ĉ( a) > c̄, so the solution
(Vl , Wl , ĉl ) stays in the homogenous region of the utility function defined by Assumption
2. As shown in the proof of Theorem 5 using the phase diagram (to the right of c = r),
this solution cannot be extended forever and there exists a∗∗ < ∞ such that Vl ( a∗∗ ) <
V̄ ( a∗∗ ) < Vu ( a∗∗ ). Therefore a∗ < a∗∗ < ∞.
Proof of Theorem 7 (Characterization). We show the characterization of poverty trap under
Assumption 2 and that β is non-decreasing and β̄ > β̂. In any equilibrium, there exists a∗
such that ĉ( a) ≥ ra for all a < a∗ and ĉ( a) < ra for all a > a∗ .
Indeed, let a∗ = inf{ a ≥ a : ĉ( a) < ra}. If a∗ = ∞ then ĉ( a) ≥ ra for all a ≥ a, the
result is immediate. We just need to show the result for a∗ < +∞. By the definition of a∗ ,
ĉ( a) ≥ ra for all a < a∗ .
We show by contradiction that ĉ( a) ≤ ra for all a ≥ a∗ . Assume otherwise, then there
exists ã > a∗ , such that ĉ( ã) > r ã. Let a∗∗ = inf { a > a∗ : ĉ( a) > ra}.
There are two possibilities:
Case 1: a∗∗ > a∗ : Then ĉ( a) ≤ ra for all a ∈ ( a∗ , a∗∗ ). Therefore by Lemma 13,
∗∗
ĉ( a ) = ra∗∗ .
i) β(ra∗∗ ) ≤ β̂. Then β(ra) ≤ β̂ for all a ≤ a∗∗ . Following the proof of Lemma 14, there
cannot be strict saving for a < a∗∗ , which contradicts the definition of a∗ .
ii) β(ra∗∗ ) > β̂: Then β(ra) > β̂ for all a ≥ a∗∗ . Following the proof of Lemma18, there
cannot be strict dissaving for a > a∗∗ , which contradicts the definition of a∗∗ .
Case 2: a∗∗ = a∗ : Then ĉ( a∗ ) ≥ ra∗ , otherwise ĉ( a) < ra in a neighborhood to the right
of a∗ , which contradicts the definition of a∗∗ = a∗ .

By the definition of a∗ and a∗∗ , there exist two sequences { asn } , adn both decrease
ds
towards a∗ and ĉ( asn ) < rasn and ĉ( ads
n ) > ran .
∗
If β(ra ) < β̂, there exists e such that β(ra) < β̂ for all a < a∗ + e. Following the proof
of Lemma 14, there cannot be strict saving for a < a∗ + e, which contradicts the existence
of the strict saving sequence asn .
84

If β(ra) > β̂, for a > a∗ . Consider a dissaving point a∗ < ads
n . There exists a saving
s
∗
ds
point am ∈ ( a , an ). Following the proof of Lemma 18, there cannot not be strict dissaving
above asn which contradicts the definition of ads
n
If β(ra) = β̂, for some interval [ a∗ , a∗ + e] . Following the proof of Lemma 14, we
can show that there cannot be strict dissaving for any a ≤ a∗ + e. This contradicts the
existence of the strict saving sequence asn .
In all cases we obtain contradiction. Therefore ĉ( a) ≤ ra for all a ≥ a∗ .
Now we show that ĉ( a) < ra for all a > a∗ . Let a∗∗ = inf{ a ≥ a∗ : ĉ(b) < rb ∀ b ≥ a}.
We just need to consider the case a∗∗ < +∞ (a∗ < +∞ and a∗∗ = +∞ is a violation of
Theorem 6). Now if a∗∗ > a∗ , then there exists a sequence { an } converging to a∗∗ from the
left, such that ĉ( an ) = ran . By Lemma 13, V ( an ) ≤ V̄ ( an ). Therefore, V (ra∗∗ ) ≤ V̄ (ra∗∗ ),
thus β(ra∗∗ ) ≤ β̂. By Lemma 14, there cannot be strict saving for a ≤ a∗∗ . Therefore,
ĉ( a) = ra for all a ∈ ( a∗ , a∗∗ ). This contradicts the definition of a∗ .

H.2

Supporting Results for Theorem 7

Lemma 30. Given
the definition of Vd and â in the of Theorem 7, if â > 0 then (Vd ( â), Wd ( â)) =

V ( â), W ( â) .
Proof. As shown in the proof of Theorem 4, if â > 0, ( â, Vd ( â), Wd ( â)) ∈ Es . Therefore
ĉd ( â) = r â.
First, we show that Wd ( â) ≤ W ( â). Assume by contradiction that, Wd ( â) > W ( â), then
Wd0 ( a) =

ρWd ( â) − ρU0 (r â)
ρWd ( a) − U0 (ĉd ( a))
−→
= +∞
ra − ĉd ( a).
r â − r â

as a approaches â from the right because ĉd ( a) → r â. Moreover, by the continuity of Rl ,
lima↓â Vd0 ( a) = U10 (r â). This contradicts the property 3) in Lemma 15 that Wd0 ( a) < Vd0 ( a)
for all au > a > â. Therefore, Wd ( â) ≤ W ( â).
We also show that Wd ( â) ≥ W ( â). Assume by contradiction that, Wd ( â) < W ( â), then,
similarly to the previous case,
Wd0 ( a) =

ρWd ( a) − U0 (ĉd ( a))
ρWd ( â) − ρU0 (r â)
−→
= −∞
ra − ĉd ( a).
r â − r â

as a approaches â from the right. This contradicts the property 1) in Lemma 15 that
Wd0 ( a) > 0 for all a > â. Therefore, Wd ( â) ≥ W ( â).
The two results imply that Wd ( â) = W ( â). Combining this equality with the fact that
( â, Vd ( â), Wd ( â)) ∈ Es yields Vd ( â) = V ( â).
Lemma 31. Given the definition of Vd and â in the proof of Theorem 7, Vd ( a) > V ( a) for all
a > â.
Proof. Let Ũ (c) ≡ U1 (c) + λρ U0 (c). By the concavity of U1 and U0 , Ũ is also strictly concave. We first show that ra > ĉd ( a) > c∗ ( a) where c∗ ( a) is defined by
e 0 (c∗ ( a)) = V 0 ( a) + λ W 0 ( a).
U
ρ
85

e 0 (c∗ ( a)) > U
e 0 (ĉd ( a)) or
Indeed, because Ũ is strictly concave, this is equivalent to U
Vd0 ( a) +

λ
λ 0
Wd ( a) > U10 (ĉd ( a)) + U00 (ĉd ( a)).
ρ
ρ

Because Vd0 ( a) = U10 (ĉd ( a)) and Wd0 ( a) > U00 (ĉd ( a)) by Lemma 32, we obtain the desired
inequality.
Now using system (6), substituting Wd by the right hand side of the second equation
into the first equation, we obtain
e (ĉ( a)) + (V 0 ( a) + λ W 0 ( a))(ra − ĉ( a)).
(ρ + λ)Vd ( a) =U
d
ρ d
Let
e (c) + (V 0 ( a) + λ W 0 ( a))(ra − c).
F ( a, c) ≡ U
d
ρ d
e is strictly concave, F is strictly concave in c. By the definition of U
e and c∗ ( a),
Because U
∂F ( a,c)
( a,c)
= 0 at c = c∗ ( a) and ∂F∂c
< 0 for c > c∗ ( a). Therefore
∂c
F ( a, c∗ ( a)) > F ( a, ĉd ( a)) > F ( a, ra) = (ρ + λ)V ( a).
Moreover, F ( a, ĉd ( a)) = (ρ + λ)Vd ( a), so Vd ( a) > V ( a).
Lemma 32. Given the definition of Wd and â in the proof of Theorem 7, Wd0 ( a) > U00 (ĉ( a)) for
all a ∈ ( â, au ).
Proof. Assumption 4 is equivalent to

−U100 (c)
−U000 (c)
≤
U00 (c)
U10 (c)

(43)

for all c ≤ c̄. We use Lemma 7 to prove this lemma. Indeed, we first show that condition
2) in Lemma 7 is satisfied, i.e. if Wd0 ( a) = U00 (ĉd ( a)) then
d
d
(Wd0 ( a)) < (U00 (ĉd ( a))).
da
da
Indeed, differentiating equation (6b) with respect to a implies
ρWd0 ( a) = U00 (ĉd ( a))ĉ0d ( a) + Wd00 ( a)(ra − ĉd ( a)) + Wd0 ( a)(r − ĉ0d ( a)).
Because Wd0 ( a) = U00 (ĉd ( a)), this equation simplifies to
Wd00 ( a)

(ρ − r ) Wd0 ( a)
(ρ − r ) U00 (ĉd ( a))
=
=
.
ra − ĉd ( a)
ra − ĉd ( a)

86

(44)

On the other hand,
V 00 ( a)
d
(U00 (ĉd ( a))) = U000 (ĉd ( a))ĉ0d ( a) = U000 (ĉd ( a)) 00 d
da
U1 (ĉd ( a))
(ρ − r )U10 (ĉd ( a)) + λ (U10 (ĉd ( a)) − U00 (ĉd ( a)))
= U000 (ĉd ( a))
U100 (ĉd ( a)) (ra − ĉd ( a))
(ρ − r )U10 (ĉd ( a))
≥ U000 (ĉd ( a)) 00
,
U1 (ĉd ( a)) (ra − ĉd ( a))

(45)

where the last inequality comes from U10 (ĉd ( a)) ≥ U00 (ĉd ( a)). Combining this with ρ <
r and condition (43), we have (44), but with weak inequality. Now we show that it
holds with strict inequality. For a < au , because ĉ0d > 0, ĉd ( a) < ĉd ( au ) = c̄, therefore
U10 (ĉd ( a)) > U00 (ĉd ( a)) (this also holds for a = au under Assumption 2 with β̄ < 1). Thus
(45) holds with strict inequality. If a = au and under Assumption 2 with β̄ = 1, ĉd ( a) = c̄,
(43) holds with strict inequality (as argued in the existence proof of Theorem 4, we can
assume that U10 (c) > U00 (c) for c < c̄ WOLG). Hence, in either case, (44) holds with strict
inequality.
Now, we show that condition 1) in Lemma 7 is also satisfied. Under Assumption 2
with β̄ < 1, it is shown in Lemma 33 that at au that Wd0 ( au ) > U00 (ĉd ( au ). Under Assumption 2 with β̄ = 1, U10 (c) = U00 (c) for c ≥ c̄ , given how au is defined in the existence
proof of Theorem 4, we have Wd0 ( au ) = Vd0 ( au ) = U10 (c̄) = U00 (c̄), so Wd0 ( a) = U00 (ĉ( a)) at
a = au . Therefore, by (44), Wd0 ( a) > U00 (ĉd ( a)) in the left neighborhood of au (assuming
that U10 (c) > U00 (c) for c < c̄ = ĉ( au ) WOLG).41
Given that both conditions in Lemma 7 are satisfied, it implies that W 0 ( a) > U00 (ĉ( a))
for all a ∈ ( â, au ) .
Lemma 33. The linear equilibria described in Theorem 2 with β̄ < 1 satisfies W 0 ( a) > U00 (ĉ( a))
for all a > 0.
Proof. From Theorem 2, W 0 ( a) > U00 (ĉ( a)) is equivalent to
1

β̄v̄1− σ
1

∆ + (1 − σ) v̄− σ
or equivalently ψ >

H.3

∆
σ.

> β̄v̄,

This inequality holds because P

 
∆
σ

= ( β̄ − 1) λσ < 0.

Proof of Proposition 4

Let r be defined such that β̂ = β̄, where β̂ is defined in (9). Since β̄ ≤ 1, r ≥ ρ.
41 Another

way to show this is to proceed as in the proof of Theorem
3 by considering thesolution

(Ve , We ) to the ODE (19) with the initial condition (Ve ( au ), We ( au )) = Vu ( au ) + ρ+e λ , Wu ( au ) + λe . It easy
to verify that We0 ( au ) > U00 (ĉe ( au )) because ĉe ( au ) = ĉ( au ). Therefore by Lemma 32, Ve0 ( a) > We0 ( a) for all
a < au . As e → 0, (Ve , We ) → (Vd , Wd ) . As a result, Wd0 ( a) ≥ U00 (ĉd ( a)) for all a < au . We can then apply
Lemma 32 to show that Wd0 ( a) > U00 (ĉd ( a)) for all a < au because β(c) < 1 for all c < c̄, which implies that
(45), and consequently (44), holds with strict inequality.

87

Consider the construction in Theorem 7. Fixing ã ∈ (0, rc̄ ), such that β is not constant
over [r ã, c̄]. First we show that there exists r̄ such that for r ∈ (r, r̄ )
ˆ au
U10 (ra) da + V ( ã),
Vd ( au ) <
(46)
ã

c̄
ψ

and ψ is defined in Theorem 2 (which depends on r).


1
λ
Indeed, when r → r, ψ → r and Vd ( au ) → ρ+λ U1 (c̄) + ρ U0 (c̄) = V̄ ( au (r )). Therefore,
ˆ a u (r )
Vd ( au ) − V̄ ( ã) → V̄ ( au (r )) − V̄ ( ã) =
V̄ 0 ( a)da.

where au =

ã

Since β is not constant over [r ã, c̄], β(c) < β̄ = β̂(r ) for a non-zero measure subset of
[r ã, c̄] (and β(c) = β̄ outside the subset). Hence, V̄ 0 ( a; r ) < U10 (ra) for a non-zero measure
subset of ( ã, au (r )) and therefore,
ˆ a u (r )
V̄ ( au (r )) − V̄ ( ã) <
U10 (ra) da.
ã

From the limits and inequalities above, we obtain (46) for r sufficiently close to r.
Under (46), we show by contradiction that â > ã. Assume ã ≥ â. By Lemma 31,
Vd ( ã) ≥ V ( ã). Because ĉ( a) < ra for ã < a < au , Vd0 ( a) > U10 (ra) . So
ˆ au
Vd ( au ) − Vd ( ã) >
U10 (ra)da,
ã

which contradicts (46). So â > ã > 0. Now pick any a such that 0 < a < ã. We have â > a.
The construction in Theorem 7 implies that a∗ > a. The proof for existence also shows
that a∗ < ∞, therefore a∗ is strictly interior.

I

Proofs for Convergence Equilibria

Proof of Theorem 8. First of all let α1 = limc↑c∗ β(c) and α2 = limc↓c∗ β(c). Assumption 5
implies that
β ≤ α2 < α1 ≤ 1.
ρ+λ

Let r = ρ ρ+λ(1−α

ρ+λ

2)

and r̄ = ρ ρ+λ(1−α ) . Also by Assumption 5, we have
1

ρ < r < r < r̄.

∗
Consider the initial condition at a∗ = cr , (V ( a∗ ), W ( a∗ )) = V ( a∗ ), W ( a∗ ) . We show
that the ODE (18) admits a solution over [ a∗ , ∞) with the initial condition at a∗ . Similarly,
we show that the ODE (19) admits a solution over [ a, a∗ ] , with the initial condition at a∗ .
Combining the two solutions, we obtain an equilibrium defined over [ a, ∞).

∗
Indeed, starting at a∗ = cr , and the initial condition V ( a∗ ), W ( a∗ ) , because r <
ρ+λ
ρ ρ+λ(1−α ) , β(ra∗+ ) < β̂, we can use Lemma 2, to show the existence of a solution (V, W )
2
to ODE (18), given the initial condition. The solution has a (right) maximal interval of
existence [ a∗ , ã). If 1 − α2 > σ(U1 , c) for all c ≥ c∗ , Theorem 11 shows that ã = +∞, for
88

λ sufficiently high. Otherwise, we follows the steps in the proof of Theorem 3 to restart
the procedure each time V crosses V̄ (we can always do so since β(c) < β̂ for all c > c∗
by Assumption 5). We then obtain an equilibrium over [ a∗ , ∞) with ĉ( a) > ra except for
a countable set of steady states at which ĉ( a) = ra.

∗
Starting at a∗ = cr , and the initial condition V ( a∗ ), W ( a∗ ) , we also show that the
ODE (19) admits a solution defined over ( ã, a∗ ], where ã < a∗ . First consider the case
α1 < 1 (the case α1 = 1 will be considered below). The proof follows closely the steps of
Lemma 2, i.e. we start with the initial condition

V ( a∗ ) + e, W ( a∗ ) + δ(e)e ,
(47)
h

ρ+λ
where δ(e) ∈ 1, λ
is chosen appropriately. In Lemma 34 below, we show that there
exists ē > 0 such that for all 0 < e < ē, δ(e) can be chosen such that

max (ρ + λ − r ) Ve0 ( a∗ ), λU00 (ĉe ( a∗ )) < λWe0 ( a∗ ) < λVe0 ( a∗ ).
Therefore, following the steps in Lemma 15, we can show that

max (ρ + λ − r ) Ve0 ( a), 0 < λWe0 ( a) < λVe0 ( a),

(48)

for all a in the (left) maximal interval of existence for Ve , We .
As in the proof of Lemma 2, we show that there exists ē > 0 and ω > 0 such that the
ODE (19) with the initial condition (47) admits a unique solution (Ve , We ) defined over
[ a∗ − ω, a∗ ]. Moreover, since β(ra∗− ) > β̂, Ve ( a) > V ( a) for a < a∗ .42 Therefore, we follow
the steps in Lemma 15 to show that Ve00 ( a) < 0, for all 0 < e < ē and a∗ − ω ≤ a ≤ a∗ .
Now let a = a∗ − ω2 , we have
ω
V ( a∗ ) + ē − V ( a∗ − ω ) ≥ Ve ( a∗ ) − Ve ( a∗ − ω ) ≥ Ve ( a) − Ve ( a∗ − ω ) > Ve0 ( a),
2

2
∗
0
where the last inequality comes from the concavity of Ve . So Ve ( a) < ω V ( a ) + ē − V ( a∗ − ω ) .
Also by the concavity of Ve

2
V ( a∗ ) + ē − V ( a∗ − ω ) ,
Ve0 ( a) ≤ Ve0 ( a) <
ω
∗
for all a ∈ [ a, a ] .
Together with (48), we have

2
0 < Ve0 ( a), We0 ( a) <
V ( a∗ ) + ē − V ( a∗ − ω )
ω
∗
for all a ∈ [ a, a ] and e ∈ (0, ē) . Therefore, as in Lemma 2, we can apply Dominated
Convergence Theorem to show that (Ve , We ) → (V, W ) over [ a, a∗ ] for some subsequence
of e and (V, W ) is a solution to the ODE (19) over [ a, a∗ ] . Furthermore, for all a ∈ ( a, a∗ ] ,
( a, V ( a), W ( a)) is a regular point.
42 We

also prove by contradiction: if Ve N ( a N ) = V ( a N ) and a N → a∗ as N → ∞,
Ve N ( a∗ ) − V ( a N )
V ( a∗ ) − V ( a N )
>
a∗ − a N
a∗ − a N
= Rh ( ã N , VeN ( ã N ), WeN ( ã N ))
0

which at the limit contradicts the condition that V ( a∗− ) > U10 (ra∗ ) since β(ra∗− ) > β̂.

89

When β(c) = 1 − α1 for c ≤ c∗ . Consider left maximal interval of existence, ( â, a∗ ] of
the ODE (19) from a∗ with the initial conditions (Ve ( a∗ ), We ( a∗ )) =
(Ve , We ) as a solution to

V ( a∗ ) + e, W ( a∗ ) + e . As shown above, for e sufficiently small, at a∗ ,


ρ+λ−r 0 ∗
max
Ve ( a ), 0 < We0 ( a∗ ) ≤ Ve0 ( a∗ )
λ
Ve00 ( a∗ ) < 0
We0 ( a∗ ) ≥ U00 (ĉe ( a∗ ))
Ve ( a∗ ) > V ( a∗ ).
By Lemmas 15, 31, and 32 (when limc↑c∗ β(c) = 1, We0 ( a) = Ve0 ( a) = U10 (ĉe ( a)) =
U00 (ĉe ( a)) for a < a∗ , and We0 ( a) > U00 (ĉe ( a)) for a < a∗ ), these properties hold for all
a ∈ ( â, a∗ ). We show by contradiction that â = 0. Assume by contradiction that this is
not the case, i.e. â > 0. Then the ODE (19) reaches a singular point at â. By Lemma 30,
0
Ve ( â) = V ( â). Because Ve ( a) > V ( a) for all a > â, Ve0 ( â) ≥ V ( â). In addition, because â is
0
a singular point, Ve0 ( â) = U10 (r â). So U10 (r â) ≥ V ( â), or equivalently β(r â) = 1 − α1 ≤ β̂,
by Lemma 6. This contradicts the assumption that r < r̄. We obtain the desired contradiction. Thus, (Ve , We ) is defined over (0, a∗ ].
Given any a > 0, let ω ∈ (0, a). We have
ω
ω
ω
ω
V ( a∗ ) + e − V ( ) ≥ Ve ( a∗ ) − Ve ( ) ≥ Ve (ω ) − Ve ( ) > Ve0 (ω ),
2
2
2
2

2
0
where the last inequality comes from the concavity of Ve . So Ve (ω ) < ω V ( a∗ ) + e − V ( ω2 ) .
Also by the concavity of Ve
ω 
2 
0 < Ve0 ( a) ≤ Ve0 (ω ) <
V ( a∗ ) + ē − V ( ) ,
ω
2
∗
0
for all a ∈ [ω, a ] . We are bounded by the same bounds. Similar to the proof of Lemma
2, there exists a subsequence e → 0 such that (Ve , We ) converges to some limit (V, W )
∗
∗
which is a solution
 to ODE (19) over [ω, a ], thus over [ a, a ], with the initial condition
∗
∗
∗
a , V ( a ), W ( a ) .
Lemmah 34. Assume
that α1 < 1. There exists ē > 0 such that for e ∈ (0, ē), there exists

ρ+λ
δ(e) ∈ 1, λ , such that

max (ρ + λ − r ) Ve0 ( a∗ ), λU00 (ĉe ( a∗ )) < λWe0 ( a∗ ) < λVe0 ( a∗ ),

where (Ve0 ( a∗ ), We0 ( a∗ )) = ( Rh , Sh ) a∗ , V ( a∗ ) + e, W ( a∗ ) + δ(e)e and
 −1 0 ∗ 
ĉe ( a∗ ) = U10
Ve ( a ) < ra∗ .
Proof. Because
r>r=ρ

ρ+λ
> ρ,
ρ + λ (1 − α2 )

we have (ρ + λ − r ) < λ.
h

ρ+λ
First, we show that there exists, ē > 0 such that for all e ∈ (0, ē) and δ ∈ 1, λ ,
0
U00 (ĉe,δ ( a∗ )) < Ve,δ
( a∗ )

90

(49)




0 ( a∗ ), W 0 ( a∗ ) = ( R , S ) a∗ , V ( a∗ ) + e, W ( a∗ ) + δe and
where Ve,δ
h h
e,δ
 −1 0

ĉe,δ ( a∗ ) = U10
Ve,δ ( a∗ ) < ra∗ .
h

ρ+λ
Indeed, because Rh is continuous, for each δ ∈ 1, λ ,
0
lim Ve,δ
( a∗ ) = U10 (ra∗ )

e →0

lim ĉe,δ ( a∗ ) = ra∗ .

e →0

∗
0
∗
In addition, β(ra∗− ) = α1 < 1 which is equivalent hto U00 (ra
 − ) < U1 (ra ). Therefore there

exists, ē > 0 such that for all e ∈ (0, ē) and δ ∈ 1,
ρ + λ −r
λ

ρ+λ
λ

such that (49) holds. Because

< 1, this also implies


ρ+λ−r 0
∗
0
∗
0
max
Ve,δ ( a ), U0 (ĉe,δ ( a )) < Ve,δ
( a ∗ ).
λ

0 ( a∗ ) < V 0 ( a∗ ). It is
By Lemma 35, we can choose ē such that for all e ∈ (0, ē), We,1
e,1
easy to see that


ρ+λ−r 0
∗
∗
0
∗
0
Ve,δ ( a ), U0 (ĉe,δ ( a )) .
lim We,δ ( a ) = +∞ > max
ρ+λ
λ
δ↑
λ

So by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists δ(e) such that

max (ρ + λ − r ) Ve0 ( a∗ ), λU00 (ĉe ( a∗ )) < λWe0 ( a∗ ) < λVe0 ( a∗ ).
Lemma 35. For e > 0, let Ve ( a∗ ) = V ( a∗ ) + e and We ( a∗ ) = W ( a∗ ) + e. We have
lim Sh ( a∗ , Ve ( a∗ ), We ( a∗ )) = U00 (ra∗− ).

e →0

Proof. From the definition of Rh , Sh ,
Ve0 ( a∗ ) = Rh ( a∗ , Ve ( a∗ ), We ( a∗ ))
We0 ( a∗ ) = Sh ( a∗ , Ve ( a∗ ), We ( a∗ )).
Also by the definition of Ve ( a∗), We ( a∗ ), (λ + ρ)Ve ( a∗ ) − λWe ( a∗ ) = U1 (ra∗ ) + ρe. Using
the Taylor expansion for H ( p, a) around p∗ = U10 (ra∗ ), we obtain
λe + U1 (ra∗ ) = H (Ve0 ( a∗ ), a∗ )
∂H ( p∗ , a∗ ) 0 ∗
(Ve ( a ) − p∗ )
= H ( p∗ , a∗ ) +
∂p
1 ∂2 H ( p ∗ , a ∗ ) 0 ∗
+
(Ve ( a ) − p∗ )2 + o ((Ve0 ( a∗ ) − p∗ )2 ).
2
∂p2
From the proof of Lemma 4, H ( p∗ , a∗ ) = U1 (ra∗ ) and

∂H ( p∗ ,a∗ )
∂p

= 0. In addition,

∂2 H ( p ∗ , a ∗ )
1
1

 = − 00 ∗ > 0.
=−

2
−
1
U1 (ra )
∂p
U100 U10
( p∗ )
91

Therefore
ρe = −
Consequently

1
(V 0 ( a∗ ) − U10 (ra∗ ))2
00
2U1 (ra∗ ) e

Ve0 ( a∗ ) − U10 (ra∗ ) =

q

+ o ((Ve0 ( a∗ ) − p∗ )2 ).

√

−2U100 (ra∗ ) ρe + o ( e).

By the definition of ĉe ,
 −1 0 ∗
 −1 0 ∗
ĉe ( a∗ ) − ra∗ = U10
(Ve ( a )) − U10
(U1 (ra ))

1
= 00 ∗ Ve0 ( a∗ ) − U10 (ra∗ ) + o (Ve0 ( a∗ ) − U10 (ra∗ ))
U1 (ra )
q
√

1
−2U100 (ra∗ ) ρe + o ( e).
= 00 ∗
U1 (ra )
Therefore,
U0 (ra∗ ) − U0 (ĉe ( a∗ )) − ρe
ρWe ( a∗ ) − U0 (ĉe ( a∗ ))
=
ra∗ − ĉe ( a)
ra∗ − ĉe ( a∗ )
U (ra∗ ) − U0 (ĉe ( a∗ ))
ρe
q
= 0
−

√
∗
∗
ra − ĉe ( a )
1
−2U 00 (ra∗ ) ρe + o ( e)

We0 (ra) =

−U100 (ra∗ )

1

−→ U00 (ra∗− ),
as e → 0.

J

Derivations for Inverting Results in Section 6

Proof of Theorem 9. Differentiating (6a), and noticing that V 0 ( a) = U10 (ĉ( a)), we obtain

(ρ + λ − r )U10 (ĉ( a)) = U100 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a)) + λW 0 ( a) .
From this equation, we can solve for W 0 ( a) as a function of ĉ( a), ĉ0 ( a), a:
λW 0 ( a) = (ρ + λ − r )U10 (ĉ( a)) − U100 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a)) .
Differentiating the last equation, we can also write W 00 ( a) as a function of ĉ, ĉ0 , ĉ00 , a
2
λW 00 ( a) = (ρ + λ − r )U100 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) − U1000 (ĉ( a)) ĉ0 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a))

− U100 (ĉ( a))ĉ00 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a)) − U100 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) r − ĉ0 ( a)


2
0
0
00
00
= U1 (ĉ( a)) (ρ + λ − 2r )ĉ ( a) + ĉ ( a) − ĉ ( a) (ra − ĉ( a))
2
− U1000 (ĉ( a)) ĉ0 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a)) .
Now differentiating (6b) and rearranging, we obtain

ρ − r + ĉ0 ( a) W 0 ( a) = U00 (ĉ ( a)) ĉ0 ( a) + W 00 ( a) (ra − cb ( a)) .

92

Substituting in the expressions of W 0 and W 00 above, and using the fact that U00 (c) =
β(c)U10 (c), we arrive at


ρ − r + ĉ0 ( a) (ρ + λ − r )U10 (ĉ( a)) − U100 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a))

= λβ(ĉ( a))U10 (ĉ ( a)) ĉ0 ( a)


2
+ U100 (ĉ( a)) (ρ + λ − 2r )ĉ0 ( a) + ĉ0 ( a) − ĉ00 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a)) (ra − ĉ( a))
2
− U1000 (ĉ( a)) ĉ0 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a))2 .
Finally, dividing both sides by U10 (ĉ( a)) and simplifying, we get

ρ − r + ĉ0 ( a) (ρ + λ − r )


U1000 (ĉ( a))ĉ( a)2 0 2 ra − ĉ( a) 2
0
= λβ(ĉ( a))ĉ ( a) −
ĉ ( a)
U10 (ĉ( a))
ĉ( a)

 (ra − ĉ( a))
2
− σ(U1 , ĉ( a)) (2ρ + λ − 3r )ĉ0 ( a) + 2 ĉ0 ( a) − ĉ00 ( a) (ra − ĉ( a))
.
ĉ( a)
Since ζ is the inverse of ĉ, a = ζ (ĉ( a)). Therefore, ζ 0 =
U 000

from the definition of σ, (13), σ0 = − U10 c +
implies
at (14).

U 000
− U10 c2
1

1

=

cσ0

− σ2

U 002
c
U 02

−

U 00
U0

00

1
ĉ0

and ζ 00 = −ĉ0ĉ2 . In addition,


U 000
= 1c − U10 c2 + σ2 + σ , which
1

− σ. Plugging these identities into the last equation, we arrive

Now, we apply (14) to the parametric Example 2. Noticing that σ ≡ σ̄, then σ0 ≡ 0,
and ζ (c) ≡ c−Ψr ã + ã, ζ 0 ≡ Ψ1 , (14) becomes
 2
1
1
1
λβ = α1 + α2
Ψ
Ψ
Ψ




2
1 
r  r ã
r  r ã
2
+ σ̄(2 + (2ρ + λ − 3r ) ) 1 −
− 1 + (σ̄ + σ̄) 1 −
−1
,
Ψ
Ψ
c
Ψ
c
 r ã

r ( c−Ψr ã + ã)−c
r
=
1
−
−
1
. Dividing both sides by λ Ψ1 and simplifying,
since rζc−c =
c
Ψ
c
we obtain the expression for β(c) given in Example 2.

K

Proofs for Further Characterizations

Proof of Theorem 10. Consider the construction of equilibrium in Theorem 3 and let (V, W ) =
(V0 , W0 ) and [ a, a∗ ) denote its maximal interval of existence. First of all, we show that
there exists e ∈ (0, 1) such that λW 0 ( a) < (1 − e) (λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a), for all a ∈ [ a, a∗ ).
Then we show that a∗ = ∞.
Because r < ρ, there exists e ∈ (0, 1) (sufficiently small) such that

(1 − e ) ( ρ + λ − r )
>1
λ

93

and

(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )
11−e
>
.
λ e
λ
In the proof of Lemma 2, we show that
(ρ − r )

lim W 0 ( a) ≤ U00 (ra) ≤ U10 (ra) = lim V 0 ( a).
a↓ a

a↓ a

Therefore, in the right neighborhood of a,
λW 0 ( a) < (1 − e) (λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a),
because (1 − e) (λ + ρ − r ) > λ.
We use Lemma 7 (Variation 2) to show that λW 0 ( a) < (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a) for all
a∗ > a > a. We just showed that this is true in the right neighborhood of a, so the first
condition in Lemma 7 is satisfied. Now, we show that the second (relaxed) condition in
Lemma 7 is also satisfied, i.e. if there exists ã > a such that λW 0 ( ã) = (1 − e)(ρ + λ −
r )V 0 ( ã), then λW 00 ( a) < (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 00 ( a) in the left neighborhood of ã.43
Indeed, in the left neighborhood of ã, λW 0 ( a) ≈ (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a), therefore
V 00 ( a) =

e ( ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a )
λW 0 ( a) − (λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a)
≈−
< 0,
ĉ( a) − ra
ĉ( a) − ra

Differentiating equation (6b), we obtain
W 00 ( a) =

(U00 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) − ρW 0 ( a)) (ĉ( a) − ra) − (U0 (ĉ( a)) − ρW ( a))(ĉ0 ( a) − r )

(ĉ( a) − ra)2
(U00 (ĉ( a))ĉ0 ( a) − ρW 0 ( a)) W 0 ( a)(ĉ0 ( a) − r )
−
.
=
ĉ( a) − ra
ĉ( a) − ra

Therefore,

(U00 (ĉ( a)) − W 0 ( a)) ĉ0 ( a) (r − ρ)W 0 ( a)
W ( a) =
+
ĉ( a) − ra
ĉ( a) − ra
0
0
00
(U0 (ĉ( a)) − W ( a)) V ( a)
( r − ρ )W 0 ( a )
+
=
ĉ( a) − ra
U100 (ĉ( a))
ĉ( a) − ra
0
0
(W ( a) − U0 (ĉ( a)))
( r − ρ )W 0 ( a )
00

=
(
a
)
+
.
V
ĉ( a) − ra
(ĉ( a) − ra) −U100 (ĉ( a))
00

When a close to ã, we also have:
λW 0 ( a) − (λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a)
ĉ( a) − ra
e
− λ 1− e W 0 ( a )
≈
,
ĉ( a) − ra

V 00 ( a) =

because, by continuity, when a close to ã, λW 0 ( a) ≈ (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a). Therefore,
W 0 ( a) ≈ − λ1 1−e e V 00 ( a)(ĉ( a) − ra). Plugging this back to the expression for W 00 above, we
43 We

use Variation 2 of Lemma 7 because if ã = a∗ , W 0 and W 00 might not exist at a∗ .

94

have
(1−e)(ρ+λ−r ) 0
U1 (ĉ( a)) − U00 (ĉ( a))
(r − ρ) λ1 1−e e V 00 ( a)(ĉ( a) − ra)
λ
00

≈
V ( a) −
ĉ( a) − ra
(ĉ( a) − ra) −U100 (ĉ( a))



0
(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r ) U0 (ĉ( a))
11−e
1
ĉ( a)
=
− 0
+ (ρ − r )
V 00 ( a)
λ
U1 (ĉ( a)) σ (U1 , ĉ( a)) ĉ( a) − ra
λ e





W 00 ( a)

(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r ) 00
V ( a ),
λ
where the last inequality comes from


(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r ) U00 (ĉ( a))
ĉ( a)
1
− 0
λ
U1 (ĉ( a)) σ (U1 , ĉ( a)) ĉ( a) − ra


(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )
ĉ( a)
1
≥
> 0,
−1
λ
σ (U1 , ĉ( a)) ĉ( a) − ra
<

and

11−e
(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )
>
λ e
λ
00
and V ( a) < 0. Therefore both conditions 1) and 2) in Lemma 7 are satisfied, and by that
lemma, λW 0 ( a) ≤ (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a) for all a < a∗ .
We prove by contradiction that a∗ is infinite. Assume by contradiction that a∗ is finite.
Let F ( a) = (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra). At a = a∗ , F ( a) = 0 and

(ρ − r )

F 0 ( a) =(ρ + λ)V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) − rU10 (ra)

>(ρ + λ)V 0 ( a) − (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a) − rU10 (ra)
= (ρ + λ − (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r ) − r ) U10 (ra)
=e (ρ + λ − r ) U10 (ra) > 0.
So F ( a) < 0 in the left neighborhood of a∗ . This is a contradiction. Thus a∗ = +∞, i.e.
(V, W ) is defined over [ a, ∞).
By Lemma 5,
V 00 ( a)
(λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a)
=
ĉ ( a) = 00
U1 (ĉ( a))
U100 (ĉ( a))(ĉ( a) − ra)
e ( λ + ρ − r )V 0 ( a )
eλV 0 ( a)
> 00
> 00
> 0,
U1 (ĉ( a))(ĉ( a) − ra)
U1 (ĉ( a))(ĉ( a) − ra)
0

where the last inequality comes from r < ρ.
Proof of Theorem 11. As in the proof of Theorem 10 (using the same definition of V, W and
a∗ ), first, we show that there exists e ∈ (0, 1) such that λW 0 ( a) < (1 − e) (λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a),
for all a ∈ [ a, a∗ ). Then we show that a∗ = ∞.
Condition (15) implies that supc>ra β(c) < 1. Therefore, there exists e ∈ (0, 1) such
that
β(c) < 1 − e

95

and

(1 − e ) − β ( c ) > (1 − e ) σ ( c )
for all c >
Therefore, given ρ ≤ r, there exists λ̄ ≥ 0 such that for all λ > λ̄, we have
ρ
β(ra) < β̂ (r, ρ, λ) (since β(ra) < r ) and
ra.44

λU00 (ra) < (1 − e) (λ + ρ − r ) U10 (ra)

(50)

and for all c > ra,

(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r ) U00 (c)
− 0
>
λ
U1 (c)



r − ρ 1 − e (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )
+
λ
e
λ



σ ( c ).

(51)

Moreover λ̄ can be chosen to be increasing in r and λ̄(ρ) = 0.45,46
By (50),
ρ + λ − r > 0.
(52)
Since β(ra) < β̂ we can apply Lemma 2. Besides, in the proof of Lemma 2, we show
that
lim W 0 ( a) ≤U00 (ra),
a↓ a

lim V 0 ( a) =U10 (ra).
a↓ a

Therefore, by (50),

λW 0 ( a) < (1 − e) (λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a)
in the right neighborhood of a.
Given these three conditions, as in the proof of Theorem 10, we use Lemma 7 (Variation 2) to show that λW 0 ( a) < (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a) for all a > a. As shown above,
this is true in the right neighborhood of a so the first condition in Lemma 7 is satisfied. Now we show that the second (relaxed) condition in Lemma 7 is also satisfied,
i.e. if there exists ã > a such that λW 0 ( ã) = (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( ã), we show that
λW 00 ( a) < (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 00 ( a) in the left neighborhood of ã. Indeed, in the left neighborhood of ã, λW 0 ( a) ≈ (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a), therefore
e ( ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a )
λW 0 ( a) − (λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a)
V ( a) =
≈−
< 0,
ĉ( a) − ra
ĉ( a) − ra
00

Differentiating equation (6b) and simplifying as done in the proof of Theorem 10:
W 00 ( a) =

(W 0 ( a) − U00 (ĉ( a)))
( r − ρ )W 0 ( a )
00

V
(
a
)
+
.
ĉ( a) − ra
(ĉ( a) − ra) −U100 (ĉ( a))

When a close to ã, we also have:

−λ 1−e e W 0 ( a)
λW 0 ( a) − (λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a)
≈
,
V ( a) =
ĉ( a) − ra
ĉ( a) − ra
00

1
is equivalent to 1 − σ(c) > 1−
e β ( c ), for some e ∈ (0, 1)which is true given (15).
45 When r = ρ, (51) becomes (1 − e ) − β ( c ) > (1 − e ) σ (U , c ).
1
46 Similarly, given λ > 0 there exists r > ρ such that for r ∈ [ ρ, r ], (50) and (51) hold. The proof for
1
1
existence of continuous Markov equilibrium then proceeds in exactly the same way.
44 This

96

because, by continuity, when a close to ã, λW 0 ( a) ≈ (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a). Therefore,
W 0 ( a) ≈ − λ1 1−e e V 00 ( a)(ĉ( a) − ra). Plugging this back to the expression for W 00 above, we
have


(1−e)(ρ+λ−r ) 0
0 ( ĉ ( a ))
U
(
ĉ
(
a
))
−
U
(r − ρ) λ1 1−e e V 00 ( a)(ĉ( a) − ra)
0
1
λ
00

W 00 ( a) ≈
V
(
a
)
−
ĉ( a) − ra
(ĉ( a) − ra) −U100 (ĉ( a))



ĉ( a)
(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r ) U00 (ĉ( a))
1
11−e
=
− 0
− (r − ρ )
V 00 ( a)
λ
U1 (ĉ( a)) σ (U1 , ĉ( a)) ĉ( a) − ra
λ e
(1 − e)(ρ + λ − r ) 00
<
V ( a ),
λ
where the last inequality comes from (51) and V 00 ( a) < 0. Therefore both conditions 1)
and 2) in Lemma 7 are satisfied, and by that lemma, λW 0 ( a) ≤ (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a)
for all a ≤ a∗ .
As in the proof of Theorem 10, we prove by contradiction that a∗ is infinite. Assume
by contradiction that a∗ is finite. Let F ( a) = (ρ + λ)V ( a) − λW ( a) − U1 (ra). At a = a∗ ,
F ( a) = 0 and
F 0 ( a) = (ρ + λ)V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a) − rU10 (ra)

> (ρ + λ)V 0 ( a) − (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r )V 0 ( a) − rU10 (ra)
= (ρ + λ − (1 − e)(ρ + λ − r ) − r ) U10 (ra)
= e (ρ + λ − r ) U10 (ra) > 0,
where the last inequality comes from (52). So F ( a) < 0 in the left neighborhood of a∗ . This
is a contradiction. Thus a∗ = +∞.
Similar to the proof of Theorem 10,
ĉ0 ( a) =

e ( λ + ρ − r )V 0 ( a )
(λ + ρ − r ) V 0 ( a) − λW 0 ( a)
>
> 0,
U100 (ĉ( a))(ĉ( a) − ra)
U100 (ĉ( a))(ĉ( a) − ra)

where the last inequality also comes from (52).
Proof of Theorem 12. We use the notation V λ , W λ for the functions defined in (8). Notice
that
1
W λ ( a) = U0 (ra),
ρ
independent of λ, so we can drop the subscript λ.
ρ
First, we notice that since supc≥ra β(c) < r , there exists λ∗ > 0 such that β(c) < β̂ for
all λ ≥ λ∗ . Therefore, we can apply Lemma 2 and Theorem 3 to construct Markov equilibria with dissaving. Let Vλ , Wλ denote the equilibrium value functions constructed in the
proof of Theorem 3. We show that there exists λ̄ > λ∗ , such that for all λ ≥ λ∗ , Vλ crosses
V λ at some a1 (λ) > a and limλ→∞ a1 (λ) = a. In addition, Wλ ( a1 (λ)) < W λ ( a1 (λ)). This
result immediate implies the existence of a Markov equilibrium with dissaving and discontinuous policy function because starting from a1 (λ) we can apply Theorem
3 to obtain

a Markov equilibrium defined over [ a1 (λ), ∞) with (V, W ) = V λ , W λ at a1 (λ). Combining this equilibrium with (Vλ , Wλ ) defined over [ a, a1 (λ)), we obtain a discontinuous
equilibrium over [ a, ∞).
97

We prove the result by contradiction. Assume that the result does not hold, then there
exists ā > a and a sequence of {λn }∞
n=1 with limn→∞ λn = ∞, such that
Vλn ( a) > V λn ( a)
U (ra)−U (ra)

for all a ∈ ( a, a) .47 Because lima↓a 0 a−a 0
= rU00 (ra), and r > ρ, there exists a1 ∈ ( a, a)
and 0 < γ such that
1 U0 (ra1 ) − U0 (ra)
> (γ + 1) U00 (ra).
ρ
a1 − a
First, using Lemma 36 below, we show that
lim Wλn ( a1 ) = W ( a1 ).

n→∞

Indeed, by Lemma 11, Wλn ( a1 ) − W ( a1 ) ≤ 0. Therefore

lim sup Wλn ( a1 ) − W ( a1 ) ≤ 0.
n→∞

(53)

Now,
Wλn ( a1 ) − W ( a1 ) = Wλn ( a1 ) − Vλn ( a1 ) + Vλn ( a1 ) − V λn ( a1 )

+ V λ n ( a1 ) − W λ n ( a1 ).
By Lemma 36,

lim (Vλn ( a1 ) − Wλn ( a1 )) = 0.

n→∞

By the definition of V λ , W λ in (8)

lim V λn ( a1 ) − W λn ( a1 ) = 0,

n→∞

and by the contradiction assumption
Vλn ( a1 ) − V λn ( a1 ) ≥ 0.
Thus


lim inf Wλn ( a1 ) − W ( a1 ) ≥ 0.

Therefore by (53) and (54)

n→∞

(54)


lim Wλn ( a1 ) − W ( a1 ) = 0.

n→∞

Given this limit, for e > 0, sufficiently small, there exists N such that Wλn ( a1 ) −
W ( a1 ) > −e for all n ≥ N. Now,
Wλn ( a1 ) − Wλn ( a)
W ( a1 ) − W ( a ) − e
e
>
> (γ + 1) U00 (ra) −
.
a1 − a
a1 − a
a1 − a
47 By

(55)

Lemma 11, Wλn ( a) < W λ ( a). Therefore (ρ + λn ) Vλn ( a) − λn Wλn ( a) > (ρ + λn ) V λn ( a) −
λn W λn ( a) = U1 (ra). Thus Vλn , Wλn are defined and continuous over [ a, a] .

98

By the Mean Value Theorem, there exists an ∈ ( a, a1 ) such that,
Wλn ( a1 ) − Wλn ( a)
a1 − a
ρ
0
≤ U0 (ran ) + U10 (ran )
λn
ρ 0
0
≤ U0 (ra) + U1 (ra),
(56)
λn
where the first inequality comes from the proof of Lemma 10 (especially inequality (30)).
By choosing e sufficiently small and n sufficiently large such that
ρ
e
+ U10 (ra) < γU00 (ra),
a1 − a λ n
which contradicts (55) and (56). We obtain the desired contradiction.
Wλ0 n ( an ) =

Lemma 36. Assume that there exists ā > a and a diverging sequence {λn } such that Vλn ( a) >
V λn ( a) for all a ∈ ( a, a) . Then
lim (Vλn ( a) − Wλn ( a)) = 0,

(57)

n→∞

for all a ∈ ( a, ā) .
Proof. By Lemma 11, Wλn ≤ W therefore
Vλn ( a) − Wλn ( a) ≥ V λm ( a) − W λn ( a)
for all a ∈ ( a, a) .
To find an upper bound on Vλn − Wλn . We rewrite equation (6a) as
λ (Vλ ( a) − Wλ ( a)) = U1 (ĉλ ( a)) + Vλ0 ( a)(ra − ĉλ ( a)) − ρVλ ( a).
Therefore

λ (Vλ ( a) − Wλ ( a)) ≤ U1 (ĉλ ( a)) − ρV λ ( a),
because Vλ ( a) > Vλ ( a) = V λ ( a), and Vλ0 ≥ 0, and ra − ĉλ ( a) < 0.
Now if U1 is bounded above

(58)

λ(Vλ ( a) − Wλ ( a)) ≤ sup U1 (c) − ρV λ ( a).
c

Thus λ |Vλ ( a) − Wλ ( a)| is bounded when λ → ∞. Therefore (57) holds.
If U1 is not bounded, by Assumption 2, for some σ > 0, σ (c) > σ for all c ≥ c̄. We
show, using Lemma 7, that there exists λ̄ such that, when λ > λ̄, ĉλ ( a) < 2λ
σ a, for all
a ∈ ( a, a) . Let f ( a) =

2λ
σ a

and g( a) = ĉλ ( a). With λ > σr, f ( a) =

2λ
σ

> ra. We just need to
0
0
verify that if f ( a) = g( a) then f 0 ( a) = 2λ
σ > g ( a ) = ĉλ ( a ). Indeed, by differentiating, the
first order condition (6c) with respect to a,
ĉ0λ ( a) =

Vλ00 ( a)
.
U100 (ĉλ ( a))

To get Vλ00 ( a), differentiating (6a) with respect to a and use the first order condition for c,
we obtain
99

Vλ00 ( a)(ra − ĉλ ( a)) = (ρ + λ − r ) Vλ0 ( a) − λWλ0 ( a)

= (ρ + λ − r ) U10 (ĉλ ( a)) − λWλ0 ( a).
Therefore, because Wλ0 ≥ 0 as shown in Lemma 10,
ĉ0λ ( a)

(ρ + λ − r ) U10 (ĉλ ( a)) − λWλ0 ( a)
(ρ + λ − r ) U10 (ĉλ ( a))
=
≤
−U100 (ĉλ ( a)) (ĉλ ( a) − ra)
−U100 (ĉλ ( a)) (ĉλ ( a) − ra)
1
ĉλ ( a)
ĉλ ( a)
λ
= (ρ + λ − r )
<
σ (U1 , ĉλ ( a)) (ĉλ ( a) − ra)
σ (ĉλ ( a) − ra)
=

λ
σ

2λ
σ
2λ
σ

− ra

.

By choosing λ̄ sufficiently large, for all λ > λ̄,
Lemma 7, ĉλ ( a) < 2λ
σ a.
Now, going back to inequality (58),

2λ
σ
2λ
−
ra
σ

< 2 for all a ∈ ( a, ā) . Therefore, by

λ (Vλ ( a) − Wλ ( a)) ≤ U1 (ĉλ ( a)) − ρV λ ( a) < U1




2λ
ā − ρV λ ( a).
σ

By the INADA conditions
lim

λ→∞

It is easy to show that limλ→∞

V λ ( a)
λ

U1



2λ
σ ā

λ



= 0.

= 0. Thus we obtain the desired convergence (57).

100

