                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  ENDOGENOUS TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION AND R&D AS SOURCES OF BUSINESS
                      CYCLE PERSISTENCE

                                       Diego Anzoategui
                                         Diego Comin
                                         Mark Gertler
                                        Joseba Martinez

                                      Working Paper 22005
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22005


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 2016, Revised March 2017




Thanks to Francesco Bianchi, Bob Hall, Howard Kung, and Chris Tonetti for helpful comments.
Financial assistance from the NSF is greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Diego Anzoategui, Diego Comin, Mark Gertler, and Joseba Martinez. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Technology Adoption and R&D as Sources of Business Cycle Persistence
Diego Anzoategui, Diego Comin, Mark Gertler, and Joseba Martinez
NBER Working Paper No. 22005
February 2016, Revised March 2017
JEL No. E3,O3

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the hypothesis that the slowdown in productivity following the Great Recession was
in significant part an endogenous response to the contraction in demand that induced the
downturn. We first present some panel data evidence that technology diffusion is highly cyclical.
We then develop and estimate a macroeconomic model with an endogenous TFP mechanism that
allows for both costly development and adoption of new technologies. We then show that the
model's implied cyclicality of technology diffusion is consistent with the panel data evidence. We
next use the model to assess the sources of the productivity slowdown. We find that a significant
fraction of the post- Great Recession fall in productivity was an endogenous phenomenon. The
endogenous productivity mechanism also helps account for the slowdown in productivity prior to
the Great Recession, though for this period shocks to the effectiveness of R&D expenditures are
critical. Overall, the results are consistent with the view that demand factors have played a role in
the slowdown of capacity growth since the onset of the recent crisis. More generally, they provide
insight into why recoveries from financial crises may be so slow.


Diego Anzoategui                                  Mark Gertler
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
New York University                               New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor                      269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003DRESS HERE                      New York, NY 10003
diego.anzoategui@nyu.edu                          and NBER
                                                  mark.gertler@nyu.edu
Diego Comin
Dartmouth College                                 Joseba Martinez
Economics Department                              New York University
6106 Rockefeller Hall, Room 327                   19 W. 4th Street, 6 FL
Hanover, NH 03755                                 New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                          joseba.martinez@nyu.edu
diego.comin@dartmouth.edu
1        Introduction
One of the great challenges for macroeconomists is explaining the slow recovery from major
financial crises (see, e.g. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)). Many popular explanations involve
persistent demand shortfalls.1 For example, a number of authors emphasize the deleveraging
process as an important cause of a sustained decline in spending by borrowers as they saved
to reduced their indebtedness. Others emphasize how constraints on macroeconomic policy
likely also contributed to sluggish demand. The zero lower bound on the nominal interest
rate limited the ability of monetary policy to stimulate the economy, and the political fight
over the national debt ceiling effectively removed fiscal policy as a source of stimulus.
    While these demand side factors have undoubtedly played a central role, it is unlikely
that they alone can account for the extraordinarily sluggish movement of the economy back
to the pre-crisis trend. This has led a number of authors to explore the contribution of
supply-side factors. Both Hall (2014) and Reifschneider et al. (2015) have argued that
the huge contraction in economic activity induced by the financial crisis in turn led to
an endogenous decline in capacity growth. Hall (2014) emphasizes how the collapse in
business investment during the recession brought about a non-trivial drop in the capital
stock. Reifschneider et al. (2015) emphasize not only this factor but also the sustained
drop in productivity. They conjecture that the drop in productivity may be the result of
a decline in productivity-enhancing investments, and thus an endogenous response to the
recession.
    Indeed, sustained drops in productivity appear to be a feature of major financial crises.
This has been the case for the U.S. and Europe in the wake of the Great Recession. The
same phenomenon holds broadly for financial crises in emerging markets: in a sample of
East Asian countries that experienced a financial crisis during the 1990s, Queralto (2015)
finds a sustained drop in labor productivity in each case to go along with the sustained
decline in output.
    What accounts for reduced productivity growth following financial crises? There are two
candidate hypotheses: bad luck versus an endogenous response. Fernald (2014) makes a
compelling case for the bad luck hypothesis. As he emphasizes, the productivity slowdown
began prior to the Great Recession, raising questions on whether the crisis itself can be a
causal factor. Figure 1 illustrates the argument. The figure plots detrended total factor
productivity, specifically the utilization corrected measure described in Fernald (2012), along
with labor productivity. Both measures show a sustained decline relative to trend in the
    1
        See, for example Christiano et al. (2015) for a taxonomy of possible explanations for the slow recovery.



                                                         2
        Figure 1: Detrended Capacity Adjusted TFP and Labor Productivity


                       6



                       4



                       2



                       0



                      -2



                      -4
                                                                       TFP
                                                                       Labor productivity
                      -6
                           Q1-85   Q1-90    Q1-95    Q1-00     Q1-05     Q1-10        Q1-15




All series are log-linearly detrended.     Labor productivity is GDP divided by hours worked (see Ap-
pendix A.1 for data sources).       TFP is Utilization-Adjusted Total Factor Productivity (available at
http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/total-factor-productivity-tfp/; see Fernald (2012) for details).


years after the Great Recession, but the decline appears to begin around 2004-05.
   There are several different theories of how the productivity slowdown could reflect an
endogenous response to the crisis. The one on which we focus involves a reduction in
productivity enhancing investments.2 Specifically, to the extent that the crisis induced a
drop in these investments, the subsequent decline in productivity could be an endogenous
outcome.
   We focus on two types of productivity enhancing investments: (i) the creation of new
technologies through research and development (R&D) and (ii) the diffusion of new tech-
nologies via adoption expenditures. In Section 2 we present evidence that each of these
types of investments is highly procyclical. The cyclicality of R&D is readily apparent from
aggregate data. It declined nontrivially during the Great Recession, but exhibited an even
sharper decline relative to economic activity during and after the 2001-2002 recession.3 We
   2
     Our hypothesis is similar to Reifschneider et al. (2015). An alternate approach stresses misallocation
of productive inputs following a financial crisis. See for example Garcia-Macia (2015) who emphasizes
misallocation between tangible and intangible capital.
   3
     Further, the decline in R&D in 2001 was reasonably widespread across sectors. Using COMPUSTAT


                                                     3
will argue that this decline contributed to the productivity slowdown prior to the Great Re-
cession. Unfortunately there is no aggregate data series on technology adoption. However,
using a panel of survey data on technology adoption, we estimate a highly cyclical pace of
diffusion. Indeed our subsequent analysis will find much of the endogenous productivity
slowdown during and after the Great Recession attributable to a drop in adoption intensity.
   To assess the quantitative relevance of an endogenous technology response to the crisis on
the evolution of TFP, we develop and estimate a macroeconomic model modified to allow for
endogenous technology via R&D and adoption. The endogenous productivity mechanism
we develop is based on Comin and Gertler (2006), which uses the approach to connect
business cycles to growth. The Comin/Gertler work, in turn, is a variant of Romer (1990)’s
expanding variety model of technological change, modified to include an endogenous pace of
technology adoption. We include adoption to allow for a realistic period of diffusion of new
technologies, and we allow for endogenous adoption intensity to capture cyclical movements
in productivity that may be the product of cyclical adoption rates. We then show that
the cyclical speed of diffusion generated by our model is consistent with the panel data
evidence presented in Section 2. We also include an exogenous TFP shock that can capture
the Fernald (2014) bad luck hypothesis.
   We find that a sharp decline in endogenous adoption intensity accounts for much of the
productivity decline during the Great Recession and after. On the other hand, a decline in
the efficiency of R&D is mainly responsible for the pre-Great Recession slowdown. Exoge-
nous TFP movements do not explain much of the productivity variation over this period.
We conclude by providing independent evidence that supports the plausibility of our key
findings. In particular, we provide a measure of R&D productivity based on the ratio of new
patents relative to R&D researchers that displays the same pattern as the R&D productiv-
ity shocks we estimate. Similarly, we show that a measure of expenditures by companies in
licensing new technologies developed by universities resembles the evolution of the intensity
of adoption implied by our model.
   In addition to the literature cited above, there are several other papers related to our
analysis. Schmookler (1966) and Shleifer (1986) emphasize the role of aggregate demand on
the timing of innovation and technology adoption. Queralto (2015), Guerron-Quintana and
Jinnai (2014) and Garcia-Macia (2013) have appealed to endogenous growth considerations
to explain the persistence of financial crises. The paper most closely related to ours is
Bianchi and Kung (2014), who also estimate a macroeconomic model with endogenous
data, we observe that out of 29 sectors with R&D expenditures of at least $100 million in 2000, 19 experienced
a decline in R&D expenditures between their peak in the period 1998-2000 and 2002. As a benchmark,
computers and software experienced the 9th and 10th largest declines, of approximately 20% in each case.


                                                      4
growth and are the first to use R&D data. In addition to variation in details and focus,
there are three key differences between our analysis and that in Bianchi and Kung (2014).
First, our model of R&D and adoption is more explicit, which imposes discipline on the lags
in the diffusion process, and allows a clearer interpretation of the technology parameters.
Second, and perhaps most importantly, we use the panel data evidence presented in Section
2 as an external validity check to ensure that the cyclical behavior of adoption in the model
is plausible. This distinction is important because cyclical diffusion plays an important
role in this literature but is not directly observable in the aggregate, necessitating some
form of external validity. A final notable difference is that our solution method allows us
to take account of a binding zero lower bound on monetary policy, which turns out to be
an important factor propagating the endogenous decline in productivity in the wake of the
Great Recession.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents evidence of the cyclical
behavior of R&D and technology adoption. Section 3 presents the model. Section 4 describes
the econometric implementation and presents our estimation results. In addition, we show
that estimates of the cyclicality of technology diffusion from artificial data generated by
the model are consistent with the estimates in 2. Finally, using a historical decomposition
of productivity growth, section 5 analyzes the extent to which the endogenous growth
mechanism can account for the evolution of productivity both before and after the Great
Recession.


2     Evidence on R&D and the speed of technology diffusion
In this section, we present evidence on the cyclical behavior of R&D and technology adop-
tion. The goal is twofold: first to motivate our formulation of endogenous productivity; and
second to present external evidence that we use in Section 4.5 to validate the quantitative
predictions of our estimated model.
    Figure 2 plots expenses on R&D conducted by US corporations. The figure shows a clear
procyclical pattern, consistent with the evidence found in other studies (see e.g. Comin and
Gertler (2006)).4 While there is a noticeable decline in R&D expenditures during the Great
Recession, there is a substantially larger decline relative to economic activity following the
2001-2002 recession. Overall, the figure raises the possibility that the productivity slowdown
prior to the Great Recession was in part a consequence of the sharp R&D contraction that
  4
    There is a long literature documenting the cyclicality of R&D expenditures (see Barlevy (2007), for a
summary). Barlevy (2007) presents evidence based on firm-level data on the importance of both sectoral
demand as well as firms’ financial conditions for the pro-cyclicality of R&D expenditures.


                                                   5
                Figure 2: R&D Expenditures by US Corporations, 1983-2013




                      0.1




                     0.05




                       0




                    -0.05




                     -0.1



                                                                             R&D Expenditure by US Corporations

                    -0.15
                            1984   1987   1990   1993   1995       1998   2001   2004     2006      2009     2012




Log-linearly detrended data. Source: R&D Expenditure by US corporations (National Science Foundation).
Data are deflated by the GDP deflator and divided by the civilian population older than 16 (see Appendix
A.1 for data sources).


preceded it.
   We next turn to technology adoption. As noted earlier, an aggregate time series mea-
suring adoption is not available. To explore the cyclicality of technology diffusion we resort
to survey data on the speed of technological diffusion, of the type used in the productivity
literature.5 The specific data we have available is time series data of the fraction of compa-
nies that have adopted a technology, for a sample of 26 production technologies, detailed in
Table 1, that diffused at various times over the period 1947-2003 in the US (5) and the UK
(21). We use the data to estimate the effect of the business cycle on the speed of diffusion,
after controlling for the normal diffusion process.
   Specifically, we denote by mit the fraction of potential adopters that have adopted a
   5
       See for example, Griliches (1957) and Mansfield (1961).




                                                               6
                       Table 1: Technologies in diffusion panel data


     UK Technologies
     Special presses                             Foils
     Wet suction boxes                           Gibberellic acid
     Automatic size boxes                        Accelerated drying hoods
     Basic oxygen process                        Vacuum degassing
     Vacuum melting                              Continuous casting
     Electrical hygrometers                      Synthetic fabrics
     Tunnel kilns                                Computer-controlled processing
     Tufted carpets                              Computer typesetting
     Photo-electrically controlled cutting       Shuttleless looms
     Numerical control printing presses          Numerical control turning machines
     Numerical control turbines
     US Technologies
     CT scanners                                 Computerized numerical control machines
     Automated inspection sensors                3-D CAD
     Flexible manufacturing systems

Source: UK data from Davies (1979). US data from Trajtenberg (1990) and Bartel et al. (2009)


specific technology i in t. The ratio of adopters to non-adopters rit is

                                        rit = mit /(1 − mit ).                                 (1)

The speed of diffusion is then the percentage change in rit :


                                        Speedit = 4 ln(rit )                                   (2)

   As shown by Mansfield (1961), if the diffusion process follows a logistic curve, the speed
of diffusion (2) is equal to a constant αi . In reality, however, the speed of diffusion is not
constant; it tends to be faster in the early stages. Therefore, rit declines with the age of
the technology. Additionally, we want to explore whether the speed of technology diffusion
varies over the cycle. To this end, we consider the following specification


                              Speedit = αi + G(lagit ) + β ∗ ybt + it ,                       (3)

where G(.) is a polynomial in the years since the technology was first introduced, and ybt
is a measure of cyclical fluctuations in GDP, specifically detrended real GDP per capita
(following Comin and Gertler (2006) we detrend GDP using a bandpass filter to capture


                                                  7
high- and medium- frequency fluctuations).

                 Table 2: Cyclicality of the Speed of Technology Diffusion


                                                   I           II       III       IV

                          ybt                    3.73          3.7     3.64      4.12
                                                (3.59)       (2.81)   (3.94)    (3.17)
                          ybt * US                            0.07               -0.74
                                                             (0.04)             (0.53)
                          lagit                 -0.057       -0.057
                                                (5.22)       (4.76)
                             2
                          lagit                  0.001       0.001
                                                (2.52)       (2.12)
                          ln(lagit )                                   -0.29     -0.29
                                                                      (6.68)    (6.65)
                          R2 (within)            0.11        0.11      0.13      0.13
                          N technologies          26          26         26       26
                          N observations         327         327        327       327

Notes: (1) dependent variable is the speed of diffusion of 26 technologies, (2) all regressions include technology
specific fixed effects. (3) t-statistics in parenthesis, (4) ybt denotes the cycle of GDP per capita in the country
and represents the high and medium frequency components of output fluctuations, (5)b
                                                                                   yt *US is the medium
term cycle of GDP per capita times a US dummy, (6) lag represents the years since the technology first
started to diffuse.

   Table 2 presents the estimates of equation (3). The main finding is that the estimates
of the elasticity of the speed of diffusion with respect to the cycle, β, are robustly positive
and significant. In particular, the point estimate is between 3.6 and 4.1 depending on the
specification. These estimates of β provide a benchmark on the cyclicality of the speed of
technology diffusion in the micro-data. In our analysis, we use this benchmark to externally
validate the sensitivity of diffusion to the cycle in our model and in this way ensure that
the productivity dynamics induced by the endogenous adoption mechanisms in the model
are consistent with the micro-evidence.
   The effect of years since the technology started diffusing is negative and convex (i.e. it
vanishes over time). The results are robust to specifying the function G as a second order
polynomial or in logarithms. Finally, we do not observe any significant differential effect of
the cycle on US versus UK technologies.
   To illustrate the cyclicality of the speed of technology diffusion for U.S. data, Figure 3
plots the speed of diffusion for the balanced panel of four US technologies for which we have

                                                         8
                                   Figure 3: Speed of Diffusion


                   0.2


                  0.15


                   0.1


                  0.05


                    0


                 −0.05


                  −0.1


                 −0.15


                  −0.2


                 −0.25


                  −0.3
                                                                       Avg. diffusion
                                                                       Avg. diffusion (3 year MA)

                    1980          1985         1990          1995          2000                2005




data from 1981 to 2003. Specifically, for each of the technologies we remove the acyclical
component of the diffusion rate (αi + G(lagit )). We then average the residual (β ∗ ybt + it )
over the four technologies. The dashed line is a plot of this average, while the solid line is
a three year centered moving average. The figure reveals a positive correlation between the
speed of diffusion and the cycle. Diffusion speed was lowest in the deep 1981-82 recession;
it recovered during the 80s and declined again after the 1990 recession. It increased notably
during the expansion in the second half of the 90s and declined again with the 2001 recession.
   Unfortunately we do not have comprehensive data on technology diffusion during the
Great Recession. We do, however, have two types of limited evidence. First, Eurostat
provides information on the diffusion of three relevant internet-related technologies in the
UK.6 Figure 4 plots their average diffusion from 2004 until 2013 with the business cycle
    6
      The measures we consider are the fraction of firms that (i) have access to broadband internet, that
(ii) actively purchase online products and services and that (iii) actively sell online products and services
(actively is defined as constituting at least 1% of sales/purchases). For each of these three measures we
construct the speed of technology diffusion using expression (2), and then filter the effect of the lag since
the introduction of the technology using expression (3) and the estimates from column 3 of Table 2. The
resulting series are demeaned so that they can be interpreted as percent deviations from the average speed
of technology diffusion.


                                                      9
 Figure 4: Diffusion of Technologies on Business use of Internet in UK, 2004-2013


                       1

                     0.8

                     0.6

                     0.4

                     0.2

                       0

                     -0.2

                     -0.4

                     -0.6

                     -0.8
                        2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013




Source: Eurostat; see footnote 6 for details of calculations. Shaded areas are UK recession dates as dated by
UK ONS.


downturns in the UK. The figure confirms the pro-cyclicality of the speed of diffusion of
these technologies. In particular, during the downturn corresponding to the Great Recession
(2008-2009), the average speed of diffusion of our three technologies sharply declined by
75%. After the Great Recession, the speed of diffusion recovered but remained below
trend, converging to approximately 10% below average. Beyond its cyclicality, the second
observation we want to stress from the Figure is that fluctuations in the speed of diffusion
are very wide, ranging from 86% above average in 2004 to 74% below the average diffusion
speed in 2009.7
   Second, for the U.S., we have an aggregate time series for fees paid for licensing new
technologies. Licensing fees may be interpreted as expenses paid for adopting new tech-
nologies. We defer further discussion of this data, which shows a marked a decline during
the Great Recession, to Section 5.
   7
     Andrews et al. (2015) have recently provided complementary evidence that technology diffusion in OECD
countries may have slowed during the Great Recession. In their study, they show that the gap in productivity
between the most productive firms in a sector (leaders) and the rest (followers) has increased significantly
during the Great Recession. They interpret the increase in the productivity gap as evidence that followers
have slowed down the rate at which they incorporate frontier technologies developed by the leaders.


                                                      10
    We make two uses of the data presented in this section in our subsequent analysis. We use
the R&D series directly as an observable in our estimation procedure. And, in Section 4, we
develop and estimate a model analogy to Equation (3), and use the panel regression results
presented in this section as an external validity check of the cyclicality of technological
diffusion generated by our estimated model.


3     Model
Our starting point is a New Keynesian DSGE model similar to Christiano et al. (2005)
and Smets and Wouters (2007). We include the standard features useful for capturing the
data. In addition, monetary policy obeys a Taylor rule with a binding zero lower bound
constraint. The key non-standard feature is that total factor productivity depends on two
endogenous variables: the creation of new technologies via R&D and the speed of adoption
of these new technologies. Skilled labor is used as an input for the R&D and adoption
processes. We do not model financial frictions explicitly; however, we allow for a shock that
transmits through the economy like a financial shock, as we discuss below. We begin with
the non-standard features of the model before briefly describing the standard ones.

3.1    Production Sector and Endogenous TFP: Preliminaries

In this section we describe the production sector and sketch how endogenous productivity
enters the model. There are two types of firms: (i) final goods producers and (ii) intermedi-
ate goods producers. There are a continuum, measure unity, of monopolistically competitive
final goods producers. Each final goods firm i produces a differentiated output Yti . A final
good composite is then the following CES aggregate of the differentiated final goods:
                                           ˆ   1              µt
                                                           1
                                    Yt =            (Yti ) µt di                          (4)
                                            0

                                                                i units of intermedi-
where µt > 1 is given exogenously. Each final good firm i uses Ymt
ate goods composite as input to produce output, according to the following simple linear
technology
                                           Yti = Ymt
                                                  i
                                                                                          (5)

    We assume each firm sets its nominal price Pti on a staggered basis, as we describe later.
There exists a continuum of measure At of monopolistically competitive intermediate goods
firms that each make a differentiated product. The endogenous predetermined variable


                                                11
At is the stock of types of intermediate goods adopted in production, i.e., the stock of
                                                                 j
adopted technologies. Intermediate goods firm j produces output Ymt . The intermediate
goods composite is the following CES aggregate of individual intermediate goods:
                                                    ˆ        At               ϑ
                                                                     j ϑ 1
                                          Ymt =                    (Ymt ) dj                                    (6)
                                                          0


with ϑ > 1. Let Ktj be the stock of capital firm j employs, Utj be how intensely this capital
is used, and Ljt the stock of labor employed.8 Then firm j uses capital services Utj Ktj and
unskilled labor Ljt as inputs to produce output Ymt
                                                 j
                                                    according to the following Cobb-Douglas
technology:                                            α
                                         j
                                        Ymt = θt Utj Ktj (Ljt )1−α                                              (7)

where θt is an exogenous random disturbance. Finally, we suppose that intermediate goods
firms set prices each period. That is, intermediate goods prices are perfectly flexible, in
contrast to final good prices.
   Given a symmetric equilibrium for intermediate goods, it follows from equations (6) and
(7) that to a first order we can express the aggregate production function for the final good
composite Yt as9                            h             i
                                     Yt =       Aϑ−1
                                                 t   θt       · (Ut Kt )α (Lt )1−α                              (8)

   The term in brackets is total factor productivity, which is the product of a term that
reflects endogenous variation, Aϑ−1
                                t   , and one that reflects exogenous variation θt . In sum,
endogenous productivity effects enter through the expansion in the variety of adopted in-
termediate goods, measured by At . We next describe the mechanisms through which new
intermediate goods are created and adopted.

3.2     R&D and Adoption

The processes for creating and adopting new technologies are based on Comin and Gertler
(2006). Let Zt denote the stock of technologies, while as before At is the stock of adopted
technologies (intermediate goods). In turn, the difference Zt − At is the stock of unadopted
technologies. R&D expenditures increase Zt while adoption expenditure increase At . We
   8
     We allow for variable utilization intensity of capital Utj so as not to mistakenly attribute all high frequency
variation in the Solow residual to endogenous technology.
   9
´ The production
               1
                  µt function implies Yt = Ωt · Y t where Y t is average output per firm and Ωt =
   1    i
  0
     (Yt /Y t ) di
               µt     = 1 to a first order. Next, given the total number of final goods firms is unity, given
the production function for each final goods producer (5), and given that Yt ≈ Y t , it follows that to a first
order Yt ≈ Ymt . Equation (8) then follows from (6) and (7).


                                                              12
distinguish between creation and adoption because we wish to allow for realistic lags in
the adoption of new technologies. We first characterize the R&D process and then turn to
adoption.

3.2.1    R&D: Creation of Zt

There are a continuum of measure unity of innovators that use skilled labor to create new
intermediate goods. Let Lpsrt be skilled labor employed in R&D by innovator p and let ϕt
be the number of new technologies at time t + 1 that each unit of skilled labor at t can
create. We assume ϕt is given by

                                                            z −1
                                              ϕt = χt Zt Lρsrt                                          (9)

where χt is an exogenous disturbance to the R&D technology and Lsrt is the aggregate
amount of skilled labor working on R&D, which an individual innovator takes as given.
Following Romer (1990), the presence of Zt , which the innovator also takes as given, re-
flects public learning-by-doing in the R&D process. We assume ρz < 1 which implies that
increased R&D in the aggregate reduces the efficiency of R&D at the individual level. This
congestion externality permits us to have constant returns to scale in the creation of new
technologies at the individual innovator level, which simplifies aggregation, but diminishing
returns at the aggregate level. Our assumption of diminishing returns is consistent with
the empirical evidence (see Griliches (1990)); further, with our specification the elasticity
of creation of new technologies with respect to R&D becomes a parameter we can estimate,
as we make clear shortly.10
   Let Jt be the value of an unadopted technology, Λt,t+1 the representative household’s
stochastic discount factor and wst the real wage for a unit of skilled labor. We can then
express innovator p’s decision problem as choosing Lpsrt to solve

                                 max
                                  p
                                     Et {Λt,t+1 Jt+1 ϕt Lpsrt } − wst Lpsrt                            (10)
                                 Lsrt


The optimality condition for R&D is then given by

                                        Et {Λt,t+1 Jt+1 ϕt } − wst = 0
  10
    An added benefit from having diminishing returns to R&D spending is that, given our parameter es-
timates, steady state growth is relatively insensitive to tax policies that might affect incentives for R&D.
Given the weak link between tax rates and long run growth, this feature is desirable.




                                                     13
which implies
                                                          ρz −1
                                   Et {Λt,t+1 Jt+1 χt Zt Lsrt   } = wst                                 (11)

   The left side of Equation (11) is the discounted marginal benefit from an additional
unit of skilled labor, while the right side is the marginal cost. Given that profits from
intermediate goods are pro-cyclical, the value of an unadopted technology, which depends
on expected future profits, will be also be pro-cyclical. This consideration, in conjunction
with some stickiness in the wages of skilled labor which we introduce later, will give rise to
pro-cyclical movements in Lsrt .11
   Finally, we allow for obsolescence of technologies. Let φ be the survival rate for any
given technology. Then, we can express the evolution of technologies as:

                                          Zt+1 = ϕt Lsrt + φZt                                          (12)

where the term ϕt Lsrt reflects the creation of new technologies. Combining equations (12)
and (9) yields the following expression for the growth of new technologies:

                                           Zt+1
                                                = χt Lρsrt
                                                        z
                                                           +φ                                           (13)
                                            Zt

where ρz is the elasticity of the growth rate of technologies with respect to R&D, a parameter
that we estimate.

3.2.2    Adoption: From Zt to At

We next describe how newly created intermediate goods are adopted, i.e. the process of
converting Zt to At . Here we capture the fact that technology adoption takes time on
average,12 but the adoption rate can vary pro-cyclically, consistent with the evidence in
Comin (2009) and Section 2. In addition, we would like to characterize the diffusion process
in a way that minimizes the complications from aggregation. In particular, we would like to
avoid having to keep track, for every available technology, of the fraction of firms that have
and have not adopted it. To do so, we suppose there is a competitive group of “adopters”
who convert unadopted technologies into ones that can be used in production. They buy
the rights to the technology from the innovator, at the competitive price Jt , which is the
value of an unadopted technology. They then convert the technology into use by employing
  11
     Other approaches to motivating procyclical R&D, include introducing financial frictions (Aghion et al.
(2010)), short term biases of innovators (Barlevy (2007)), or capital services in the R&D technology function
(Comin and Gertler (2006)).
  12
     See, for example, Comin and Hobijn (2010).


                                                     14
skilled labor as input. This process takes time on average, and the conversion rate may
vary endogenously. In particular, the pace of adoption depends positively on the level of
resources devoted to adoption in the following simple way: an adopter succeeds in making a
product usable in any given period with probability λt , which is an increasing and concave
function of the amount of skilled labor employed, Lsat :

                                            λt = λ(Zt Lsat )                              (14)

with λ0 > 0, λ00 < 0.13 We augment Lsat by a spillover effect from the total stock of tech-
nologies Zt - think of the adoption process as becoming more efficient as the technological
state of the economy improves. The practical need for this spillover is that it ensures a
balanced growth path: as technologies grow, the number of new goods requiring adoption
increases, but the supply of labor remains unchanged. Hence, the adoption process must be-
come more efficient as the number of technologies expands. Unlike the specification used for
R&D, there is no separate shock to the productivity of adoption activities in (14). We are
forced to introduce this asymmetry because we do not have a direct observable to measure
adoption labor or λt .
   Our adoption process implies that technology diffusion takes time on average. If λ̄ is the
steady state value of λt , then the average time it takes for a new technology be adopted is
1/λ̄. Away from the steady state, the pace of adoption will vary with skilled labor input
Lsat . We turn next to how Lsat is determined.
   Once in usable form, the adopter sells the rights to the technology to a monopolistically
competitive intermediate goods producer that makes the new product using the production
function described by Equation (7). Let Πmt be the profits that the intermediate goods firm
makes from producing the good, which arise from monopolistically competitive pricing. The
price of the adopted technology, Vt , is the present discounted value of profits from producing
the good, given by
                                      Vt = Πmt + φEt {Λt,t+1 Vt+1 }                       (15)

Then we may express the adopter’s maximization problem as choosing Lsat to maximize
the value Jt of an unadopted technology, given by

                       Jt = max Et {−wst Lsat + φΛt,t+1 [λt Vt+1 + (1 − λt )Jt+1 }        (16)
                             Lsat
  13
       In the estimation, we assume that
                                            λ(•) = κλ ∗ (•)ρλ .
where κλ and 0 < ρλ < 1 are constants.



                                                    15
with λt as in Equation (14). The first term in the Bellman equation reflects total adoption
expenditures, while the second is the discounted benefit: the probability weighted sum of
the values of adopted and unadopted technologies. The first order condition for Lsat is

                            Zt λ0 · φEt {Λt,t+1 [Vt+1 − Jt+1 ]} = wst                      (17)

The term on the left is the marginal gain from adoption expenditures: the increase in the
adoption probability λt times the discounted difference between the value of an adopted
versus an unadopted technology. The right side is the marginal cost. The term Vt − Jt
is pro-cyclical, given the greater influence of near term profits on the value of adopted
technologies relative to unadopted ones. Given this consideration and the stickiness in wst
which we alluded to earlier, Lsat varies pro-cyclically. The net implication is that the pace
of adoption, given by λt , will also vary pro-cyclically.
   Since λt does not depend on adopter-specific characteristics, we can sum across adopters
to obtain the following relation for the evolution of adopted technologies

                                  At+1 = λt φ[Zt − At ] + φAt                              (18)

where Zt − At is the stock of unadopted technologies.

3.2.3    Technology diffusion: mapping to the data

Before continuing with the model, we make a detour to map the notion of diffusion in
our framework to the econometric analysis presented in Section 2. The data diffusion
corresponds to the number of companies at time t + j that have adopted a single technology
invented at some time t. Within our model, only one firm adopts a technology but multiple
technologies are invented in a given period. Accordingly, the natural notion of diffusion in
the model is the share of technologies invented at time t that have been adopted at time
t + j.
                        t
   Formally, denote by Zt+k the mass of technologies that was invented at time t that
survives (i.e. is not obsolete) at time t + k, and Att+k the mass of vintage t technologies that
have been adopted at time t + k. Then, we can define the fraction of vintage t technologies
adopted at time t + k by
                                                    Att+k
                                         mtt+k ≡      t   .                                (19)
                                                    Zt+k




                                               16
Analogously to Equations 1 and 2, we define r and the speed of diffusion in the model as:

                                             t           mtt+k
                                            rt+k ≡                                                      (20)
                                                       1 − mtt+k

and                                                !                                 !
                                             t
                                            rt+k                            t
                                                               1 + λt+k−1 /rt+k−1
                     Speedtt+k   ≡ log     t           = log                                            (21)
                                          rt+k−1                   1 − λt+k−1
                                                                            t , as de-
Where the second equality comes from substituting in the law of motion for rt+k
tailed in Appendix A.3. Equation (21) has two relevant implications. First, the speed of
technology, Speedtt+k , is pro-cyclical because it varies positively with the adoption prob-
ability λt+k−1 , which is pro-cyclical. Second Speedtt+k declines with the diffusion level of
                               t
the technology as measured by rt+k−1 . This prediction is consistent with the panel data
evidence from Table 2.14

3.3    Households

The representative household consumes and saves in the form of capital and riskless bonds
which are in zero net supply. It rents capital to intermediate goods firms. As in the standard
DSGE model, there is habit formation in consumption. Also as is standard in DSGE models
with wage rigidity, the household is a monopolistically competitive supplier of differentiated
types of labor.
   The household’s problem differs from the standard setup in two ways. First it supplies
two types of labor: unskilled labor Lht which is used in the production of intermediate goods
and skilled labor which is used either for R&D or adoption, Lhst . Second, we suppose that
the household has a preference for the safe asset, which we motivate loosely as a preference
for liquidity and capture by incorporating bonds in the utility function, following Krish-
namurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). Further, following Fisher (2015), we introduce a
shock to liquidity demand %t > 0.15 As we show, the liquidity demand shock transmits
through the economy like a financial shock. As the estimated model reveals, it turns out to
be the main source of cyclical variation, particularly during the Great Recession period.
   Let Ct be consumption, Bt holdings of the riskless bond, Πt profits from ownership of
monopolistically competitive firms, Kt capital, Qt the price of capital, Rkt the rate of return,
  14
    To control for this non-linear “vintage” effect, which is due to the geometric nature of diffusion in the
model, we introduce (see Section 4.5) a vintage-control when estimating the cyclicality of diffusion in the
model, analogous to that included in the panel data regression in Section 2.
 15
    As Fisher (2015) discusses, the liquidity demand shock is an explicit formulation of the risk shock in
Smets and Wouters (2007).


                                                       17
and Dt the rental rate of capital. Then the households’ decision problem is given by
                                ∞
                                                                                       υ(Lht )1+ϕ + υs (Lhst )1+ϕ
                                X                                                                                 
                                           τ
         max               Et          β           log(Ct+τ   − bCt+τ −1 ) + %t Bt+1 −
 Ct ,Bt+1 ,Lh   h
            t ,Lst ,Kt+1
                                                                                                 1+ϕ
                                τ =0
                                                                                                                    (22)
subject to

                Ct = wth Lht + wst
                                h h
                                   Lst + Πt + Rkt Qt−1 Kt − Qt Kt+1 + Rt Bt − Bt+1                                  (23)

with Rkt ≡ (Dt + Qt )/Qt−1 .
   Let Λt,t+1 ≡ βu0 (Ct+1 )/u0 (Ct ) be the household’s stochastic discount factor and ζt ≡
%t /u0 (Ct ) be the liquidity demand shock in consumption units. Then we can express the
first order necessary conditions for capital and the riskless bond as, respectively:

                                                        1 = Et {Λt,t+1 Rkt+1 }                                      (24)

                                                      1 = Et {Λt,t+1 Rt+1 } + ζt                                    (25)

As equation (25) indicates, the liquidity demand shock distorts the first order condition
for the riskless bond. A rise in ζt acts like an increase in risk: given the riskless rate
Rt+1 the increase in ζt induces a precautionary saving effect, as households reduce current
consumption in order to satisfy the first order condition (which requires a drop in Λt,t+1 ).
It also leads to a drop in investment demand, as the decline in Λt,t+1 raises the required
return on capital, as equation (24) implies. The decline in the discount factor also induces
a drop in adoption and R&D. Overall, the shock to ζt generates positive co-movement
between consumption and investment similar to that arising from a monetary shock. To
see, combine equations (24) and (25) to obtain

                                                   Et {Λt,t+1 (Rkt+1 − Rt+1 )} = ζt                                 (26)

   To a first order an increase in ζt has an effect on both Rkt+1 and Λt,t+1 that is qualitatively
similar to that arising from an increase in Rt+1 . In addition, note that an increase in ζt
raises the spread Rkt+1 − Rt+1 . In this respect it transmits through the economy like a
financial shock. Indeed, we show later that our identified liquidity demand shock is highly
correlated with credit spreads. We defer to the next section a description of the household’s
wage-setting and labor supply behavior.




                                                                   18
3.4     Standard DSGE model features

Since the remaining features of the model are standard, we present only the equilibrium
conditions (a full derivation of the model is available as an online appendix).

3.4.1    Intermediate goods firms: factor demands

Intermediate goods firm choose capital Kt , utilization Ut , and labor Lt to minimize costs
given the relative price of the intermediate goods composite pmt , the price of capital Qt ,
the rental rate Dt , the real wage wt and the desired markup ς. Following Greenwood et al.
(1988), we endogenize the capital utilization decision by assuming that the depreciation
rate δ(Ut ) is an increasing and convex function of capital utilization Ut .
   The first order conditions from the firm’s cost minimization problem for Kt , Ut and Lt
are then given by
                                        pmt Ymt
                                    α           = ς[Dt + δ(Ut )Qt ]                                (27)
                                          Kt
                                            pmt Ymt
                                        α           = ςδ 0 (U )Qt Kt                               (28)
                                              Ut
                                                   pmt Ymt
                                         (1 − α)           = ςwt                                   (29)
                                                     Lt
   We allow ς to be smaller than the optimal unconstrained markup ϑ due to the threat of
entry by imitators as is common in the literature (e.g., Aghion and Howitt (1998)).

3.4.2    Capital producers: investment

Competitive capital producers use final output to make new capital goods, which they sell
to households, who in turn rent the capital to firms. Let It be new capital produced and
pkt the relative price of converting a unit of final output into new capital (the replacement
price of capital), and γy the steady state growth in It . Following Christiano et al. (2005), we
assume flow adjustment costs of investment: the adjustment cost function f (It /(1+γy )It−1 )
is increasing and concave, with f (1) = f 0 (1) = 0 and f 00 (1) > 0. The first order condition
for It relates the ratio of the market value of capital to the replacement price (i.e. “Tobin’s
Q”) to investment, as follows:
                                                                                         2                 
Qt                   It               It         0        It                         It+1         0      It+1
    = 1+f                      +               f                     −Et Λt,t+1                 f
pkt             (1 + γy )It−1    (1 + γy )It−1       (1 + γy )It−1                (1 + γy )It         (1 + γy )It
                                                                                                    (30)




                                                     19
We assume that log(pkt ) follows an AR(1) process with parameters ρpk and σpk . Finally,
the law of motion for capital is

                                      Kt+1 = It + (1 − δ(Ut ))Kt                                     (31)

3.4.3   Price and Wage Setting

Following Smets and Wouters (2007), we assume that that both nominal prices and wages
are set on a staggered basis, following the “Calvo” adjustment rule. Let ξp be the probability
a firm cannot adjust its price and let ξw be the probability a firm cannot adjust its wage.
Conversely, let ιp be the degree of indexing prices to past inflation and let ιw the analogue
for wages. The only difference from the standard model is that households in our economy
supply two types of labor, skilled and unskilled. We assume that each type of labor has the
same frequency of wage adjustment.
   Denoting by πt the inflation rate and by mct the marginal cost of final goods producers
in log-deviation from steady state, the price Phillips curve is:

                                           ιp                 β
                    πt = κmct +                  πt−1 +              πt−1 Et [πt+1 ] + εµt           (32)
                                     1 + ιp β̃             1 + ιp β̃

                                  (1−ξp β̃)(1−ξp )
with β̃ = β/(1 + γy ) and κ =       ξp (1+ιp β̃)
                                                   ,   respectively, and εµt is a shock to the final goods
markup that follows an AR(1) process with parameters ρµ and σµ .
   The unskilled wage Phillips curve is:

                 1                                      β̃
(1+κw )w̃t =          w̃t−1 + ιw πt−1 − (1 + β̃ιw )πt +                               g t −ϕ˜lt )+εµwt
                                                               Et [w̃t+1 + πt+1 ]+κw (muc
               1 + β̃                                   1 + β̃

                 (1−ξw )∗(1−ξw β̃)
with κw =   ξw (1+β̃)(1+ϕ(1+(1/µ̄w )))
                                       ,   and where µ̄w is the steady state wage markup, respec-
        g w̃, ˜l, are the marginal utility of consumption and unskilled wage and hours in
tively; muc,
log deviation from steady state and εµwt is a shock to the wage markup that follows an
AR(1) process with parameters ρµw and σµw . The skilled wage Phillips curve is identical,
replacing unskilled wage and hours for skilled equivalents16 .
  16
    In estimating the model we introduce wage markup shocks to the wage setting problem of unskilled
labor only, so the markup for skilled labor is constant at its steady state level.




                                                        20
3.4.4    Monetary policy

The nominal interest rate Rnt+1 is set according to the following Taylor rule:
                                                                  !1−ρR
                                          π φπ  L φy                               R
                                            t       t
                        Rnt+1 =    rtm                   Rn                  (Rnt )ρ                   (33)
                                           π0     Lss

where Rn is the steady state nominal rate, π 0 the target rate of inflation, Lt total em-
ployment and Lss steady state employment; φπ and φy are the feedback coefficients on the
inflation gap and capacity utilization gap respectively and log(rtm ) follows an AR(1) process
with parameters ρmp and σ mp . We use the employment gap to measure capacity utilization
as opposed to an output gap for two reasons. First, Berger et al. (2015) show that measures
of employment are the strongest predictors of changes in the Fed Funds rate. Second, along
these lines, the estimates of the Taylor rule with the employment gap appear to deliver a
more reasonable response of the nominal rate to real activity within this model than does
one with an output gap.17 In addition, we impose the zero lower bound constraint on the
net nominal interest rate, which implies that the gross nominal rate cannot fall below unity.

                                                Rnt+1 ≥ 1                                              (34)

3.5     Resource constraints and equilibrium

The resource constraint is given by
                                                                     
                                                            It
                           Yt = Ct + pkt 1 + f                              I t + Gt                   (35)
                                                       (1 + γy )It−1

   where government consumption Gt is financed by lump sum taxes and follows (in logs)
an AR(1) process:

                 log(Gt /(1 + γy )t ) = (1 − ρg )ḡ + ρg log(Gt−1 /(1 + γy )t−1 ) + gt ,              (36)

   The market for skilled labor must clear:

                                           Lst = Lsat + Lsrt                                           (37)
   17
      Part of the problem may be that the behavior of the flexible price equilibrium output is quite complex
in the model, particularly given the endogenous growth sector. As a robustness check on our specification of
the Taylor rule, we estimate a version of the model in which we adjust the employment gap for demographic
effects on the size of the labor force; our estimation results are robust to this change.



                                                    21
    Finally, the market for risk-free bonds must clear, which implies that in equilibrium,
risk-free bonds are in zero net supply Bt = 0.
    This completes the description of the model.


4     Estimation
We estimate our model using Bayesian methods (see for example An and Schorfheide (2007)
Smets and Wouters (2007) and Justiniano et al. (2010)). We estimate using quarterly data
from 1984:I to 2008:III on eight US series: the growth rates of real output, consumption,
investment, and real wages, the log-level of hours worked, inflation (as measured by the
growth rate of the GDP deflator), the nominal risk-free interest rate and the growth rates
of expenditures on R&D by US corporations. Unlike the other series, R&D expenditures
are annual. We deal with the mixed frequency of the data in estimation using a version of
the Kalman filter adapted for this purpose. Appendix A.1 describes the data in detail.
    We do not use data beyond 2008:III in the estimation of the structural parameters be-
cause the zero lower bound (ZLB) on the nominal interest was binding after that period,
rendering estimation using a log-linear approximation of our baseline model problematic.
However we do use the data from 2008:III to 2015:IV to identify shocks and other latent
variables of our model, including the endogenous component of TFP. We do so by modify-
ing the standard log-linear approximation of the model with the technique introduced by
Guerrieri and Iacoviello (2015) to deal with occasionally binding constraints, as described
in Appendix A.2.
    We estimate all the standard parameters that appear in the conventional DSGE model
with the exception of the markup in the final goods sector. The presence of an additional
markup in the intermediate goods sector along with the elasticity of substitutions between
goods in this sector makes identification problematic, leading us to calibrate these param-
eters.
    Of the four technological change parameters, we estimate the elasticity of the creation
of new technologies with respect to R&D.18 The first order condition for R&D (11) allows
us to identify ρz , along with the shock to R&D productivity, χt . We calibrate the other
technological parameters using evidence from other studies and long-run restrictions. Ad-
ditionally, we use the panel data evidence from section 2 as a check that the elasticity of
the diffusion rate with respect adoptions expenditure ρλ that results from our model is
  18
     We also estimate the steady state growth rate of the economy which pins down the average productivity
of R&D χ̄.



                                                   22
reasonable. We next discuss the calibrated parameters and describe the prior and posterior
estimates of the remaining parameters.

4.1    Calibrated parameters

As is standard we calibrate the steady state depreciation rate δ and the steady state ratio
of government expenditures to output to match the data. The markups on final (µ) and
intermediate goods (ς) are set to 1.1 and 1.18 respectively. We set the markup on final
goods towards the lower end and the markup on intermediate goods in the middle of the
range of estimates in the literature.19 We set markups conservatively low because the R&D
share of GDP is increasing in markups and decreasing in ρλ , so setting markups low makes
our calibration of ρλ more conservative. Finally, the parameter ϑ is set to 1.35 to produce
an elasticity of substitution of 3.85 between intermediate goods, in line with the estimates
from Broda and Weinstein (2006).
   The three endogenous technological change parameters we calibrate include: the steady
state adoption lag λ̄, the obsolescence rate (1 − φ), and the elasticity of the adoption
probability λ with respect to adoption expenditures, ρλ . λ̄ is set to produce an average
adoption lag of 5 years which is consistent with the estimates in Cox and Alm (1996), Comin
and Hobijn (2010) and Comin and Mestieri (2015). 1 − φ is set to 2% (quarterly) which
is the average of the estimates of the obsolescence rate that come from the rate of decay
of patent citations (see Caballero and Jaffe (1993)) and patent renewal rates (Bosworth
(1978)). Finally, ρλ is set to 0.925 to induce a ratio of private R&D to GDP consistent with
post-1970 U.S. data (approximately 1.9% of GDP). As discussed earlier, though, since ρλ
governs the cyclicality of technological diffusion, we check that cyclicality in the model is
consistent with the panel data evidence. Table 3 presents the calibrated parameters and
their values.

4.2    Parameter estimates

Table 4 presents the prior and posterior distributions for the parameters that we estimate.
For the conventional parameters we use similar priors to the literature (e.g. Justiniano et al.
(2010)). For the new parameter we estimate, the elasticity of R&D parameter (ρz ) we use
a beta prior centered around a mean of 0.6, which is at the lower end of estimates provided
in Griliches (1990).
  19
     Jaimovich (2007) reports markup estimates in gross output data between 1.05 and 1.15 and in value
added data from 1.2 to 1.4.




                                                 23
                                Table 3: Calibrated Parameters

              Parameter      Description                                            Value
                  δ          Capital depreciation                                    0.02
                   G
                   Y         SS government consumption/output                         0.2
                  µ          SS final goods mark up                                   1.1
                   ς         SS intermediate goods mark up                           1.18
                  ϑ          Intermediate goods elasticity of substitution           1.35
                 1−φ         Obsolescence rate                                      0.08/4
                  λ̄         SS adoption lag                                        0.2/4
                  ρλ         Adoption elasticity                                     0.925


   Most of our estimates are similar to those in the literature. The price and wage rigidity
parameters are higher than the estimates in, for example, Smets and Wouters (2007), likely
reflecting that inflation was low and stable over our sample20 . Our estimate of the elasticity
of new technologies with respect to R&D, ρz , is 0.37, which is somewhat below the Griliches
(1990) estimates. The value of ρz is identified from the co-movement between the series on
R&D expenditures and the model estimates of the value of un-adopted technologies. The
discrepancy in the estimate of ρz may reflect the fact that (effectively) we use quarterly
data while the literature uses annual data: one would expect greater diminishing returns to
R&D (and hence smaller co-movement with the market value of new technologies) at higher
frequencies due to frictions in adjusting skilled labor input.
   Finally, with respect to the shocks, we find lower estimates of the persistence of exogenous
TFP than in the literature (the prior and posterior distributions of parameters of the shock
processes can be found in Table 9 in the appendix). This reflects the fact that our model
produces significant endogenous persistence in TFP21 .

4.3    Sources of Variation and the Liquidity Demand Shock

Here we establish that demand shocks - and the liquidity demand shock in particular - is
not only an important source of variation in output, but an important source of variation
in endogenous productivity as well. In addition, this importance is especially pronounced
during recessions.
   Our key finding is that the liquidity demand shock is the most important source of
  20
     In a more recent study, Del Negro et al. (2015) report estimates of wage and price rigidity parameters
of similar magnitude to our results.
  21
     Estimating our model without the endogenous technology mechanism over the same sample period gives
an estimate for the AR(1) parameter of the exogenous TFP process of 0.9685 versus 0.951 in the model with
endogenous technology.



                                                    24
                  Table 4: Prior and Posterior Distributions of Estimated Parameters

       Parameter         Description                        Prior                     Posterior
                                                 Distr      Mean     St. Dev.     Mean St. Dev.
       ρR                Taylor rule smoothing   Beta       0.70       0.15       0.828    0.0007
       φπ                Taylor rule inflation   Gamma      1.50       0.25       1.574    0.0516
       φy                Taylor rule labor       Gamma      0.30       0.10       0.386    0.0050
       ϕ                 Inverse Frisch elast.   Gamma      2.00       0.75       2.706    0.7066
       f 00              Investment adj. cost    Gamma      4.00       1.00       5.644    0.6455
       δ 0 (U )
           δ             Capital util. elast.    Gamma      4.00       1.00       4.056    0.9842
       ξp                Calvo prices            Beta       0.50       0.10       0.935    0.0001
       ξw                Calvo wages             Beta       0.75       0.10       0.908    0.0013
       ιp                Price indexation        Beta       0.50       0.15       0.241    0.0104
       ιw                Wage indexation         Beta       0.50       0.15       0.383    0.0171
       µw                SS Wage Markup          Normal     0.15       0.05       0.149    0.0025
       b                 Consumption habit       Beta       0.70       0.10       0.483    0.0017
       ρz                R&D elasticity          Beta       0.60       0.15       0.372    0.0103
       α                 Capital share           Normal     0.30       0.05       0.201    0.0009
       β est             100 × (β −1 − 1)        Gamma      0.25       0.10       0.422    0.0093
       100 ∗ γy          SS output growth        Normal     0.46       0.03       0.453    0.0005


cyclical variation as well as the most important driver of recessions, including the Great
Recession. We ascertain the relative importance of each shock by calculating a set of
variance decompositions. To do so we simulate the model a large number of periods taking
into account the ZLB as described in Appendix A.2. Table 5 presents the results. There
are several important takeaways. As noted, the liquidity demand is the main source of
variation. It explains 42.5% of output growth, 55.3% of hours and 50.6% of endogenous
productivity. In addition, the“demand” shocks overall are dominant. The two main demand
shocks (liquidity demand and money) combined account for more than half the volatility
of output and hours and more than two thirds of the variation in hours and endogenous
production variation. The next most important shock is the exogenous component of total
factor productivity, which accounts for 19.1% of output variation, 10.9% of hours variation,
and 9.9% of the variation in endogenous TFP.
   Next we show that the liquidity demand shock is by far the most important shock driving
recessions. Figure 5 plots the historical evolution of per capita output growth as well as
the components that are accounted for by the liquidity demand and the exogenous TFP
shock, the disturbance that is second most important in driving recessions22 . In each of
  22
    The decomposition takes into account the ZLB (as described in Appendix A.2), which makes the model
nonlinear for the period 2008:I-2015:IV. Because of this nonlinearity, the sum of the contribution of each



                                                   25
                            Table 5: Variance Decomposition (%)

 Variables                   Liquidity     Money      Govt    Price of    TFP      R&D      Mark up         Wage
                             Demand                   Exp     Capital                                      mark up
 Output Growth                 42.5         13.3      16.5      6.1        19.1      0          2.1          0.4
 Consumption Growth            45.7         14.4      16.6      0.7        20.5      0          1.8          0.3
 Investment Growth             16.4          4.7       2.6     65.3         7.7     0.4         1.8          1.2
 Inflation                      0.1           0        0.1       0          3.3      0         80.8         15.7
 Nominal R                     35.2         33.2       1.2      2.2         7.8     0.3        13.3          6.7
 Hours                         55.3         18.3       5.4      4.7        10.9     0.2         3.9          1.2
 Endogenous TFP                50.6         18.7       3.6      0.9         9.9     9.4         1.6          5.3
      Variance decomposition with ZLB (10,000 simulations, HP filtered series, filter parameter = 1600).


the three recessions, the liquidity demand shock accounts for most of the decline in output.
In addition to comparing to the though during the Great Recession, the liquidity demand
shock is also responsible for its duration. In particular, the historical decomposition shows
that if the only shock that had hit the economy was the liquidity demand shock the recovery
of output growth after the GR would have been even slower.
   Finally, we present evidence supporting our interpretation of the liquidity demand shock
as a financial shock (as noted in section 3.3, a negative liquidity demand shock causes the
spread between the return on capital and the riskless rate to widen). Figure 6 compares
the spreads implied by our estimated liquidity shocks to the Baa corporate bond spread
(over 10 year US treasuries) and the 2 year personal loan rate spread (over 2 year US
treasuries). The model estimated spread has a correlation of 0.65 with the bond spread and
0.72 with the loan spread. The three series show increases in spreads around recessions with
an absolute peak in the sample around early 2009. The model and personal loan spread
series are persistently high after the Great Recession. The difference in the evolution after
the GR with the BAA spread may reflect the fact that financial conditions have normalized
for large firms, while households as well as small and medium-sized companies continue to
face borrowing frictions. Overall, we consider that the similarity between our estimated
liquidity shocks and the data supports our interpretation of the shocks.
shock does not equal the value of the smoothed variable being decomposed (output growth in this case) for
the mentioned period. This “nonlinear residual” emerges because the interaction between shocks is relevant
in nonlinear models. However, our results indicate that the only shock that moves the economy to the ZLB
is the liquidity demand shock. We therefore assign the nonlinear residual to this shock.




                                                   26
                            Figure 5: Output Growth Decomposition



                  1.5


                    1


                  0.5


                    0


                  -0.5


                   -1


                  -1.5

                                 Output Growth
                   -2
                                 Liq. Demand Shock Contrib.
                                 TFP Shock Contrib.
                  -2.5
                         Q1-85     Q1-90       Q1-95          Q1-00   Q1-05   Q1-10   Q1-15




Data sources are described in Appendix A.1 . Smoothed shocks from model estimated using data as described
in Section 4.2 and Appendix A.1.




                                                          27
                            Figure 6: GZ Spread and Model Spread



                   2                                                                     1




                                                                                         0

                   0




                                                                                         -1
                                                              Model Spread (left axis)
                                                              2 Year Loan Spread
                                                              BAA-10Y Spread
                   -2
                        Q1-85   Q1-90   Q1-95     Q1-00    Q1-05      Q1-10        Q1-15




Source: Moody’s Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield Relative to Yield on 10-Year Treasury Constant Matu-
rity from FRED; Finance Rate on 24 Month Personal Loans at Commercial Banks from Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System (G.19 Consumer Credit report); 2-Year Treasury Constant Maturity from
FRED. Smoothed shocks from model estimated using data as described in Section 4.2 and Appendix A.1.




                                                 28
                                                 Figure 7: Impulse Response to 1 std. dev. Shock


                                                    Output                                  Consumption                             Investment
                   % Dev. from S.S.




                                        0                                          0                                      0

                                      -0.2                              -0.2                                     -0.5
                                      -0.4                              -0.4                                              -1
                                      -0.6                              -0.6                                     -1.5
                                             0                 50                       0                 50                   0                   50
                                                    In.ation                                 Nominal R                             Spread Rk ! R
                                                                                   4                                      1
            % Dev, Annual




                                 0.02
                                                                %, Annual




                                                                                                           %, Annual
                                    0
                                -0.02                                        3.5                                     0.5
                                -0.04
                                -0.06
                                                                                   3                                      0
                                             0                 50                       0                 50                   0                   50
                                             Endogenous TFP                                    R&D                                 Adoption Rate
                   % Dev. from S.S.




                                                                % Dev. from S.S.




                                                                                   0                                      5
                                        0                                                                  %, Quarterly

                                      -0.2                                         -1
                                                                                                                     4.8
                                      -0.4
                                                                                   -2
                                             0                 50                       0                 50                   0                   50
                                                                          Baseline Model             Exogenous TFP




4.4    Endogenous Technology Mechanism

Before analyzing how our model can account for productivity dynamics, we do two exercises.
First, in this sub-section we analyze how shocks to the economy transmit into endogenous
movements in productivity. We consider a shock to liquidity demand, given the importance
of this disturbance as a source of variation. In the next sub-section, we show that the cyclical
movements in technology diffusion the model generates are consistent with the panel data
evidence in section 2.
   Figure 7 presents the responses of some key variables to a one standard deviation liquidity
demand shock.23 To isolate the effects of our endogenous productivity mechanism, we plot
the responses of our model and a version where technology is purely exogenous.
   An increase in the demand for the liquid asset, all else equal, induces households to
reduce their consumption demand and their saving in risky assets (See equations 24-26).
  23
     In the online Appendix we report the impulse response functions to the money shock and the shock to
the R&D productivity.




                                                                                               29
As a result there is upward pressure on the required return to capital, Rkt+1 , and downward
pressure on the safe real rate Rt+1 . The former leads to a fall in both physical investment
demand as well as in the demand for productivity enhancing investments, including both
R&D and adoption expenditures. The latter cushions the drop in consumption. Given
nominal rigidities, the overall drop in both investment and consumption demand leads
to a decline in output. The drop in productivity enhancing investments, further, induce
a decline in productivity, magnifying both the overall size and persistence of the output
decline relative to the version of the model where technology is exogenous.
   One additional interesting result is that the endogenous productivity mechanism mutes
the decline in inflation following the contractionary demand shock. As in conventional New
Keynesian models, inflation declines when aggregate demand falls. However, the endogenous
decline in productivity growth lessens the decline in marginal costs, which in turn dampens
the decline in inflation, making it almost negligible. This feature can offer at least part of
the explanation for the surprising failure of inflation to decline by any significant amount
during the Great Recession.24
   Finally, the main part of our analysis involves analyzing productivity over a period
where the ZLB is binding. Our historical decomposition, further, suggests that it is the
liquidity demand shock that moves the economy into the ZLB. Accordingly it is useful to
understand the implications of the ZLB for how a contractionary liquidity demand shock
influences endogenous productivity. Figure 8 plots the impulse response functions with and
without a binding ZLB.25 When the ZLB is binding, monetary policy cannot accommodate
a recessionary shock. This results in higher interest rates than when the ZLB is not binding.
The higher real rates amplify the drops in investment, R&D and adoption intensity. In the
short term, this leads to lower aggregate demand and a larger output drop. It also leads to
larger declines in the growth rate of the number of adopted technologies and to lower levels
of TFP in the medium and long term.26
  24
     Indeed, in the estimation, there is no need for positive realizations of the cost push shock to match the
observed evolution of inflation during and after the Great Recession.
  25
     The binding ZLB is achieved with a ten-standard deviation positive shock to the liquidity preference.
  26
     One interesting observation on how the endogenous technology mechanism interacts with the ZLB is
that in contrast with standard neo-keynessian models with exogenous technology, in our model once the
economy enters in the ZLB region, it naturally remains there without the need of additional contractionary
shocks. This is the case because of the additional amplification and propagation generated by the endogenous
contraction in TFP.




                                                     30
                                   Figure 8: Liquidity Demand Shock and the ZLB


                                                Output                                                    Endogenous TFP
                                  0                                                           0
               % Dev. from S.S.




                                                                         % Dev. from S.S.
                                  -2
                                                                                            -0.5
                                  -4
                                                                                             -1
                                  -6

                                  -8                                                        -1.5
                                       0   10   20     30     40    50                             0    10     20     30     40   50
                                                                                                                      k
                                           Nominal R (Level)                                                 Spread R ! R
                                  4                                                          10
               % Dev. from S.S.




                                                                         % Dev, Annual


                                  2
                                                                                              5
                                  0


                                  -2                                                          0
                                       0   10   20     30     40    50                             0    10     20     30     40   50
                                                     Baseline Model (ZLB)                          Baseline Model (Linear)




4.5   Technology Diffusion: Model vs. Data

In this section we investigate whether the cyclicality of diffusion in our model is reasonably
similar to that in the micro data. This exercise is important to validate the realism of the
diffusion mechanism in the model. To do so, we derive a model analogy to the estimating
Equation (3) of Section 2.
   Recall from Equation (21) that due to the geometric nature of diffusion in the model, the
vintage of the technology affects the speed of diffusion. In particular, absent any cyclical
              t
fluctuations rt+k is increasing in k, the time elapsed since invention. Accordingly, we define
the vintage effect as the speed that a given vintage would have in the absence of business
cycle fluctuations; that is, if the adoption rate was equal to its constant steady state level,
λ̄. Formally, the vintage effect on speed is
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                    t
                                                                                            1 + λ̄/rt+k−1
                                                      t
                                                 Speedt+k       = log                                                                  (38)
                                                                                                1 − λ̄

   Using this definition, we model the regression equation for the effect of the cycle on the



                                                                         31
                Table 6: Cyclicality of diffusion speed: model versus data


                                              Data         Model
                                       β̂     3.73          1.94
                                            [1.7,5.8]    [1.59,2.29]

β̂ is the estimated elasticity of speed of diffusion with respect to the output gap. Numbers in brackets are
95% confidence intervals. Model confidence intervals are constructed by averaging across regression results
of 100 period long sub-samples of the model simulated data.


speed of diffusion as
                                                         t
                             Speedtt+k = α + Speedt+k + β ŷt+k + t+k                                 (39)

where ŷt+k denotes the same measure of the output gap as in Section 2. Note that the
vintage-effect on the speed is akin to the lag control we included in regression (3) to capture
the deterministic effect of the lag on the average speed of diffusion.
   We estimate equation (39) in a synthetic sample constructed from 100,000 period sim-
ulations of our estimated model. As described in Appendix A.3, we estimate the panel by
weighting each observation by the share of age k technologies in the steady state. Table 6
reports the point estimates together with the 95% confidence intervals of the estimates of β
in the data simulations as well as from the panel estimates in section 2. The point estimate
in the model is smaller (1.94 versus 3.73) but falls within the 95% confidence interval of the
point estimate in the data.
   Table 7 reports a sensitivity analysis to ρλ of the cyclicality of the speed of diffusion and
our calibration target, the share of R&D expenditures in GDP. To obtain these results we
reestimate the model for alternative values of ρλ and simulate the model using the resulting
parameter estimates. The lower the values of ρλ the higher the share of R&D in GDP in
steady state.27 For a ρλ of 0.85, R&D represents 3.5% of GDP while for a ρλ of 0.95 the
R&D share is 1.3%. The cyclicality of the speed of diffusion increases with the value of ρλ .
For ρλ equal to 0.95, the elasticity of the speed of diffusion with the cycle produced by the
model is 2.26 which falls within the confidence interval for the technology panel in Section
2. However, for values of ρλ smaller than our baseline of 0.925 the elasticities of the speed
of diffusion with the cycle fall outside the confidence interval. For example, for a ρλ of 0.85,
the elasticity is 1.19.
   We conclude from this analysis that the cyclical response of the speed of diffusion in
  27
    This is because, for a given λ, a lower ρλ produces greater curvature in the value of unadopted tech-
nologies raising the rents earned from engaging in R&D.



                                                    32
Table 7: Effect of varying ρλ on estimated elasticity β̂ and R&D expenditure share


                                         ρλ       β̂       R&D/GDP
                                        0.85     1.19        3.5%
                                        0.9      1.61        2.4%
                                       0.925     1.94        1.9%
                                        0.95     2.26        1.3%

Values in bold are for baseline calibration (ρλ =0.925). Values for alternative ρλ are obtained by re-estimating
and simulating the model as described in Sections 4 and 4.5.


our model is similar to that estimated in the panel data, falling in the lower part of the
confidence interval.


5        Analysis of Productivity Dynamics
We now explore the model’s implications for the evolution of productivity, with particular
emphasis on the periods before, during and after the Great Recession. We focus on TFP but
also consider labor productivity. The latter allows us to consider the impact of the demand
shortfall during the Great Recession on the supply side that operates via the conventional
capital accumulation channel (as emphasized by Hall (2014) and others), as well as our
endogenous productivity channel.
     To begin, we use equation (8) to derive the following expression that links labor produc-
tivity with TFP and capital intensity:28,29

                                     Yt
                                        = θt · (At )ϑ−1 · (Ut Kt /Lt )α .                                 (40)
                                     Lt |       {z    }
                                                TFP

The first two terms capture total TFP, which is the product of an exogenous component
(θt ) and an endogenous one ((At )ϑ−1 ). The third term measures capital intensity which
includes both capital per hours worked and the capital utilization rate.
     Figure 9 plots the evolution of (detrended) labor productivity together with TFP and
the endogenous component of TFP. Labor productivity corresponds exactly to the data.
    28
     This expression holds to a first order approximation.
    29
     We focus on labor productivity for two reasons. First, our measure of capital includes residential
investment. Therefore, there is a discrepancy between our measure of TFP and that from standard sources
(e.g., BLS). Second, labor productivity also captures the effect of variation in capital per hour. This is
another channel by which fluctuations in demand can affect the potential supply in the economy.




                                                      33
               Figure 9: Endogenous TFP, TFP and Labor Productivity



                   10



                    8



                    6



                    4



                    2



                    0        TFP
                             Endogenous Component of TFP
                             Labor Productivity
                   -2
                          Q3-87      Q1-93       Q3-98     Q1-04      Q3-09     Q1-15




Labor productivity is GDP divided by hours worked (see Appendix A.1 for data sources). Smoothed shocks
from model estimated using data as described in Section 4.2 and Appendix A.1.


The other two series are identified from the model. It is worth noting, though, that the
evolution of TFP and labor productivity are qualitatively similar.30
   Except for the middle to late 1990s, the endogenous component of TFP accounts for much
of the cyclical variation in TFP. The model attributes the rise in TFP during the late 90s
mainly to its exogenous component; the labor productivity surge in this period is explained
by both exogenous innovations to TFP and capital deepening. After 2000, however, the
endogenous component plays a predominant role in the evolution of TFP. Importantly,
the endogenous component explains virtually all of the decline in TFP betweem 2005 and
2008, as well as the decline during and after the Great Recession. In particular, between
the starting point of the recent productivity slowdown, 2005, and the end of our sample,
2015, total TFP declined by approximately 8 percentage points (relative to trend). The
endogenous component accounts for 7.75 percentage points of decline. This factor also
accounts for most of the drop in labor productivity, which declined 8.5 percentage points
  30
     One can obtain the capital intensity component of labor productivity from the figure by taking the
difference between labor productivity and TFP.


                                                    34
                       Figure 10: Endogenous TFP Decomposition



                   3

                   2

                   1

                   0

                  -1

                  -2

                  -3

                  -4
                            Endogenous Component of TFP
                  -5        Liq. Demand Shock Contribution
                            R&D Shock Contribution
                  -6
                    Q1-85     Q1-90      Q1-95       Q1-00   Q1-05   Q1-10     Q1-15




Smoothed variables from model estimated using data as described in Section 4.2 and Appendix A.1.


over the same period. A drop in capital intensity after 2009 mainly accounts extra the drop
in labor productivity relative to TFP (consistent with Hall (2014)). While endogenous
TFP declines steadily after 2005, the main sources of the drop varies over time. Figure 10
presents a historical decomposition of endogenous productivity that isolates the effects of
the two shocks that were the main causes of the decline: (i) shocks to the productivity of
R&D and (ii) the liquidity demand shock. We note first that the liquidity demand shock
accounts for nearly all of the decline in endogenous TFP after the start of the recession at
the end of 2007. This result is consistent with our earlier findings that: (i) the liquidity
demand shock was the main disturbance driving the recession (see Figure 5); and (ii) the
liquidity demand shock has a significant impact on endogenous TFP, especially at the ZLB
(see Figure 8).
   In the period just prior to the Great Recession, 2005-2007, however, the liquidity demand
shock is unimportant. Instead the decline in endogenous TFP is mainly the result of negative
shocks to the productivity of R&D. The downward trend in R&D productivity actually
begins in the mid 1990s, which is consistent with Gordon (2012)’s hypothesis of a secular


                                                     35
decline in the contribution of technological innovations to productivity. After a brief upturn
following the 2000-01 recession, shocks to R&D productivity induce a sharp downturn in
TFP from 2005 until the height of the crisis.
   Intuitively, the exogenous decline in R&D productivity generated fewer technologies
for given level of R&D spending, which ultimately slowed the pace of adoption of new
technologies. The slow diffusion of technologies generates a lag between the decline in R&D
productivity and the reduction in TFP growth. In this respect, a shock to R&D productivity
is very different from a shock to exogenous TFP, which shows up immediately in measured
TFP. An additional difference comes from the identification of the shocks. While exogenous
TFP is identified from the Solow residual, shocks to R&D productivity are identified from
the difference between observed R&D and R&D predicted by the free entry condition (11).
The magnitude of the decline in R&D around the 2001 recession indicates a significant drop
in R&D productivity. In the next sub-section, we present direct evidence that supports this
finding.
   We next explore the relative importance of the specific mechanisms that drove endoge-
nous TFP. From equation (18), fluctuations in the stock of adopted technologies, At , (and
hence endogenous TFP), are driven by the product of two factors: the adoption rate λt
and the total stock of unadopted technologies, Zt − At . Fluctuations in λt reflect the effect
of cyclical variation in adoption intensity on endogenous productivity while fluctuations in
Zt reflect the effect of cyclical variation in R&D. To analyze the relevance of these two
channels, Figure 11 plots (relative to trend) the evolution of Zt , At and λt 31 . Note that the
evolution of At mirrors the evolution of endogenous productivity (At ϑ−1 ).
   We emphasize several points. First, cyclicality in λt is the main driver of cyclical fluctu-
ations in endogenous productivity. That is, λt co-moves closely with At while Zt does not.
During each of the recessions, λt declines along with At , implying that the slowdown in
adoption activity in turn accounts well for the the cyclical contraction in endogenous TFP.
These results are consistent with our earlier findings that: (i) liquidity demand shocks are
important drives of recessions (see Figure 4) and that these shocks can induce contractions
in adoption rates and endogenous productivity (See Figure 7).
   Fluctuations in Zt , however, also play a role in the evolution of endogenous productivity.
Following the 2000-01 recession there is a steady decline in Zt , consistent with the negative
shocks to R&D productivity over this period that Figure 9 identifies.32 This drop in Zt ,
in turn, helps account for the pre-Recession drop in productivity that Fernald emphasizes,
  31
    For λt we plot on the right-hand axis the level of the quarterly adoption rate.
  32
    The decline in endogenous productivity induced by the negative shocks to productivity lags the decline
in Zt (compare figures 9 and 10) due to the lags in the adoption process.


                                                   36
                                                   Figure 11: Sources of Endogenous Technology



                                                                                                               8


                                       15
              Adopted Tech. (A), Technology (Z)




                                                                                                                    Adoption Rate (6), %
                    % dev. from trend




                                                                                                               5
                                              0




                                                          A
                                                          Z
                                                          6 (right axis)
                                   -15                                                                          2
                                                  Q1-85     Q1-90          Q1-95   Q1-00   Q1-05   Q1-10   Q1-15




complementing the analysis of Figure 9. After the start of the Great Recession, though, the
contraction in the adoption rate becomes the main driver of the productivity decline. The
failure of the adoption rate to return to normal levels, after a brief recovery in 2010, is the
reason endogenous TFP continues to decline.
   Interestingly, while λt remains low following the Great Recession, the stock of unadopted
technologies, Zt − A, reaches a peak over the sample. This occurs mostly because the stock
of adopted technologies, At , declines, but also because there is a modest increase in Zt . This
finding is consistent with the evidence by Andrews et al. (2015) that suggests that innovation
by leading edge firms continued after the Great Recession but adoption by followers slowed.
An important implication is that the economy may not be doomed to low productivity
growth for the foreseeable future. Given the high stock of unadopted technologies, to the
extent enhanced economic activity pushes up the adoption rate, productivity growth should
pick up. Conversely, if the economy continues to stagnate, adoption rates will remain low,
keeping productivity growth low.




                                                                                   37
5.1    Evidence on the two key findings

In the previous section we presented two main findings regarding the recent productivity
slowdown: first, the decline in R&D productivity after the 2001 recession contributed to the
pre-Great Recession slowdown that began in 2005. Second, the drop in adoption intensity
during and after the Great Recession was mainly responsible for the rest. We conclude our
analysis by providing independent historical evidence in support of these two conclusions.
   First we focus on the evolution of R&D productivity. A natural way to measure R&D
productivity is by the number of patent applications relative to the number of R&D re-
searchers. Patent applications are a proxy for R&D outputs while researchers employed is
a proxy for its inputs. Because the outcomes of today’s R&D efforts may lead to appli-
cations at some point in the near future, we propose the following measure of the average
productivity of R&D in years t − 1 and t :
                                                                             
                                                    P atentst + P atentst−1
                        R&D prodt−1,t = log                                                        (41)
                                                       2 ∗ R&D empt−2

where P atentst is the number of patent applications in year t, and R&D empt−2 denotes
the number R&D researchers at year t − 2.33
   Figure 12 plots the linearly detrended level of R&D prodt−1,t together with the average
of the estimated log-level of the model measure of R&D productivity, χt , between years t−1
and t (which we label χ̄t−1,t ).34 The main observation is that the model and direct measures
of R&D productivity evolve similarly around the three recessions in the sample. Both series
drop significantly around 1991, and 2001. In particular, the magnitude of the decline after
2001 is similar in the model estimates of χ̄t−1,t and in the data proxy, R&D prodt−1,t .
This finding supports our model’s prediction that the pre-GR productivity slowdown may
partly reflect the decline in R&D productivity after 2001. The measure of R&D prodt−1,t
is also consistent with our finding that R&D productivity was relatively high during and
after the GR. Admittedly the model estimate, χ̄t−1,t , remains higher than R&D prodt−1,t
during 2009 and 2010, but overall the patterns in both series between 2008 and 2013 are
similar. Based on these observations, we conclude that the independent measure of R&D
productivity is consistent with the evolution of R&D productivity that we have estimated.
  33
     The patent applications come from the United States Patent and Trademark Office and measure the
total number of applications in the US during the calendar year. The series on the number of researchers
in the US comes from the OECD. The patterns for the number of US researchers closely resembles that for
R&D expenditures in Figure 2.
  34
     One reason to detrend the measure of R&D prod are the changes in the law that strengthened patent
protection during the 80s inducing patent applications.



                                                  38
                      Figure 12: R&D efficiency in data versus model


                    0.08

                    0.06

                    0.04

                    0.02

                       0

                   -0.02

                   -0.04

                   -0.06

                   -0.08

                                  Patents per researcher
                    -0.1
                                  Model Implied R&D Efficiency
                   -0.12
                        84   86   88   90    92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10   12




The solid line is detrended level of R&D prodt−1,t and the dashed line is average of the estimated log-level
of χt between years t − 1 and t (χ̄t−1,t ). Source: Patent data from the United States Patent and Trademark
Office; R&D research employment from the OECD; model implied R&D efficiency estimated using data as
described in Section 4.2 and Appendix A.1.


   As we have noted, our analysis also finds that the critical driver of the productivity
slowdown during and after the Great Recession is the slowdown in the intensity of adoption
of new technologies in response to the liquidity demand shock. One approach to measuring
adoption activity is through the investments of companies in adopting new technologies.
While there does not exist a measure that covers all adoption expenditures for the US econ-
omy, the Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM) compiles the expenses
by companies to acquire licenses of technologies developed by universities and research hos-
pitals.35 The expenditures to license new technologies are one component of firms’ overall
investments in technological adoption.
   Figure 13 shows the evolution of linearly detrended licensing revenues from 1995 to
2014 together with linearly detrended GDP.36 The two series are highly correlated with a
  35
     Approximately 180 institutions complete the survey. Their combined R&D budgets in 2011 was $60
billion of which $53 billion corresponded to universities. This sample represents a large majority of total
R&D activity by higher institutions which according to the NSF amounted to $62 billion in 2011.
  36
     Both series are deflated by the GDP deflator and scaled by population older than 16 years old.


                                                            39
             Figure 13: Revenues from Licensing Technologies, 1993-2013


                    0.5                                                                                    0.1




                     0                                                                                     0




                                  Licensing revenues
                                  US GDP (real, percapita, linearly detrended), right axis
                   -0.5                                                                                    -0.1
                          1994   1996   1998    2000     2002    2004    2006     2008       2010   2012




Source: Licensing revenues from Association of University Technology Managers.


coefficient of 0.69. Both around 1999 and 2006 licensing fees start to decline in a protracted
way coinciding with the cyclical declines in GDP. The decline in licensing fees continued after
the Great Recession and by the end of the sample in 2014 there was no sign of a recovery
in the revenues from licensing university technologies. This evidence is thus consistent with
our key finding that a significant and protracted decline in adoption activity underlies the
slowdown in productivity growth since 2008.


6    Conclusions
We have estimated a monetary DSGE model with endogenous productivity via R&D and
adoption. We then used the model to assess the behavior of productivity, with particular
emphasis on the slowdown following the onset of the Great Recession. Our key result
is that this slowdown mainly reflected an endogenous decline in the speed at which new
technologies are incorporated in production. The endogenous decline in adoption, further,
was a product of the recession. We also find that our endogenous productivity mechanism
can help account for the productivity slowdown that preceded the Great Recession. Shocks


                                                              40
to the productivity of the R&D process play an important role, consistent with Fernald
(2014)’s view that acyclical factors were important over this period. Finally, we find a very
limited role for an exogenous decline in TFP in the slowdown of productivity. Overall, the
results suggest that the productivity slowdown following the start of the Great Recession
was not simply bad luck, but rather another unfortunate by-product of the downturn.
   Our analysis also sheds light on two open debates. First, it provides a time series for
the productivity of R&D activities that can be used to explore the hypothesis advanced by
Gordon (2012) that the U.S. economy is experiencing a secular deterioration in its innovation
capacity. Consistent with Gordon’s hypothesis we find low levels of productivity of R&D
activities between 2002 and 2007 that contributed to the decline in TFP between 2005 and
2009. However, this episode is short-lived and the estimates suggest that the slowdown in
productivity reflects medium term cyclical factors rather than secular ones. We provide
independent evidence on the evolution of patent applications relative to research labor that
supports this interpretation of our estimates. The second relevant debate concerns the
stability of inflation during the Great Recession in spite of the very significant decline in
economic activity. Our model and estimates suggests that the endogenous decline in TFP
has increased production costs (relative to trend) counteracting the traditional Phillips-
curve effect of economic contractions on inflation.
   Overall, our results emphasize the importance of the effects that demand shocks have on
the supply side over the medium term. This is an important take away that can be used to
explain productivity dynamics more generally.




                                             41
A      Appendix
A.1     Data

The data used for estimation are available from the FRED (https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/)
and NSF (http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/) websites. Descriptions of the data and their cor-
respondence to model observables follow (the standard macro series used are as in Del Ne-
gro et al. (2015))37 . To estimate the model we use data from 1984:I to 2008:III. Real
GDP (GDPC), the GDP deflator (GDPDEF), nominal personal consumption expenditures
(PCEC), and nominal fixed private investment (FPI) data are produced by the BEA at
quarterly frequency. Average weekly hours of production and nonsupervisory employees
for total private industries (AWHNONAG), civilian employment 16 and over (CE16OV)
and civilian noninstitutional population 16 and over (CNP16OVA) are released at monthly
frequency by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) (we take quarterly averages of monthly
data). Nonfarm business sector compensation (COMPNFB) is produced by the BLS ev-
ery quarter. For the effective federal funds rate (DFF) we take quarterly averages of the
annualized daily data (and divide by four to make the rates quarterly). Letting ∆ denote
the temporal difference operator, the correspondence between the standard macro data
described above and our model observables is as follows:

    • Output growth = 100 ×∆LN((GDPC)/CNP16OVA)

    • Consumption growth = 100 ×∆LN((PCEC/GDPDEF)/CNP16OVA)

    • Investment growth = 100 ×∆LN((FPI/GDPDEF)/CNP16OVA)

    • Real Wage growth = 100 ×∆LN(COMPNFB/GDPDEF)

    • Hours worked = 100 × LN((AWHNONAG × CE16OV/100)/CNP16OVA)

    • Inflation = 100 ×∆LN(GDPDEF)

    • FFR = (1/4) × FEDERAL FUNDS RATE

    The R&D data used in estimating the model is produced by the NSF and measures
R&D expenditure by US corporations. The data is annual, so in estimating the model
and extracting model-implied latent variables (see Appendix A.2) we use a version of the
Kalman filter adapted for use with mixed frequency data.
  37
     Del Negro et al. (2015) include consumer durables in consumption as opposed to investment. Our results
are robust to including them in investment. Neither approach, of course, is ideal.


                                                    42
A.2     Extracting Model-Implied Latent Variables during ZLB period

The piece-wise linear solution from the OccBin method developed by Guerrieri and Iacoviello
(2015) can be represented in state space form as

                            St = C(Nt , θ) + A(Nt , θ)St−1 + B(Nt , θ)t
                            Yt = H(Nt , θ)St

Where θ is a vector of structural parameters, St denotes the endogenous variables at time t,
Yt are observables, and t are normally and independently distributed shocks. Nt is a vector
that identifies whether the occasionally binding constraint binds at time t and whether it
is expected to do so in the future. In particular, Nt is a vector of zeros and ones indicating
when the constraint is or will be binding. For example, the vector Nt = (0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0...)
is a situation in which the constraint does not bind at time t (denoted by the first zero in
the vector), but is expected to bind in t + 1, t + 2 and t + 3. Note that the matrices A,
B and C, which in a standard linear approximation depend only on parameters are here
also functions of Nt .38 OccBin provides a way of computing the sequence of endogenous
variables {St }Tt=1 and regimes {Nt }Tt=1 for a given initial condition S0 and sequence of shocks
{t }Tt=1 . The vector Nt is computed by a shooting algorithm and its resulting value will
depend on the initial state and shocks at time t. We refer the reader to Guerrieri and
Iacoviello (2015) for a detailed description of the method. We construct the Kalman filter
and smoother from the nonlinear state space representation presented above by taking
advantage of the fact that a given sequence of regimes, say {N̂t }Tt=1 , uniquely defines a
sequence of matrices {Ĉt , Ât , B̂t , Ĥt }Tt=1 . It follows that for that specific set of regimes the
state space representation becomes linear:

                                      St = Ĉt + Ât St−1 + B̂t t
                                      Yt = Ĥt St

For this linear state space representation it is straightforward to compute the Kalman filter
and smoother. We use this fact in our algorithm by running two blocks: (i) one in which
we compute the Kalman filter and smoother for a given set of regimes {Nt }Tt=1 ; and (ii)
another where we use OccBin to compute the regimes given a sequence of shocks {t }Tt=1 .
The algorithm steps are the following.
  38
    The matrix H might also be a function of Nt because some observables might become redundant when
the occasionally binding constraint binds. This is the case for the Taylor rule interest rate when the ZLB
binds.


                                                    43
                                         (0)
  1. Guess a sequence of regimes {Nt }Tt=1 ;

  2. Use the guess from the previous step and define the sequence of matrices {Ct , At , Bt , Ht }Tt=1
      using OccBin;

  3. With the matrices from the previous step, compute the Kalman Filter and Smoother
      using the observables {Yt }Tt=1 , and get the Smoothed shocks {ˆt }Tt=1 and initial con-
      ditions of endogenous variables;

  4. Given the smoothed shocks and initial conditions from the previous step, use OccBin
                                               (1)
      to compute a new set of regimes {Nt }Tt=1 ;
            (0)             (1)                                               (0)
  5. If {Nt }Tt=1 and {Nt }Tt=1 are the same, stop. If not, update {Nt }Tt=1 and go to
      step 2.

   Once it converges, this algorithm yields a sequence of smoothed variables and shocks,
consistent with the observables, and taking into account the occasionally binding constraint.




A.3    Comparing diffusion speed in the model to the data

We calibrate ρλ , the elasticity of adoption with respect to skilled labor input, by targeting a
ratio of R&D expenditure to GDP consistent with the data (around 1.9%). In our baseline
calibration, this results in a value of ρλ of 0.925. To check that this calibration does not lead
to a rate of technological diffusion that is at odds with the data, we compare the sensitivity
of speed of diffusion in the model to the regression analysis presented in Table 2. There are
three conceptual obstacles to overcome in carrying out this comparison. The first is that
the data in the regressions of Table 2 concerns the diffusion of specific technologies in the
cross section of potential adopters over time. In our model instead each new technology is
adopted either fully or not at all. The second is that the diffusion process in the data is
approximately logistic, whereas the diffusion process in our model is geometric. Finally, in
the model, unlike in the data available for analysis, technologies become obsolete over time.
To address the first challenge, we define speed of diffusion in our model as relating to the
speed at which technologies invented at different times are adopted. Formally, denote by
 t
Zt+k the mass of technologies invented at time t that survives (i.e. is not obsolete) at time
t + k, and Att+k the mass of vintage t technologies that have been adopted at time t + k.




                                                 44
Then, we can define the fraction of vintage t technologies adopted at time t + k as

                                                      Att+k
                                         mtt+k ≡        t   .                             (42)
                                                      Zt+k

Analogously to Equation 1, we define

                                         t         mtt+k
                                        rt+k ≡                                            (43)
                                                 1 − mtt+k

The stock of vintage t total and adopted technologies evolve as follows:

                                         t       t
                                        Zt+k = φZt+k−1                                    (44)

                                                    t
                       Att+k = φAtt+k−1 + λt+k−1 φ Zt+k−1 − Att+k−1
                                                                                 
                                                                                          (45)

With initial conditions Ztt = Zt − φZt−1 and Att = 0. These laws of motion and initial
                                 t
conditions imply that mtt+k and rt+k follow:

                           mtt+k = mtt+k−1 + λt+k−1 1 − mtt+k−1
                                                                             


and
                                             t
                                            rt+k−1 + λt+k−1
                                    t
                                   rt+k =                                                 (46)
                                               1 − λt+k−1
With initial conditions mtt = 0 and rtt = 0. In each period, a fraction 1 − φ of technologies
becomes obsolete, so the total stock of vintage t technologies decreases over time. The stock
of adopted vintage t technologies increases as a fraction λt+k−1 of the remaining unadopted
technologies (note that all unadopted technologies, irrespective of vintage, have the same
probability λt+k−1 of being adopted). By analogy to Equation (2) we define the speed of
diffusion at time t + k for a vintage t technology as
                                                                             !
                                                                      t
                                                                     rt+k
                          Speedtt+k               t
                                                        
                                      ≡ ∆ log    rt+k       = log    t                    (47)
                                                                    rt+k−1

The regression analysis we conduct measures the sensitivity of the speed of technological
diffusion to fluctuations in the output gap. If the fraction of adopters is a logistic function
of time (see Mansfield (1961)), diffusion speed is constant absent any cyclical fluctuations.
In contrast, the diffusion process in the model is geometric, which implies that speed is
a declining function of the age of a technology. To remove this non-cyclical variation,


                                                 45
                                                                                          t
                                                                 \ t+k , defined as
we construct a detrended model measure of speed, which we denote Speed
follows:
                                         t
                                   \ t+k ≡ Speedtt+k − Speedtt+k
                                   Speed                                                      (48)

Where                                                                        !
                                                                      t
                                                                    r̄t+k
                                            t
                                       Speedt+k    = log           t                          (49)
                                                                  rt+k−1

and
                                                        t
                                                       rt+k−1  + λ̄
                                               t
                                             r̄t+k =                                          (50)
                                                          1 − λ̄
               t
Intuitively, r̄t+k                    t
                   is the value that rt+k would take if the diffusion process returned to steady
state. Our detrended measure therefore captures cyclical variation in the diffusion process.
Figure 14 illustrates the effect of detrending on our measure of speed.
   The data used in our regression analysis is a panel of technologies. In the model however
the relative masses of technologies of different vintages is not constant over time, due to
obsolescence, adoption and trend growth in the stock of technologies. In calculating a
population average of speed of diffusion, we take account of the effect of these three factors to
make the data and model regressions comparable. To do so, we run the following regression
using model-simulated data

                                              t
                                       \ t+k = α + β k ŷt + k,t
                                       Speed

where k denotes the age of a technology, for a range of values of k. To construct a population
average, we weight each β k by the relative steady state fraction of technologies of age k in
the population, wk , defined as:
                                           
                                wk = 1 − mk   φk−1 (1 + g a )−(k−1)
                                              | {z } |
                                    | {z } obsolescence   {z      }
                                                                         growth in tech
                                       adoption


The population average elasticity of speed with respect to the output gap is then

                                                    K
                                                    X wj
                                               β=                 βj ,
                                                             w̄
                                                       j=1

             1   PK       j.
where w̄ =   K    j=1 w        For the estimation results reported in Section 5 we set K to a large
number (50) so that the effect of adding additional vintages to the average is negligible.
To obtain the point estimates and confidence intervals reported in 6 we estimate regres-


                                                        46
sion (A.3) in 100 period subsamples of our model-simulated data and average across these
subsample results.

                                             \ Simulated and Steady State
                        Figure 14: Speed and Speed:


                  0.9                                             0.1


                  0.8                                            0.08

                                                                 0.06
                  0.7

                                                                 0.04
                  0.6
          Speed




                                                          Speed
                                                           d
                                                                 0.02
                  0.5
                                                                    0
                  0.4
                                                                -0.02

                  0.3
                                                                -0.04

                  0.2                                           -0.06

                  0.1                                           -0.08
                           10   20   k 30    40      50                       10   20   30   40      50
                                             Simulation        Steady State


                                                   \ (right panel) as a function of the age of a technology k
This figure plots Speed (left panel) and detrended Speed
. In both cases the dotted line is the steady state value of speed and the solid line is a typical model simulation.



A.4      Other Tables and Figures

As a check of the fit of the estimated model, Table 8 presents the theoretical standard
deviations of the observable variables generated by the model and compares them with the
data in our sample. Roughly speaking the model is in line with the actual volatilities of the
key variables.




                                                          47
              Table 8: Comparison of Standard Deviations

                         Variable          Data   Model
                     Output Growth         0.55    0.61
                  Consumption Growth       0.51    0.71
                   Investment Growth       1.54    1.51
                        Inflation          0.23    0.36
                       Nominal R           0.60    0.55
                      Hours (level)        1.82    1.53
                 R&D Expenditure Growth    4.00    6.80




      Table 9: Prior and Posterior Distributions of Shock Processes

Parameter   Description             Prior                     Posterior
                          Distr      Mean      St. Dev.   Mean St. Dev.
σ%          Liq. Demand   Inv. Gamma 0.10        2.00     0.222    0.0013
σχ          R&D           Inv. Gamma 0.10        2.00     2.203    0.1718
σg          Govt. exp.    Inv. Gamma 0.10        2.00     2.560    0.0353
σmp         Monetary      Inv. Gamma 0.10        2.00     0.096    0.0001
σµ          Markup        Inv. Gamma 0.10        2.00     0.093    0.0002
σpk         Investment    Inv. Gamma 0.10        2.00     1.271    0.0093
σθ          TFP           Inv. Gamma 0.10        2.00     0.489    0.0013
σµw         Wage markup   Inv. Gamma 0.10        2.00     0.287    0.0014
ρ%          Liq. Demand   Beta        0.50       0.20     0.926    0.0005
ρχ          R&D           Beta        0.50       0.20     0.804    0.0070
ρg          Govt. exp.    Beta        0.50       0.20     0.968    0.0001
ρmp         Monetary      Beta        0.50       0.20     0.472    0.0071
ρµ          Markup        Beta        0.50       0.20     0.406    0.0181
ρpk         Investment    Beta        0.50       0.20     0.899    0.0014
ρθ          TFP           Beta        0.50       0.20     0.951    0.0008
ρµw         Wage markup   Beta        0.50       0.20     0.273    0.0086




                                   48
References
Aghion, P., G.-M. Angeletos, A. Banerjee, and K. Manova (2010): “Volatility
  and growth: Credit constraints and the composition of investment,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 57, 246 – 265.

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1998): Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT
  Press.

An, S. and F. Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric
  Reviews, 26, 113–172.

Andrews, D., C. Criscuolo, and P. Gal (2015): “Frontier Firms, Technology Diffusion
  and Public Policy: Micro Evidence from OECD Countries,” .

Barlevy, G. (2007): “On the Cyclicality of Research and Development,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 97, 1131–1164.

Bartel, A., C. Ichniowski, K. L. Shaw, and R. Correa (2009): International Differ-
  ences in the Adoption and Impact of New Information Technologies and New HR Prac-
  tices: The Valve-Making Industry in the United States and United Kingdom, University
  of Chicago Press, 55–78.

Berger, D., I. Dew-Becker, L. D. Schmidt, and Y. Takahashi (2015): “Layoff risk,
  the welfare cost of business cycles, and monetary policy,” .

Bianchi, F. and H. Kung (2014): “Growth, Slowdowns, and Recoveries,” Working Paper
  20725, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bosworth, D. L. (1978): “The Rate of Obsolescence of Technical Knowledge–A Note,”
  The Journal of Industrial Economics, 26, 273–279.

Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006): “Globalization and the Gains From Variety,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 541–585.

Caballero, R. J. and A. B. Jaffe (1993): “How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An
  Empirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of
  Economic Growth,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993, Volume 8, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 15–86.




                                            49
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and
  the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113,
  1–45.

Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2015): “Understanding
  the Great Recession,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 110–67.

Comin, D. (2009): “On the integration of growth and business cycles,” Empirica, 36,
  165–176.

Comin, D. and M. Gertler (2006): “Medium-Term Business Cycles,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 96, 523–551.

Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2010): “An Exploration of Technology Diffusion,” American
  Economic Review, 100, 2031–59.

Comin, D. and M. Mestieri (2015): “If Technology Has Arrived Everywhere, Why has
  Income Diverged?” Working paper.

Cox, M. W. and R. Alm (1996): “The economy at light speed: technology and growth
  in the information age and beyond,” Annual Report, 2–17.

Davies, S. (1979): The Diffusion of Process Innovations, Cambridge University Press.

Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and F. Schorfheide (2015): “Inflation in the Great
  Recession and New Keynesian Models,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  7, 168–96.

Fernald, J. (2012): “A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity,”
  Tech. rep.

Fernald, J. G. (2014): Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the
  Great Recession, 1–51, in Parker and Woodford (2015).

Fisher, J. D. (2015): “On the Structural Interpretation of the Smets–Wouters “Risk
  Premium” Shock,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 47, 511–516.

Garcia-Macia, D. (2013): “The Financing of Ideas and The Great Deviation,” .

——— (2015): “The Financing of Ideas and the Great Deviation,” .




                                            50
Gordon, R. J. (2012): “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts
  the Six Headwinds,” NBER Working Papers 18315, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search, Inc.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): “Investment, Capacity
  Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle,” The American Economic Review, 78, 402–417.

Griliches, Z. (1957): “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
  Change,” Econometrica, 25, pp. 501–522.

——— (1990): “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 28, 1661–1707.

Guerrieri, L. and M. Iacoviello (2015): “OccBin: A toolkit for solving dynamic
  models with occasionally binding constraints easily,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  70, 22 – 38.

Guerron-Quintana, P. and R. Jinnai (2014): “Liquidity, trends, and the great reces-
  sion,” .

Hall, R. E. (2014): “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Finan-
  cial Crisis,” in Parker and Woodford (2015), 71–128.

Jaimovich, N. (2007): “Firm dynamics and markup variations: Implications for sunspot
  equilibria and endogenous economic fluctuations,” Journal of Economic Theory, 137, 300
  – 325.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): “Investment shocks and
  business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 132–145.

Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2012): “The Aggregate Demand for
  Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 120, 233 – 267.

Mansfield, E. (1961): “Technical Change and the Rate of Imitation,” Econometrica, 29,
  pp. 741–766.

Parker, J. A. and M. Woodford (2015): NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, Volume
  29, University of Chicago Press.

Queralto, A. (2015): “A Model of Slow Recoveries from Financial Crises,” .



                                            51
Reifschneider, D., W. Wascher, and D. Wilcox (2015): “Aggregate Supply in the
  United States,” IMF Econ Review, 63, 71–109.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. Rogoff (2009): This time is different: Eight centuries of
  financial folly, Princeton University Press.

Romer, P. M. (1990): “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy,
  98, pp. S71–S102.

Schmookler, J. (1966): Invention and Economic Growth, Harvard University Press.

Shleifer, A. (1986): “Implementation Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 94, 1163–90.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
  Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97, 586–606.

Trajtenberg, M. (1990): Economic Analysis of Product Innovation: The Case of CT
  Scanners, Cambridge University Press.




                                             52
