                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ARE EXPECTATIONS ALONE ENOUGH? ESTIMATING THE EFFECT OF A MANDATORY
                COLLEGE-PREP CURRICULUM IN MICHIGAN

                                              Brian Jacob
                                            Susan Dynarski
                                            Kenneth Frank
                                           Barbara Schneider

                                         Working Paper 22013
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22013


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2016




Thanks to our partners at the Michigan Department of Education (MDE) and Michigan’s Center for
Educational Performance and Information (CEPI), especially Thomas Howell, Venessa Keesler and
Joseph Martineau. An army of research assistants worked to prepare these data and we are eternally
grateful to them all. The Institute of Education Sciences provided generous support through Grant
R305E100008. This research uses data structured and maintained by the Michigan Consortium for
Educational Research (MCER). MCER data are modified for analysis using rules governed by MCER
and are not identical to data collected and maintained by MDE and CEPI. Results, information and
opinions are the authors’ and do not reflect the views or positions of MDE or CEPI. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Brian Jacob, Susan Dynarski, Kenneth Frank, and Barbara Schneider. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Expectations Alone Enough? Estimating the Effect of a Mandatory College-Prep Curriculum
in Michigan
Brian Jacob, Susan Dynarski, Kenneth Frank, and Barbara Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 22013
February 2016
JEL No. I0,I21,I3

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impacts of the Michigan Merit Curriculum, a statewide college
preparatory curriculum that applies to the high school graduating class of 2008 and later. We use
a student, longitudinal database for all public school students in Michigan for the main analyses,
and complement this with analyses from a state-year panel. The study employs several non-
experimental approaches, including a comparative interrupted time series and a synthetic control
method. Our analyses suggest that the higher expectations embodied in the MMC has had little
impact on student outcomes. Looking at student performance on the ACT, the only clear evidence
of a change in academic performance comes in science. Our best estimates indicate that ACT
science scores improved by 0.2 points (or roughly 0.04 standard deviations) as a result of the
MMC. Students who entered high school with the weakest academic preparation saw the largest
improvement, gaining 0.35 points (0.15 standard deviations) on the ACT composite score and
0.73 points (0.22 standard deviations) on the ACT science score. Our estimates for high school
completion are very sensitive to the sample and methodology used. Some analysis suggests a
small negative impact on high school graduation for students who entered high school with the
weakest academic preparation, but other analysis finds no such effect.



Brian Jacob                                             Kenneth Frank
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy                  Room 462 Erickson Hall
University of Michigan                                  Michigan State University
735 South State Street                                  East Lansing, MI 48824-1034
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                     kenfrank@msu.edu
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu                                       Barbara Schneider
                                                        Erickson Hall
Susan Dynarski                                          Michigan State University
University of Michigan                                  East Lansing, MI 48824-1034
Weill Hall                                              bschneid@msu.edu
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
and NBER
dynarski@umich.edu
INTRODUCTION

       Over the past two decades, the academic achievement of elementary students in the

United States has risen substantially, but that of high school students has stagnated. Reading and

math scores of 9- and 13-year-olds rose from the early 1970s through 2012, while those of 17-

year-olds barely budged (National Center for Education Statistics, 2013). Moreover, recent

research indicates that, when calculated properly, the high school graduation rate of boys is flat

over the past 40 years while that of girls has increased only slightly (Murnane, 2013). The United

States consistently lags behind other industrialized countries on international tests of the

academic performance of high school students. On the 2009 PISA exam, fifteen-year-olds in the

United States scored seventeenth in math and twelfth in science relative to students in the other

thirty-three OECD countries.

       Spurred in part by these disappointing trends, there has been an intense, nationwide

conversation about establishing uniform curricular standards in the US. The Common Core,

which has now been adopted by 43 states and the District of Columbia, details the knowledge

that should be expected of students in each grade. The expectation is that consistent standards

will produce students who are better prepared for both college and work.

       While it is far too early to measure the effect of the Common Core, it is possible to

examine the effect of analogous initiatives in individual states. In this paper, we focus on the

efforts of one state to impose consistent curricular standards across high schools. In 2007,

Michigan implemented the Michigan Merit Curriculum, which established an ambitious set of

standards for the state’s high school students.

       In order to graduate from high school, Michigan’s students must now take a set of classes

that includes Algebra II, chemistry or physics, four years of English, and two years of a foreign




                                                                                                     2
language. While this set of courses is standard for any student planning to attend a four-year

college, it is not at all typical of most high school graduates. In 2005, only 12% of Michigan’s

high schools required Algebra II and even fewer required chemistry or physics. Among high

school graduates nationwide in 2005, 68% completed Algebra II and only 31% completed

physics. 1

        The intent of the Michigan Merit Curriculum is to increase academic preparation for

college and enhance career readiness. But the theoretical effects of the initiative are ambiguous.

When graduation standards are raised, it is plausible that fewer students will meet the new,

higher standards required to graduate. However, the theory underlying the Michigan Merit

Curriculum is that students, teachers, and schools will rise to the higher expectations, leading to

an increase in academic achievement and attainment.

        This paper evaluates the effect of the Michigan Merit Curriculum (MMC) on high school

graduation rates and academic achievement. 2 Like many large education policy changes, the

MMC was implemented statewide and affected virtually all students at the same time, making it

difficult to convincingly estimate the causal impact of the reforms. We take several approaches

to evaluating the policy. To begin, we use student-level longitudinal data to estimate an

interrupted time series that identifies the impact of the policy from deviations in pre-existing

trends. We supplement this with an analysis of aggregate data that compares changes over time

in Michigan to changes over the same time period in comparison states.

        Looking at student performance on the ACT, the only clear evidence of a change in

academic performance comes in science. Our best estimates indicate that ACT science scores


1
 See https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_225.40.asp
2
 In future work, as the affected cohorts age, we will also examine effects on postsecondary attainment, choice and
achievement.



                                                                                                                     3
improved by 0.2 points (or roughly 0.04 standard deviations) as a result of the MMC. Students

who entered high school with the weakest academic preparation saw the largest improvement,

gaining 0.35 points (0.15 standard deviations) on the ACT composite score and 0.73 points (0.22

standard deviations) on the ACT science score. Looking at student performance on the ACT, the

only clear evidence of a change in academic performance comes in Science.

       Our estimates for high school completion are very sensitive to the sample and

methodology used. Overall, we find no clear evidence that the introduction of the new policy

changed graduation rates. However, some of our analyses suggest that the new requirements may

have had a small negative impact on the likelihood of high school graduation for students who

entered high school with the weakest academic preparation.

       These findings are consistent with much of the prior literature. A large body of research

has found that increasing high school graduation requirements (whether in the form of additional

courses or exit exams) results in lower graduation rates among the most disadvantaged students.

There is less evidence on how such policies impact student achievement, but the existing

research generally does not find large gains in student performance.

       Our findings suggest several important lessons for policymakers. First, higher

expectations alone are likely insufficient to generate substantial improvements in student

outcomes. Second, higher expectations may have a downside in terms of pushing the least

prepared students out of school.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we describe the

background of the Michigan Merit Curriculum. In Section III, we review prior literature on

similar reform efforts. Section IV and V describe the empirical strategy and data respectively.

Section VI presents results and we conclude in Section VII.




                                                                                                   4
BACKGROUND

       While the Common Core is relatively new, there is a longer history of states imposing

curricular standards on school districts. Forty-six states have at least some statewide

requirements for high school graduation (American Association of State Colleges and

Universities, 2006), and 25 states offer an optional, college-preparatory diploma (Dounay, 2006).

       The American Diploma Project, an advocacy organization, has tracked state’s adherence

to their recommended high-school curriculum, which includes math through Algebra II and four

years of English. Since 2004, 36 states and the District of Columbia have raised graduation

requirements to meet this set of standards, while an additional 14 states plan to do so in the next

few years (Achieve, 2013).

       Following this national trend, the Michigan legislature in 2006 passed a set of high

school graduation requirements called the Michigan Merit Curriculum. The stated intent of the

Michigan Merit Curriculum was to, by increasing the rigor of secondary school, better prepare

students for college and career (Cherry Commission, 2004). The first students covered by the

Michigan Merit Curriculum started high school in the fall of 2007. Students who started high

school before that date were not bound by the new rules. The first cohort of freshmen affected by

the Michigan Merit Curriculum graduated in the spring of 2011.

       The Michigan Merit Curriculum emphasizes academic preparation in mathematics and

science. Students are required to take Algebra I, Geometry, and Algebra II, as well as Biology

and either Chemistry or Physics. Students must also take four years of English, two years of a

foreign language, three courses in social studies, and one credit each of physical education, art,

and online learning. The typical high school student will devote about half of her courses to

meeting the requirements of the Michigan Merit Curriculum.




                                                                                                      5
           Before these requirements were passed, Michigan had largely left curricular decisions to

the districts. For high school students, the only state requirement was a single course in civics. 3

The state still had influence on curricular content, however, in that it wrote and graded the

standardized tests required by the federal No Child Left Behind Act. Since schools and districts

faced sanctions if students performed poorly on these tests (given in 11th grade, as well as grades

three through eight) they had a strong incentive to teach the material contained in those tests. But

the state imposed no constraints on the curricula that schools used to teach the material contained

in the required tests.

           Before the Michigan Merit Curriculum, districts varied considerably in the courses they

required of high school students. According to a state-administered survey, only about a third of

school districts required four years of math before the new curriculum was put in place; a similar

proportion required three years of science. These requirements were reflected in students’

choices: only a quarter of high school students took physics, less than half took chemistry, and

only one out of eight took Algebra II. By contrast, about 60 percent of districts required four

years of English even before the Merit Curriculum was implemented. 4 These statistics suggest

that the new curriculum was particularly binding in the realms of science and math. Note that the

new curriculum not only required students to take more rigorous classes, but also required

schools to provide them; thus, many schools would need to hire teachers and schedule the

courses students would now be required to take.

           While the requirements of the Michigan Merit Curriculum are extensive, state oversight

of compliance is relatively limited. The state does provide a detailed framework for each

required course, including instructional guidelines. However, implementation of these standards


3
    See page 2 in http://www.michigan.gov/documents/mde/faq1_178592_7.pdf.
4
    Authors’ calculations based on data provided by the Michigan Department of Education.


                                                                                                       6
and enforcement of the requirements of the curriculum are local responsibilities. A set of

standardized, statewide, end-of-course exams was intended to accompany the new curriculum,

but these were shelved in the face of budget constraints and district resistance. Districts and

schools write and administer their own course assessments, which can consist of (for example) a

final exam, a portfolio, a project, or a series of tests given throughout the course. The state does

not audit these assessments or student transcripts to confirm that the Michigan Merit Curriculum

is being followed. We therefore expect considerable variation across the state in the fidelity with

which the curriculum is implemented and, therefore, in the impact of the Merit Curriculum on

student learning.

       The state does require that all students take the Michigan Merit Exam (MME) in 11th

grade. The MME consists of the ACT college entrance examination, components of the ACT’s

WorkKeys job skills assessment, and Michigan-developed assessments in mathematics, science,

and social studies. Graduation is not contingent on passing the MME.

PRIOR LITERATURE

        A long literature documents the correlation between the rigor of courses that students

take in high school and their future academic success. Successful completion of rigorous math

and science courses is associated with improved academic and social outcomes in the short term

(Frank et al., 2008). Those who take math and science are also more likely to attend college,

especially four-year institutions (Adelman, 1999; Sells, 1973; Davis-Kean, Eccles, & Simpkins,

2006; Sadler & Tai, 2007, Schneider, Swanson, & Riegle-Crumb 1997; Riegle-Crumb, 2006).

This may be because requiring a set of college-preparatory courses raises students’ college

aspirations (Bryk, Lee, & Holland, 1993; Lee, 2002).




                                                                                                       7
         A small but growing body of research shows that taking certain core courses, especially

those in math and science, can have significant, positive effects on long-term labor-market

outcomes (Cortes, Goodman, & Nomi, forthcoming; Goodman, 2012, Levine & Zimmerman,

1995; Betts & Rose, 2004). This evidence suggests that requiring more rigorous courses of

Michigan’s students could improve their earnings and employment as adults. In theory, this

effect could operate both through an increase in educational attainment and through enhanced

skills among those with a given level of education. We will therefore examine the effects of the

Michigan Merit Curriculum on educational attainment as well as on standardized test scores. In

later work, as the cohort ages and if the requisite data are made available, we hope to examine

labor market effects.

         Evidence based on courses students choose to take, however, may not predict the effects

of a policy that requires all students to take those same courses. The effects of taking a given

course are almost certainly heterogeneous. Standard economic theory would predict that those

who choose to take a course are those who expect to benefit most from it, and that forcing others

to take it would produce smaller benefits or even harm. However, the standard assumptions

underlying this prediction may well be violated in this context. Students, as well as parents,

teachers and counselors, may be uninformed about the benefits of such courses, especially since

they largely arrive far in the future. Under such conditions, those induced to take the classes by

the Michigan Merit Curriculum could actually benefit more than the students who took them

voluntarily. 5

         It is also possible that the imposition of the curricular requirements could harm students

who voluntarily would have taken the required courses. Schools may shift teachers out of

5
 Analogously, a large body of evidence now indicates that students forced to stay in high school by compulsory
schooling and child labor laws benefit from the additional schooling (Angrist and Krueger 1991; Acemoglu and
Angrist, 2001; Oreopoulos, 2006; Oreopoulos, 2007 .


                                                                                                                 8
courses tailored to high-achieving students in order to staff the newly required classes. A school

might scale back its AP science offerings, for example, so that teachers can be deployed to other

science courses required by the Michigan Merit Curriculum. Peer effects and class size are

additional channels through which high-achieving students could be harmed, as their classes

expand to include less-eager classmates. Depending on the nature of classroom peer effects and

instruction, the lower-achieving students, by contrast, could benefit from sharing more classes

with their high-achieving classmates. 6

            What is the evidence on the effect of requiring high school students to take more

rigorous courses? The results to date are mixed. There is some evidence that increased course-

taking boosts student performance and high school completion (Achieve, 2009; Balfanz & West,

2009). But there is countervailing evidence that higher course requirements are associated with

decreases in high school completion (DeCicca & Lillard, 2001). Moreover, there is substantial

evidence that high school exit exams, a closely related policy, increase dropout rates, particularly

among low-income students (Jacob 2001; Jenkins, Kulick, &Warren, 2006; Dee & Jacob 2007;

Papay, Murnane, and Willets, 2010) and little evidence that they improve student achievement

(Grodsky, Kalogrides, & Warren 2009; Dee & Jacob 2007).

            Two evaluations in Illinois are particularly relevant to the present paper. In 1997, the

Chicago Public Schools enacted a reform that mandated a college-preparatory curriculum,

including four years of specific English courses, three years of specific math courses (algebra,

geometry and advanced algebra), three years of laboratory science (biology, earth or space or

environmental science, and chemistry or physics), and three years of social science. As part of

this policy, students were required to take Algebra I and English I in ninth grade (rather than

lower-level math and English courses). In a series of papers, researchers at the Consortium on

6
    Many of the same issues are raised in the literature on ability tracking.


                                                                                                       9
Chicago School Research investigated the impact of these requirements on a wide variety of

short- and long-run outcomes (Allensworth et al., 2009; Allensworth et al., 2010; Montgomery

and Allensworth, 2010). The result was a convergence in the courses taken by students of

differing race and baseline achievement. However, grades in Algebra I grades went down and

more students failed the course. Further, affected students were no more likely to take math

courses beyond Algebra II. There was no effect on test scores or college attendance. In addition,

the research documented a sharp decline in high school graduation rates in the first few years

following the introduction of the policy, although graduation rates subsequently recovered and

returned to pre-policy levels. 7

         In 2005, Illinois passed legislation requiring three years of math and two years of science

for high school graduation. Buddin and Croft (2014) use cross-district variation in baseline

requirements to implement a differences-in-differences strategy, with districts that had the

requirements in place prior to the legislation serving as the control group and other districts as

the treatment group. Their findings indicate that students took slightly more science courses as a

result of the policy, but there was no change in math courses or college attendance. Despite the

increase in science coursework, science scores did not rise, and actually dropped for students

with the lowest baseline achievement.




7
  In a related set of analyses, researchers studied a program of “double-dose” algebra that Chicago implemented in
an effort to improve outcomes among low-performing students. In 2003, Chicago required students with below-
average math scores to take two periods of algebra. Researchers found that test scores increased among students
targeted for this “double dose” as well as those who were not. But, at the same time, failure rates increased among
students who were not targeted for the double dose (Nomi and Allensworth 2009; see also Cortes, Goodman, &
Nomi, forthcoming ). Subsequent research indicated that the double-dose policy led schools to sort students into
math classes based on ability to a greater extent than they had previously. As a result, some students who were just
above the average were sorted into classes with higher performing peers and more rigorous standards. This
contributed to the improvement in their scores, but also led to higher failure rates for this group (Nomi and
Allensworth, 2014). Nomi (2012) documents that the double-dose policy led to more mixed-ability classes and a
subsequent decline of high-performing students.


                                                                                                                   10
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

        The Michigan Merit Curriculum was implemented statewide in a single year. Before the

new legislation, Michigan had few school districts with requirements resembling those of the

Michigan Merit Curriculum. This precludes the construction of a straightforward within-state

control group of schools that were not bound by the new requirements, as was used in the

analysis of Illinois (Buddin and Croft, 2014). For this reason, we utilize several complementary

methods to estimate the impact of the Michigan Merit Curriculum on student outcomes.

        Our primary approach is to estimate an interrupted time series (ITS) using rich, student-

level, longitudinal data. In the ITS approach, post-policy deviations from pre-policy trends in

outcomes are attributed to the policy. 8 Specifically, we estimate a model of the form:

(1.1)        yics = β 0 + β1 PostYr1c + β 2 PostYr 2c + β3 PostYr 3c + γ Cohortc + X ics + µ s + ε ics

        Here, subscripts index student i in school s in ninth grade cohort c. The dependent

variable is a measure of educational attainment or achievement. The variable Cohort is a

continuous variable indicating the year a student starts high school, and serves to estimate our

trend. The three Post variables are dummies that are set to one for the first, second and third

cohorts bound by the new policy. The coefficients on these dummies estimate cohort-specific

deviations from the pre-policy trend in the dependent variable. We present the weighted average

of the coefficients on these dummies as a summary measure of the policy impact.

        The key identifying assumption of an ITS is that, absent the policy, the outcome of

interest would have continued on its pre-policy trend. Since we are undertaking a cohort analysis,

the key threats to identification are cohort-specific shocks. These shocks could include changes

in the composition of Michigan’s students, economic shocks that affect labor market prospects
8
  The ITS approach has been used by a number of researchers to evaluate district- and state-initiated reforms,
including comprehensive Accelerated Schools (Bloom et al., 2001), Talent Development (Herlihy, Kemple, &
Smith, 2005), and district-wide high-stakes testing (Jacob, 2005).


                                                                                                                 11
and family income, and other shifts in education policy affecting the same cohorts as the new

curriculum. Our detailed longitudinal data will allow us to control for a rich set of student, school

and district characteristics, included in the vector X in the equation above. These include student

race, sex, eligibility for subsidized meals, and baseline test scores. In addition, we include fixed

effects that indicate the school at which a student was a freshman, along with cohort-specific

measures that capture the average characteristics of a school’s freshman class.

       During the first years of the Michigan Merit Curriculum, economic conditions in

Michigan (as in the rest of the country) were rapidly deteriorating. The effect of the Great

Recession on educational attainment and achievement is ambiguous. Dismal labor market

conditions reduce the opportunity cost of schooling, but deteriorating family income may

negatively affect the ability of children to succeed in school. To control for such variation in

economic conditions across time, as well as across the state, we include measures of the local

unemployment rate during the time a student was enrolled in high school. Since these economic

shocks may have also affected schools’ financial resources, we also control for annual, per-pupil

expenditures at the level of the school and district.

        One concern that we cannot address with such controls involves the context of the

reforms in Michigan. As noted above, the Cherry Commission report released in 2004 signaled a

renewed focus on high school reform in the state, with a focus on both academic skill as well as

educational attainment. The MMC legislation passed in 2006 reinforced the emphasis on high

school reform, and incorporated more tangible changes such as the mandate that all 11th graders

take the ACT exam (see Hyman, forthcoming, for a discussion of this policy and its potential

impact) along with the introduction of a new Michigan-specific high school assessment, the

Michigan Merit Exam. These changes took place prior to the actual MMC requirements that are




                                                                                                   12
the focus of this paper. To the extent that we see improvements in student outcomes prior to the

new requirements themselves, the ITS assumes that such improvements would have continued

on the same trend. If we expect that the improvement generated by these non-curricular high

school reforms would have declined (or accelerated) of their own accord, the ITS results might

be misleading.

        This may be particularly relevant for examining ACT scores. It is well documented in the

education literature that scores tend to fall after the introduction of a new exam, but then rise as

teachers and students gain familiarity with its content and format (Koretz, 2002). The ACT was

mandated statewide in Michigan just a few years before the implementation of the Michigan

Merit Curriculum. This would predict that ACT scores would rise sharply for a few years before

the Merit Curriculum and then flatten out, even if the curriculum had zero causal effect on

scores. In this scenario, the inclusion of a pre-trend in the ACT analysis would lead us to

understate any benefits of the policy. For this reason, we will present all of our results both with

and without the pre-trend.

       When analyzing high school graduation outcomes, we supplement the ITS analysis with a

cross-state analysis. We will present estimates from standard panel data models (with controls

for state and year fixed effects as well as time-varying state-level controls) as well as from the

synthetic control methods suggested by Abadie et al. (2010). We discuss the details of this data

and analysis below.

       When analyzing high school achievement, we take advantage of the national scope of the

ACT exam to implement something like a comparative interrupted time series approach. During

our analysis period, Illinois required all 11th grade public school students in the state to take the




                                                                                                     13
ACT. 9 While we do not have student-level data from Illinois, we obtained the distribution of

ACT scores in Illinois by year. That is, for each year, we know the Illinois state percentile

corresponding to each possible ACT score on each subtest. We use this information to normalize

the ACT scores of Michigan students by year. 10 This normalization implicitly controls for

changes in the scaling of the ACT as well as trends in student performance in Illinois, due to

compositional changes, economic conditions, educational policies or other factors. We estimate

equation (1.1) using this Illinois-normalized ACT score. In all equations, standard errors are

clustered by the school at which a student was a freshman.

DATA

        Our estimation relies on a student-level, longitudinal data file that includes multiple

cohorts of Michigan public school students. We have merged administrative datasets from the

state’s Center for Educational Performance and Information and its Department of Education.

This yields a student-level, longitudinal file that includes information on demographics,

standardized test scores, school attended, and high school completion. We drop the roughly 5%

of students in this group who attended a nontraditional school. In addition, for our main analyses,

we focus on the subset of students with a non-missing eighth grade test score in the year prior to

high school entry. This provides us with a key covariate for our analysis, but results in the

exclusion of roughly 16-19 percent of each ninth grade cohort, most of which stems from

students who were not in the Michigan public school system prior to high school or took an

alternative assessment for students with special needs. If we include this set of students and




9
  Colorado also had mandatory ACT over this period. We chose to focus exclusively on Illinois because it is more
similar to Michigan on a variety of dimensions, and thus likely a better comparison. Several other states later
adapted mandatory ACT policies. For more information on these, see Hyman (forthcoming).
10
   For example, a student who scored 23 on the ACT math would be at the 71st percentile of the Illinois distribution
if she were in the 2005 cohort and the 67th percentile if she were in the 2010 cohort.


                                                                                                                  14
assign them imputed scores based on their own demographics and their peers eighth grade

scores, our results do not change (see appendices).

       For the analysis of student achievement, our sample consists of six cohorts of students

who entered high school in fall 2004 though fall 2009. The first three cohorts were not bound by

the Michigan Merit Curriculum, while the second three were. We will refer to these cohorts by

the spring in which they were freshmen: the pre-policy cohorts are denoted 2005, 2006 and 2007,

while the post-policy cohorts are denoted 2008, 2009 and 2010. The first cohort bound by the

Michigan Merit Curriculum would have been scheduled to graduate in spring 2011.

       The relevant high school exam during our analysis period is the Michigan Merit Exam

(MME). As part of the Michigan Merit Exam, all students take the ACT, a nationally-normed,

college-entrance exam. The ACT includes subtests in math, science, reading, writing and social

studies. While the state provides each student with an overall MME score, students are able to

use the resulting ACT score independently for purposes such as college admissions and

scholarship applications. That is, the Michigan exam is structured so that the ACT score the

students obtain is a complete and “regular” ACT score, comparable to what students would

receive had they taken the exam outside of the state testing context. The MME replaced the older

Michigan high school test, with both being administered to eleventh graders in spring 2007,

which corresponds to the ninth grade cohort of 2005. We begin our analysis period with this

cohort to avoid the need to equate across two quite different high school exams.

       In the analysis that follows, we focus on the ACT scores rather than other components of

the Michigan Merit Exam because the ACT is nationally normed and highly relevant for critical

student outcomes such as college admissions. In the small set of cases in which students have

multiple ACT scores, we use the score from the first time the student took the exam.




                                                                                                 15
         For our analysis of high school completion, we are able to include two additional pre-

policy cohorts – students entering high school in fall 2002 and fall 2003 – although we have

somewhat less confidence in the data for the fall 2002 cohort because the fraction missing 8th

grade scores is about 5 percentage points more than in subsequent cohorts. 11

         Graduation from a public high school in Michigan is captured by our longitudinal data,

which follows students as long as they remain in the public-school system. We are confident in

the data on graduation, since it is audited by the state for accountability purposes. We are less

confident in the other “exit code” values provided in the state data. The exit code represents a

school’s best guess of what a student will be doing the following year, e.g., dropping out,

transferring to a private school or leaving the state. Our inspection of the longitudinal data

indicates that these exit codes are periodically wrong. For example, many students who were

expected to re-enroll or transfer to another public school in Michigan never again appear in the

state data.

         Hence, for most of our analysis, we focus on a three-category measure that we have

coded using the longitudinal data: graduated from a Michigan public high school, still enrolled in

a Michigan public school, and everything else. Our primary outcome will be an indicator for

high school graduation, which is set to zero for all other students, who may have dropped out,

transferred to a private school, or left the state. 12

         Students in Michigan take standardized tests in grades three through eight, as well as in

the junior year of high school. The high school test will serve as our measure of academic

11
   The student longitudinal data system officially began with the 2002-03 academic year. We obtain the 2001-02 8th
grade test scores for the first cohort in our sample by matching older test score files to the longitudinal data via a
fuzzy match using name, sex, race, and school district. Match rates were 93 percent, meaning that we were able to
match 93 percent of students in the test score files to the SLDS. Note that we would not expect all to match because
some students will have left the Michigan Public Schools between 2001-02 and 2002-03.
12
   The state, when calculating its high school graduation rates for each cohort of freshmen, uses a federal formula
that excludes students who transfer to private school or leave the state. We do not exclude such students from the
analytic sample, so our measures will differ slightly from officially published graduation rates.


                                                                                                                    16
achievement, while math scores from fourth and eighth grades will serve as baseline controls.

The choice of exams for use as baseline achievement controls is dictated by data availability.

Given the rollout of standardized exams in different grades and subjects in the state, fourth and

eighth grade math were the only cases in which we had consistent elementary test score

measures for all cohorts in our sample.

       We define all student-specific demographic variables, as well as variables indicating

program participation, by their values when the student started high school. These include

dummies indicating a student’s eligibility for free or reduced priced lunch, special-education

status, migrant status, and English-learner status.

Sample Statistics

       Tables 1A (demographics and school characteristics) and 1B (outcomes) provide sample

means, reported separately for each entering freshman cohort. The size of the entering ninth-

grade cohort in Michigan public schools declined steadily, from 112,201 students in the cohort

starting high school in 2005 to 114,491 for the cohort entering in 2010. This reflects the

population loss experienced by the state during this period. The number of high schools in the

analysis fluctuates across cohorts, from as few as 674 to as many as 717 schools.

        Demographic shifts in the sample over this period were relatively minor, with the

exception of the share of students eligible for free and reduced-price lunch (FRPL), which

increased from 22 percent for the 2003 cohort to 35 percent for the 2010 cohort, a result of the

nationwide recession on Michigan’s students.

        We construct standardized scores across all cohorts by subtracting the 2005 mean score

and dividing by the 2005 standard deviation, creating a measure that is standardized relative to

the 2005 cohort. Fourth and eighth grade math scores appear to have been increasing somewhat




                                                                                                    17
throughout the time period, consistent with national trends and the findings of Dee and Jacob

(2011) with regard to NCLB. However, there is an extremely large (0.31 standard deviation)

jump in eighth grade scores for the ninth grade cohort of 2009. Despite extensive investigations

of the underlying data and conversations with state officials, we cannot find any explanation for

what seems like an extremely large one-year increase, although the fact that the 2010 cohort

mean is even larger suggests the 2009 value was not an anomaly. 13 14

          Graduation rates are also rising across time during the period before the MMC was put in

effect. Among the cohort starting high school in 2003, 75 percent graduated high school within

four years and 78 percent within five years; the corresponding statistics for those entering in

2007 are 76 percent and 79 percent, respectively. The statewide four- and five-year graduation

rate for those students who enter the Michigan system in ninth grade is 72.3% and 75.4%

respectively.

          The fraction of students taking the 11th grade test increased during the sample period,

likely reflecting the ramp-up of test-taking in the first years of the new high school test, the

MME, before the MMC took effect. Both MME and ACT scores increase over the sample

period.

RESULTS ON HIGH SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT

          The primary goal of the MMC was to ensure that students were prepared for college and

a 21st century labor market, with a focus on enhancing skills in math and science. To explore

what, if any, impact the new course requirements had on student achievement, Figures 1-5 show




13
   Relative to the 2008 cohort, the 2009 had higher scores in 8th grade science (0.17 s.d.) and 7th grade English
(0.11 s.d.) and reading (0.19 s.d.) but lower scores in 7th grade writing (0.07 s.d.).
14
   As a sensitivity analyses, we estimate all models excluding the 8th grade test score (but keeping the 4th grade
scores) and obtain comparable results.



                                                                                                                     18
trends in the ACT composite and subtest scores in Michigan from the 2005 cohort through the

2010 cohort.

        The solid line in each figure shows the unadjusted trends, normalized to zero in 2005. In

order to control for other factors that might have changed over this time period, we estimate a

variant of equation (1.1), but include indicators for cohorts 2006 through 2010 instead of the

linear trend or post-policy indicators. The dashed line in each figure indicates the point estimates

on these cohort indicators from regressions with all of the controls described above except for

the prior test scores (both at the individual student and the school-cohort level). The 2005 cohort

serves as the omitted category and so all estimates are relative to this group. The dotted line in

each figure tracks the cohort effects from a regression that also controls for prior test scores.

Specifically, we control for individual fourth and eighth grade math scores as well as the mean

and standard deviation of fourth and eighth grade in the individual’s school-cohort (i.e., the

student’s high school peers).

        Figure 1 shows that composite scores increased over the sample period. For example,

students in the 2010 cohort scored roughly 1.1 points higher than students in the 2005 cohort. It

is interesting to note that the dashed line, which controls for demographics, is notably steeper

than the solid line, which shows the unconditional achievement trend. This difference reflects the

fact that the student population in Michigan was becoming more disadvantaged over the

recession period. Controls for prior achievement flatten the trend somewhat because, despite the

economic conditions, student performance on fourth and eighth grade exams grew over this

period. Most notably, we see a sharp drop in the dotted line in 2009 and 2010, reflecting the

substantially higher eighth grade math scores for these cohorts.




                                                                                                     19
         While a simple before-after analysis would suggest a positive impact of the MMC, the

growth we observe does not deviate sharply from the existing growth once the new curricular

requirements are introduced. Scores on the Math and English tests follow trends similar to the

composite score. In contrast, scores in science and reading appear to increase more sharply,

indicating that the policy may have had a positive impact on achievement in these subjects.

         Table 2 presents regression estimates of the relationship between the Merit Curriculum

and ACT scores. In order to illustrate the importance of pre-existing trends, we show estimates

without them (columns 1-2) as well as with them (columns 3-4). All estimates control for school

fixed effects, fourth grade math scores and a full set of student, school and district covariates.

The models in columns 2 and 4 also control for eighth grade math scores. 15

         Across the estimates in Table 2, several patterns emerge. First, as shown in the figures,

the effects are stronger in science and reading than in math or English. Second, accounting for

pre-existing trends and eighth grade math scores both independently (and jointly) reduce the size

of the estimates. Third, all of the estimates are quite small relative to the pre-policy level of ACT

scores. For example, the coefficient estimate of 0.389 points for science in column 3 corresponds

to an increase of only 0.04 standard deviations. Finally, conditional on observable student and

school characteristics, the introduction of the new curriculum is associated with a slight

reduction in the proportion of students taking the ACT. 16 However, as we discuss below, this

modest sample attrition does not meaningfully bias our estimates.



15
   As discussed above, we believe eighth grade scores should be a control in our model. However, Table 1a shows
an extremely large (0.27 standard deviation) increase in 8th grade math scores between the 2008 and 2009 cohort.
Given the strong relationship between eighth grade test scores and ACT scores, the inclusion of eighth grade
controls have a noticeable influence on our estimates. For this reason, we show results with and without these grade
8 controls.
16
   This is not due to the policy-induced reduction in high school completion documented above. In results available
upon request, we find comparable impacts on test-taking if we limit the analysis to students who attended 11th grade
and/or graduated a Michigan public high school.


                                                                                                                 20
        In an effort to account for changes in the scaling of the ACT over time, as well as any

unobserved factors common to public schools in the Midwest, Table 3 shows results for ACT

scores normed to the Illinois distribution (see Data section). While the estimates are slightly

more positive than those in Table 2, the conclusions are similar. In column 4, our preferred

model, we see small but significant increases in science and reading scores. For example, the

estimate of 2.1 for science indicates a 2 percentile-point increase (from a baseline of the 47th

percentile). The math effect is very small (0.6 percentile points) and only marginally significant.

The English effect is not significantly different than zero.

        Table 4 shows results separately by the quintile of the student’s eighth grade math score,

using the specification from column 4 of Table 2. Appendix Figures 1-5 show the trends in ACT

scores by subject for each of the quintiles. Models that do not control for grade 8 scores and/or

use the Illinois percentiles of student ACT scores as the outcome yield comparable results and

are shown in Appendix Tables 1-2. The final row of Table 4 shows the difference between the

impacts of the MMC on the top and bottom quintiles. Across each subject area in our models

with a pre-policy trend, the impact on the lowest-prepared students is larger than that for the

highest-prepared students by a statistically significant margin. These comparatively larger effects

mean that even when we lack clear evidence of growth in student scores, there is a clear

narrowing of the achievement gap between the highest and lowest quintiles.

       These results suggest that the set of students who entered high school with weak

academic skills may have benefited from the new requirements, at least in terms of science and

reading achievement. The estimate of 0.726 on science scores for bottom quintile students (from

the model that includes a pre-policy trend) is equivalent to about 0.22 standard deviations; the

corresponding estimate for the composite score translates to an effect of roughly 0.15 standard




                                                                                                    21
deviations. Conversely, there is some evidence that students who entered high school with the

strongest academic skills experienced a decline in performance relative to what would have been

expected in the absence of the policy. It should be noted, however, that these results are

particularly sensitive to the inclusion of the pre-policy trend.

       To the extent that these high-achieving students were most likely to have been taking

college-prep courses in earlier years, one might not have expected the policy to have a sizeable

impact on their performance. On the other hand, the introduction of the MMC necessitated

staffing changes within schools that might have influenced the performance of higher-achieving

students. For example, principals may have shifted the most talented math or science teachers to

courses taken by less well prepared students who were newly required to take the college-prep

courses. Or staffing shortages may have led class sizes in upper level math and science courses

to increase. We plan to explore both of these potential pathways in subsequent research that

utilizes individual student transcript data.

        Table 5 shows analogous results where the outcome is the standardized Michigan Merit

Exam score, and covariates include a pre-policy trend as well as fourth and eighth grade math

scores at the student and school-cohort level. To reiterate, this exam is based in part on the ACT

and in part on Michigan-specific test items. Unfortunately, scores based solely on the Michigan-

specific items are not available. The results are generally comparable to the ACT-only estimates

discussed above. Science scores show some modest positive effects across most quintiles. For

example, students entering high school in the bottom quintile of achievement improved roughly

0.1 standard deviations after the introduction of the MMC. Conditional on prior trends, math and

reading scores show no change for most quintiles.




                                                                                                   22
Sensitivity of Results to Selection in Test-Taking

         The introduction of the MMC corresponds to a statistically significant decrease of about

two percentage points in the likelihood that students take the ACT (Table 2) relative to a baseline

of 85 percent. If this difference in test-taking is associated with unobservable factors that also

influence student outcomes, then the estimates we present in Tables 2-4 could be biased.

         To explore how differential selection into testing might influence our ACT estimates, we

use a bounding technique outlined in Lee (2009). This technique involves “trimming”

observations from either the top or the bottom of the treatment group’s distribution of outcomes,

where the percent trimmed is equivalent to the difference in response rates between treatment

and control groups.

         In order to improve the precision of these bounds, we implement what Lee (2009)

describes as “tightened” bounds. For each ACT subtest, we predict student scores using all of the

covariates in our primary specification, restricting our sample to the pre-policy cohorts. We split

our sample into deciles based on these predicted scores. We then conduct the trimming exercise

within each of these deciles. Lee (2009) shows that this technique is valid under relatively weak

monotonicity assumptions, and typically produces tighter bounds than traditional “Manski” or

“worst-case” bounds.

         Appendix Table 3 shows the results of this bounding exercise. In column 1, we present

the estimates from our primary specification. These are analogous to those shown in column 4 of

Table 2. 17 To provide an even better basis for comparison with the bounds, in column 2 we show

estimates from a model that replaces the full set of controls in the main specification with fixed

effects for the deciles we use in the bounding procedure. These estimates show the same general


17
  The results in column 1 here differ slightly from those in the main text because we exclude schools that appear in
only the post-MMC cohorts since we cannot estimate the tightened Lee bounds for students in these schools.


                                                                                                                  23
results as those in column 1, although as expected, they are not identical. Columns 3 and 4 show

the lower and upper Lee bounds respectively. With the exception of reading, the bounds exclude

zero, indicating that any bias resulting from differential test-taking would not change the

inferences one should draw about the sign of the impact. In the case of reading, the main point

estimate is small and statistically significant, so in this way the bounding is consistent with our

findings for this subject as well. In results available upon request, we conduct a similar exercise

separately by eighth grade math quintile and find that the estimated Lee bounds would not

change the inferences drawn from the analyses presented in Table 4.

Cross-State Analysis

        As an additional test, we compare achievement trends in Michigan to other states. Given

the difficulty of comparing state-specific exams with each other, and the many changes in testing

regime within state, we choose instead to focus on ACT scores. However, in most states the

average ACT score is highly dependent on the fraction of students in the state who take the exam

(Hyman, forthcoming). For this reason, we limit our analysis to two other states that had

mandatory ACT over our analysis period: Colorado and Illinois, both of which started requiring

the ACT for students in the class of 2001. Appendix Figures 6-9 show these trends for math,

English, science and reading respectively. While it is difficult to draw any strong conclusions

from these figures, they are at least consistent with the effects described above – namely,

potentially positive impacts for science but not for math.

Advanced Placement Course-Taking

        The Merit Curriculum could harm high-performing students by diverting resources from

them. For this reason we examine whether students were less likely to take AP exams after the

introduction of the new policy. Table 6 shows impact on AP course taking separately for students




                                                                                                      24
in the top three quintiles of their cohort’s eighth grade math distribution. 18 As with the ACT and

MME estimates, these models include controls for fourth and eighth grade math scores at the

student and school-cohort level. We see a very small increase in the number of AP exams taken

among students in the top quintile (0.17 exams, which is equivalent to 0.09 standard deviations).

In results not shown here, we document that there was no increase in AP math exams taken, but a

small increase in science that was not significant at conventional levels (coef=0.047, se=0.031).

Importantly, passing rates on AP science exams increased somewhat at the same time. For

example, among students in the top quintile, the fraction of students scoring at least a 3 on an AP

science exam increased by 3.6 percentage points relative to a 16.3 percent pre-policy mean. For

students in quintiles 3, the proportion scoring at least a 3 increased 0.005 percentage points from

a baseline of 0.006.



RESULTS FOR HIGH SCHOOL ATTAINMENT

           The analysis above suggests that the introduction of the new course requirements had

little impact on high school achievement for the average student, but may have improved ACT

scores for students entering high school with the weakest academic preparation. However, the

concern with policies like the MMC is that by placing additional barriers to a high school

diploma, these policies might lead the least prepared students to drop out.

           To begin to explore this issue, we present a variety of figures that track high school

completion for Michigan ninth graders in 2003 through 2010. Figure 6 shows five-year rates for

the full analysis sample. 19 As in the ACT figures, the solid lines show the unadjusted trends,

normalized to zero in 2003. The dashed lines show adjusted trends that controls for all student


18
     Essentially no students in the bottom two quintiles take AP exams.
19
     The trends in four-year graduation results look virtually identical.


                                                                                                    25
and school characteristics with the exception of prior test scores. The dotted lines show adjusted

trends that additionally control for fourth and eighth grade math scores at both the student and

school-cohort level.

        Several patterns stand out. First, unadjusted graduation rates declined somewhat between

2003 and 2005, then grew slightly until 2007, and finally leveled out for cohorts after 2008 that

were affected by the new course requirements. When we control for student demographics and

economic conditions (dashed line), completion rates look worse in the early years, but better in

the later years. This largely reflects the influence of the dramatically worsening economic

conditions over the period, which would have been expected to decrease high school completion.

The dotted trend line, which further adjusts for prior student achievement, accentuates this

pattern. The reason is that elementary school achievement scores were increasing over this time

period, which would have been expected to increase high school completion in the absence of

other factors.

        From the perspective of the interrupted time series design, the non-linearity of the pre-

policy trend substantially complicates the analysis. If we limit the analysis to the 2005-2010

cohorts, in an effort to match the achievement sample, the sharp upward trajectory before 2008

implies that we will find a negative impact of the reforms using the ITS design. If we use the

entire 2003-2007 period to estimate the pre-reform trajectory, these figures suggest that we will

find zero or even slightly positive effects. However, the fact that the trend from 2003-2007 is

clearly non-linear implies that the ITS with a linear pre-trend is mis-specified. Finally, the

existence of notable trends prior to the policy reform (at least in certain samples) suggests that

the ITS estimates may differ substantially from simple difference-in-difference estimates.




                                                                                                     26
         Given the likely sensitivity of our results to the choice of sample and specification, Table

7 presents the full range of estimates. As suggested by the figure, estimated impact of the MMC

on high school graduation ranges from negative five percentage points to positive three

percentage points. In results that are available upon request, we find a similar pattern of

estimates for both four- and six-year graduation rates. This suggests that any effects we find are

not merely a result of students taking longer to graduate high school.

         However, as discussed earlier, the prior literature and the details of the MMC in

particular suggest that the reform should have affected students differently based on their prior

academic preparation. We hypothesized that it would have little, if any, impact on highly

prepared students, many of whom would have been taking the rigorous math and science courses

prior to the new requirements and have always had extremely high graduation rates. On the other

hand, we expect it might have a negative impact on the least prepared students.

         To examine this type of heterogeneity, Figures 7-11 show the five-year graduation trends

separately for quintiles of a student’s 8th grade performance on the standardized math exam.

These quintiles are constructed separately by cohort, so they measure a student’s relative position

in the cohort’s distribution and abstract from changes in the entire distribution over time. While

there is some variation across the quintiles, each group shows a similar pattern whereby adjusted

graduation rates decline over the first few years, rise sharply immediately before the reform, and

then level off or drop for the cohorts to whom the new course requirements applied.

         Table 8 presents five-year completion separately by quintile of eighth grade score. 20

Looking across the quintiles and across the two specifications, we see that the graduation

estimates are consistently smaller for the bottom quintiles. For example, the DD (ITS) estimates


20
  There are fewer than 100 unique values of the 8th grade raw scores, which is the reason that the number of
observations per quintile differ somewhat.


                                                                                                               27
suggest that the new course requirements increased graduation rates for students in the top

quintile by roughly 2.0 (4.8) percentage points (off a baseline of 91.8 percent), compared with -

0.01 (0.00) percentage points for students in the bottom quintile. Again we show the difference

between the 1st and 5th quintile impacts in the final row of this table. In this case, the difference

reveals a widening gap in high school completion rate that is statistically significant and

substantively large, with the top students receiving a 4.9 percentage point boost to their

graduation rates from the MMC compared with no increase resulting from the policy for the

lowest achieving group.

        To the extent that one believes that the large positive coefficient for top quintile students

is due to unobserved state-time specific factors unrelated to the MMC, one might consider the

difference between top and bottom quintile students as the causal impact of the MMC from a

comparative interrupted time series (CITS) design. This may be a reasonable assumption because

the majority of students in this top quintile took MMC-mandated math and science courses prior

to the new requirements, and nearly over 90 percent of students in this group graduated high

school prior to the reform. Using the top quintile as a counterfactual for each of the lower

quintiles, we would conclude that the new policy led to a modest reduction in high school

graduation among students in the bottom quintiles. For students in the bottom quintile, for

example, DDD and CITS estimates are -0.029 and -0.049, respectively. Given the pre-reform

completion rate of 58.6 percent, these effects are noticeable but modest.

        Appendix Table 4 shows comparable estimates for a sample that excludes 2003 and 2004

cohorts to match the sample for which we have ACT scores. As suggested by the figures, the

impacts for this sample are considerably more negative. For example, the ITS model for this

sample indicates the MMC reduced graduation rates by 8.6 percentage points, and even the DD




                                                                                                    28
model indicates a reduction of 2 percentage points (though this estimate is not significantly

different from zero). 21

Cross-State Analysis

         Given the sensitivity of the graduation results presented thus far, we turn to a cross state

analysis that allows us to control for common time effects that could confound the difference-in-

difference and interrupted time series analyses. In recent years, several states have adopted

graduation policies similar to Michigan. We consider a state to have a comparable policy if its

high school graduation requirements included both Algebra 1 and Geometry, and at least two of

the three core science classes (Biology, Chemistry, and Physics) during our sample period.

Appendix Table 6 lists graduation requirements in each state during this period, and indicates

those states with policies similar to Michigan. 22 We exclude all states with similar policies from

our set of potential comparison states in the analyses described below.

         A key challenge in this approach is to find a reliable state-year measure of high school

graduation. Heckman and LaFontaine (2010) document a number of substantial biases inherent

in the commonly used sources of data. They conclude that the decennial census (and more

recently American Community Survey) provides the most accurate estimates of educational




21
   Given the large decline in graduation rates implied by the ITS estimates above, it is useful to examine what might
have happened to the bottom quintile students under the MMC. With the caveats regard data quality discussed
above, Appendix Table 5 presents estimates of how the reforms influenced the following outcomes: dropping out,
leaving Michigan public schools, and a catch-all “other” category, which includes completion other than graduation
(e.g., GED, completion of a special-education track that does not result in a diploma), incarceration, enlistment in
the military, enrollment in home schooling and death. These results indicate that the bulk of the decrease in
graduation is accounted for by an increase in outcomes captured in the “other” category.
22
   States other than Michigan that met this definition are Arizona, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia,
Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Minnesota, Mississippi, Oklahoma, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, and West Virginia. Several of these states’ requirements were implemented in different
years for math and science. For example, the math requirement in Arkansas was binding for the graduating class of
2009, while the science requirement was binding for the class of 2010. In this case, the earlier year was coded as the
beginning of the treatment period. In addition, 9 states had policies that were similar to MMC for either Math or
Science, but not both.


                                                                                                                   29
attainment at a national level. Unfortunately, it is not possible to reliably link individuals to the

state (or year) in which they attended high school with this data.

         After exploring various options, we chose to use the log of the average freshman

graduation rate (AFGR) calculated by the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and

reported in the Common Core of Data (CCD). The AFGR is a proxy measure of the graduation

rate created by using the diploma count to estimate the number of graduates (the numerator) and

an estimated freshman class size to determine the number of possible graduates (the

denominator). While less accurate than the adjusted cohort graduation rate (ACGR) that directly

measures high school completion with student-level data, the AFGR is the only available

national-level measure of state graduation rates covering the period in which we are interested.

We use the AFGR data for the cohorts graduating in 2004 through 2012, which correspond to 9th

grade cohorts 2001-2009. 23 The CCD provides AFGRs for both the overall graduation rates as

well as several subgroups. However, an inspection of the data suggested that the subgroup AFGR

statistics were frequently missing and/or included implausible values in many states. For this

reason, we limit our analysis to the state’s overall AFGR. 24

         We adopt the synthetic control method of constructing a comparison group proposed by

Abadie et al. (2010), which provides a formal method for constructing a comparison in cases

where few units receive treatment. This approach uses information on pre-policy trends in the

outcome measure as well as other covariates to create the best comparison for the treatment unit.

State-year controls include racial composition, unemployment, logged median household

income, average per-pupil expenditures for public K-12 schools, and fraction of elementary and


23
   The AFGR is not available after 2012, which means that we cannot include our final cohort in the cross-state
analysis.
24
   AFGR was missing in 7 state-year observations. In these cases, we use an interpolated value to replace the
missing.


                                                                                                                  30
secondary age children enrolled in private schools, along with the outcome measure (log AFGR)

in 2004, 2006, 2008 and 2010 . 25

           Figure 12 shows the trends in Michigan and the synthetic control group, which consists

of Alabama (weight 0.42), Alaska (weight 0.12), Connecticut (weight 0.28) and Vermont

(weight 0.18). Michigan and the control states track each other quite closely from 2004 through

2010, but then diverge in 2011, the first class affected by the new graduation requirements. The

fact that the two trend lines are so similar prior to 2011 reflects the fact that the procedure was

effective in finding a good “match” for Michigan.

           Table 9 presents corresponding regression estimates. Columns 1-3 all utilize the synthetic

control states (and weights) identified above (along with Michigan), with each column showing

point estimates from a specification that includes different control variables. The point estimates

indicate that the MMC is associated with a roughly 5 percent decline in the graduation rate in

Michigan. As a further robustness test, columns 4-6 show estimates from a more standard panel

data regression in which all states are included and equally weighted. While the estimates vary a

bit across specifications, the qualitative conclusion is the same – namely, the introduction of the

MMC was associated with a small reduction in high school graduation. Our preferred model,

column 6, indicates a roughly 3 percent reduction.

           Given the small number of states and the fact that only one state (Michigan) is in the

treatment group, standard methods of statistical inference are not appropriate. Instead, we adopt

the exact inference test described by Abadie et al. (2010). We calculate the effect of a placebo

treatment on all nontreated comparison states, and then produce p-values for the likelihood of

Type I error by calculating the percentage of these effects that are as or more extreme than the



25
     Appendix Table 7 presents summary statistics


                                                                                                      31
effect we estimate for Michigan. 26 The point estimate for Michigan is smaller than all of the 29

other states in the first two specifications (columns 1-2) which translates to a p-value of 0.000.

For the third specification (column 3), the point estimate for Michigan is smaller than 24 of the

29 other states, generating an implied p-value of 0.17. The implied p-values for the

specifications using all non-reform states as controls (equally weighted) are 0.10, 0.10 and 0.00

respectively.

       While the outcome of AFGR is imperfect and our estimates are necessarily imprecise

given the modest number of control states, we believe that this analysis provides suggestive

evidence that the introduction of the new course requirements in Michigan led to a small

reduction in high school completion.



DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS

       The Michigan Merit Curriculum implemented a standardized curriculum across the state,

which closely resembled the core set of classes commonly required for college admittance.

Among the changes the policy required was an increase in the number of math and science

courses needed for graduation. The assumption of the policy was that having students take more

rigorous courses would better prepare them for college and the workplace.

       We find that the introduction of the policy had relatively little impact on either student

achievement or educational attainment. There is some evidence that the new course requirements

led to an increase in science achievement, which is reflected in higher scores on both the ACT

exam as well as AP courses. In science and other subjects, the evidence suggests that students

who entered high school with the weakest academic preparation may have experienced the

largest benefits of the policy. However, even for the bottom quintile group in science, where we




                                                                                                     32
see the largest effects, the impact was modest: an increase of 0.73 ACT scale points, relative to a

baseline of roughly 15 points.

       Our results for high school completion are more sensitive to the choice of sample and

specification. If we use ninth grade cohorts from 2003 through 2010, the ITS estimate suggests a

3.3 percentage point (4 percent) increase in graduate rates; if we focus instead on the 2005-2010

cohorts, we find a 5 percentage point (6.4 percent) decline in graduation rates. The difference is

due to the highly non-linear pre-reform trend in high school completion, especially the sharp

increase in graduation rates for the cohort immediately prior to the reform. Our cross-state

analysis, which relies on cohorts back to 2001, suggests the MMC was associated with a 3-5

percent reduction in high school completion.

       As with the achievement analysis, we find larger impacts among the students with the

weakest academic preparation entering high school. In the case of completion, however, we find

that these lower-achieving students experience the largest reductions in the likelihood of

graduation under the new policy. We suspect that this was caused by higher failure rates among

low performing students pushed into more difficult courses by the new requirement, a claim

which we will investigate in subsequent analyses of student transcript data.

       A sizeable portion of the decrease in high school graduation rates can be explained by an

increase in dropout rates captured in the state administrative data. The remaining decrease in

high school graduation rates may also be due to dropouts that are not captured in the state data,

or to a variety of other factors such as students obtaining a GED, enlisting in the military, etc.

Unfortunately, the available state administrative data do not allow us to reliably explore these

other outcomes.




                                                                                                     33
       Given recent trends of district and states adopting more rigorous high school curriculum

requirements (Domina & Saldana, 2012), it is critical to understand how such changes influence

student outcomes. Our results suggest that higher standards alone will have, at best, a limited

impact on student performance. Future research will allow us to examine if the policy did had an

impact on college attendance and degree completion. It will also allow us to better pin down the

mechanisms responsible for any reduction in high school graduation and the pattern of

achievement effects across students with different initial achievement levels. With a deeper

understanding of these mechanisms, policymakers will be able to adapt the policy to enhance its

benefits and mitigate its costs.




                                                                                                  34
References

Abadie, A., Diamond, A., & Hainmueller, J. (2010). Synthetic control methods for comparative
case studies: Estimating the effect of California’s tobacco control program. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 105(490).

Acemoglu, D., & Angrist, J. (2001). How large are human-capital externalities? Evidence from
compulsory-schooling laws. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15 (pp. 9-74).
MIT Press.

Achieve, Inc (2013). Closing the Expectations Gap: An Annual 50-state Progress Report on the
Alignment of High School Policies With the Demands of College and Careers.

Achieve, Inc (2009). Closing the Expectations Gap: An Annual 50-state Progress Report on the
Alignment of High School Policies With the Demands of College and Careers.

Adelman, C. (1999). Answers in the Tool Box. Academic Intensity, Attendance Patters, and
Bachelor’s Degree Attainment. National Institute on Postsecondary Education, Libraries, and
Lifelong Learning.

Allensworth, E., Lee, V. E., Montgomery, N., and Nomi, T. (2009). College Preparatory
Curriculum for All: Academic Consequences of Requiring Algebra and English I for Ninth
Graders in Chicago. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 31(4): 367-391.

Allensworth, E., Nomi, Takako, Montgomery, Nicholas, Lee, V. E., and Mazzeo, Christopher
(2010). “College Prep for All? What We’ve Learned from Chicago’s Efforts.” Policy Brief,
Consortium on Chicago School Research, August 2010.

American Association of State Colleges and Universities, 2006.

Angrist, J. D., & Krueger, A. B. (1991). Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling
and Earnings?. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), 979-1014.

Balfanz, R. and West, T. C. (2009). Raising Graduation Rates: A Series of Data Briefs. The
Everyone Graduates Center. Johns Hopkins University.

Betts, J. R. and Rose, H. (2004). The Effect of High School Courses on Earnings. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 86(2): 497-513.

Bloom, H. S., Ham, S., Melton, L., & O'Brien, J. (2001). Evaluating the Accelerated Schools
Approach: A Look at Early Implementation and Impacts on Student Achievement in Eight
Elementary Schools.

Bryk, A. S., Holland, P. B., and Lee, V. E. (1993). Catholic Schools and the Common Good.
Harvard University Press.



                                                                                              35
Buddin, R. & Croft, M. (2014). Do stricter high school graduation requirements improve college
readiness? ACT Working Paper Series working paper WP-2014-1.

Cherry, J. D. (2004). Final Report of the Lt. Governor’s Commission on Higher Education &
Economic Growth. Governor’s Office, Michigan. Available at: www.cherrycommission.org.

Cortes, K. E., Goodman, J., and Nomi, T. (forthcoming). Intensive Math Instruction and
Educational Attainment: Long-run Impacts of Double-Dose Algebra. Journal of Human
Resources.

Davis-Kean, P. E., Eccles, J. S., Simpkins, S. D. (2006). Math and Science Motivation: A
Longitudinal Examination of the Links Between Choices and Beliefs. Developmental
Psychology, 42(1): 70-83.

DeCicca, P. P. and Lillard, D. R. (2001). Higher Standards, More Dropouts? Evidence Within
and Across Time. Economics of Education Review, 20(5): 459-473.

Dee, T.S. and Jacob, B.A. (2007). “Do High School Exit Exams Influence Educational
Attainment or Labor Market Performance?” In Adam Gamoran, ed., Standards-Based Reform
and the Poverty Gap: Lessons for No Child Left Behind Washington, D.C.: Brookings University
Press.

Dee, T. S. and Jacob, B. (2011). The Impact of No Child Left Behind on Student Achievement.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(3): 418–446.

Domina, T. & Saldana, J. (2012) “Does Raising the Bar Level the Playing Field?: Mathematics
Curricula Intensification and Inequality in American High Schools, 1982-2004” American
Educational Research Journal, vol. 49, No. 4, pp.685-708.

Dounay, J. (2006). Embedding College Readiness Indicators in High School Curriculum and
Assessments. Education Commission of the States.

Frank, K. A., Muller, C., Schiller, K. S., Riegle-Crumb, C., Mueller, A. S., Crosnoe, R., &
Pearson, J. (2008). The social dynamics of mathematics course-taking in high school. AJS;
American journal of sociology, 113(6), 1645.

Goodman, J. S. (2012). The labor of division: Returns to compulsory math coursework. Mimeo.

Grodsky, E., Kalogrides, D., and Warren, J. R. (2009). State High School Exit Examinations and
NAEP Long-Term Trends in Reading and Mathematics, 1971-2004. Education Policy, 23(4):
589-614.

Heckman, J. & LaFontaine, P. (2010). "The American High School Graduation Rate: Trends
and Levels," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2), pages 244-262,




                                                                                              36
Herlihy, C. M., Kemple, J. J., and Smith, T. J. (2005). Making Progress Toward Graduation:
Evidence From the Talent Development High School Model. MDRC.

Hyman, Joshua (forthcoming). “ACT for All: The Effect of Mandatory College Entrance Exams
on Postsecondary Attainment and Choice.” Education Finance and Policy.

Jenkins, K. N., Kulick, R. B., and Warren, J. R. (2006). High School Exit Examinations and
State-Level Completion and GED Rates, 1975 Through 2002. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis, 28(2): 131-152.

Jacob, B. (2001). Getting tough? The Impact of High School Graduation Exams. Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 23(2): 99-121.

Jacob, B. (2005). Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: The Impact of High-Stakes Testing in
Chicago Public Schools. Journal of Public Economics, 89(5-6): 761-796.

Koretz, D. (2002). Limitations in the use of achievement tests as measures of educators'
productivity. In E. Hanushek, J. Heckman, and D. Neal (Eds.), Designing Incentives to Promote
Human Capital. Special issue of The Journal of Human Resources, 37(4, Fall), 752-777.

Lee, D. S. (2002). Trimming for Bounds on Treatment Effects with Missing Outcomes. NBER
Technical Working Paper No. 77, June 2002.

Lee, D. S. (2009). Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treatment
effects. The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071-1102.

Levine, P. B. and Zimmerman, D. J. (1995). An Empirical Analysis of the Welfare Magnet
Debate Using NLSY. NBER Working Paper No. 5264, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Montgomery, N., & Allensworth, E. M. (2010). Passing through Science: The Effects of Raising
Graduation Requirements in Science on Course-Taking and Academic Achievement in Chicago.
Research Report. Consortium on Chicago School Research. 1313 East 60th Street, Chicago, IL
60637.

Murnane, R. J. (2013). US High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations. Journal of
Economic Literature, 51(2), 370-422.

National Center for Education Statistics (2013). The Nation’s Report Card: Trends in Academic
Progress 2012 (NCES 2013 456). Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
Washington, D.C.

Nomi, T. (2012). “The unintended consequences of an algebra-for-all policy on high-skill
students: The effects on instructional organization and sutdents’ academic outcomes.”
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 34(4): 489-505.




                                                                                             37
Nomi, T. and Allensworth, E. (2009). Double-dose algebra as an alternative strategy to
remediation: Effects on students’ academic outcomes. Journal of Research on Educational
Effectiveness, 2(2): 111-148.

Nomi, T. and Allensworth, E. (2014). Skill-Based Sorting in the Era of College Prep for All.
University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research Research Brief, March 2014.

Oreopoulos, P. (2006). Estimating average and local average treatment effects of education when
compulsory schooling laws really matter. The American Economic Review, 152-175.

Oreopoulos, P. (2007). Do dropouts drop out too soon? Wealth, health and happiness from
compulsory schooling. Journal of public Economics, 91(11), 2213-2229.

Papay, J. P., Murnane, R. J., & Willett, J. B. (2010). The consequences of high school exit
examinations for low-performing urban students: Evidence from Massachusetts. Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32(1), 5-23.

Riegle-Crumb, C. (2006). The Path Through Math: Course Sequences and Academic
Performance Intersection of Race-Ethnicity and Gender. American Journal of Education, 113(1):
101-122.

Sadler, P.M. and Tai, R. H. (2007). The Two High-School Pillars Supporting College Science.
Science, 317(5837): 457.

Schneider, B., Swanson, C. B., and Riegle-Crumb, C. (1997). Opportunities for Learning: Course
Sequences and Positional Advantages. Social Psychology of Education, 2(1): 25-53.

Sells, L. W. (1973). High school mathematics as the critical filter in the job market. Developing
opportunities for minorities in graduate education, 37-39.




                                                                                                38
                          Figure 1: Impact of MMC on ACT composite scores

             1.2
             1
             .8
ACT Points
             .6
             .4
             .2
             0




                   2005          2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                              9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement




                            Figure 2: Impact of MMC on ACT math scores
             1.2
             1
             .8
ACT Points
             .6
             .4
             .2
             0




                   2005          2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                              9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement
                          Figure 3: Impact of MMC on ACT science scores

             .8
             .6
ACT Points
             .4
             .2
             0
             −.2




                   2005        2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                            9th Grade Cohort Year

                                      Unadjusted
                                      Demo + unemp + expen
                                      Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement




                          Figure 4: Impact of MMC on ACT reading scores
             1
             .8
ACT Points
             .6
             .4
             .2
             0




                   2005        2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                            9th Grade Cohort Year

                                      Unadjusted
                                      Demo + unemp + expen
                                      Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement
                                            Figure 5: Impact of MMC on ACT English scores

                    1.5
                    1
ACT Points
                    .5
                    0




                                     2005        2006           2007         2008               2009      2010
                                                               9th Grade Cohort Year

                                                        Unadjusted
                                                        Demo + unemp + expen
                                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement




                                       Figure 6: Impact of MMC on five-years graduation rates
                    .03
                    .02
Percentage Points
                    .01
                    0
                    −.03 −.02 −.01




                                                        2005      2006        2007       2008      2009   2010
                                                                 9th Grade Cohort Year

                                                        Unadjusted
                                                        Demo + unemp + expen
                                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement
                    Figure 7: Impact of MMC on five-years graduation rates (Quintile 1)

                    .04
                    .03
Percentage Points
                    .02
                    .01
                    0
                    −.02 −.01




                                         2005     2006        2007       2008   2009   2010
                                                 9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement




                    Figure 8: Impact of MMC on five-years graduation rates (Quintile 2)
                    .02
                    .01
Percentage Points
                    0
                    −.01
                    −.02
                    −.03




                                         2005     2006        2007       2008   2009   2010
                                                 9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement
                    Figure 9: Impact of MMC on five-years graduation rates (Quintile 3)

                     .04
                     .02
Percentage Points
                     0
                     −.02
                     −.04
                     −.06




                                         2005     2006        2007       2008   2009   2010
                                                 9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement




                    Figure 10: Impact of MMC on five-years graduation rates (Quintile 4)
                     .04
                     .02
Percentage Points
                     0
                     −.02
                     −.04
                     −.06




                                         2005     2006        2007       2008   2009   2010
                                                 9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement
                     Figure 11: Impact of MMC on five-years graduation rates (Quintile 5)

                         .03
                         .02
 Percentage Points
                         .01
                         0
                         −.03 −.02 −.01




                                                    2005           2006      2007      2008    2009      2010
                                                               9th Grade Cohort Year

                                                   Unadjusted
                                                   Demo + unemp + expen
                                                   Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement




Figure 12: Impact of MMC on four-years graduation rates (synthetic control)

                                             4-Year High School Graduation Rates
                     4.5
 Log High School Grad Rate
      4.3         4.44.2




                             2004         2005   2006      2007       2008      2009    2010      2011   2012
                                                                      Year

                                                        Michigan               Comparison Group
Table 1a - Summary Statistics on Student and School Background Characteristics

                                                                                                           Year of Grade 9
Variable                                                  2003            2004            2005           2006          2007             2008           2009            2010

Demographics
   % female                                               50.1%           49.9%          50.2%          49.8%          49.6%           49.8%           49.4%          49.3%
   % White                                                76.4%           75.5%          74.6%          73.8%          73.5%           73.2%           72.9%          73.2%
   % black                                                17.0%           18.1%          19.0%          19.4%          19.4%           19.3%           19.3%          18.4%
   % Hispanic                                             3.3%             3.3%           3.4%           3.8%           4.0%            4.2%            4.5%           4.9%
   % Asian                                                2.0%             1.9%          1.9%            1.9%          2.1%             2.1%            2.2%           2.4%
   % migrant                                              0.2%             0.1%           0.2%           0.2%           0.2%            0.2%            0.1%           0.2%
   % free lunch (gr 9)                                    21.6%           22.5%          24.7%          27.2%          29.0%           30.3%           32.8%          34.5%
   % subdized lunch (gr 9)                                 5.8%            5.6%           5.7%           6.5%           6.8%            6.9%            7.3%           7.3%
   % in special education                                 11.3%           11.7%          10.7%          11.2%          11.2%           11.5%           11.8%          11.5%
   % with limited English proficiency                      1.7%            2.2%           2.6%           2.4%           2.5%            2.8%            2.8%           2.6%
   Average age                                            14.50           14.49          14.49          14.50          14.51           14.50           14.50          14.51

School Characteristics
   Enrollment                                            273.36          292.47         308.34         302.40           294.71         290.76         279.05          281.47
   % of students attending urban school                  19.67%          19.68%         19.88%         19.62%          18.16%         17.56%          17.42%          16.60%
   % of students attending suburban school               45.12%          45.26%         45.83%         46.03%          47.43%         47.68%          47.94%          48.96%
   % of students attending school in a town               9.00%           8.91%          8.70%          8.59%           8.53%          8.48%          8.44%           8.30%
   % of students attending rural school                  26.21%          26.14%         25.60%         25.76%          25.88%         26.28%          26.20%          26.13%
   % of students attending charter school                 1.29%           1.88%          2.16%          2.50%           2.69%          2.99%           3.50%           3.76%
   % of students attending magnet school                  6.21%           7.38%          9.32%         10.43%          11.08%         11.99%          14.02%          13.74%
   Unemp rate (%) in county (grade 9)                      7.36            7.70           7.70           7.38            7.55           7.94           12.25           14.18
   District pp expend (gr 9)                            10129.29        10152.35       10076.07       10006.60        10072.56        9877.53        10153.53        10080.25
   school pp expend (gr 9)                              6376.35         6444.65        6376.83        6277.96          6349.03        6231.83        6555.39         6433.25

Prior Standardized Achievement
    8th grade std math score *                            -0.23           -0.17          0.00           0.01            0.03           0.05            0.31            0.46
    % missing 4th grade math score                       17.89%          19.55%         20.40%         20.70%          20.10%         15.96%          13.50%          12.00%
    4th grade std math score *                            -0.06           -0.10          0.00           -0.06           0.17           0.17            0.33            0.34

Sample
   Total students                                        112,201         120,853        126,974        126,443        122,890         120,770         116,208         114,491
   Unique Schools                                          705             706            698            711            674             717             701             705

Notes: This table reports the mean of each variable for the sample including students who first attended a traditional high school in grade 9 during 2003-2010 with non-missing
8th grade math test scores. *standardized equated exam scores are determined based on the 2005 cohort score. Scores are "equated" to account for differences in the number of
possible points.
Table 1b - Summary Statistics on Student Outcomes

                                                                                   Year of Grade 9
Variable                                          2003       2004       2005       2006      2007        2008       2009       2010

High School Tests
   % that take the ACT                                                83.46%     84.66%     85.48%     86.33%     87.52%      87.59%
   Average ACT composite score                                         18.88      18.92      19.08      19.31      19.38       19.61
   Average ACT math score                                              18.88      19.03      19.25      19.36      19.53       19.68
   Average ACT science score                                           19.48      19.52      19.44      19.71      19.91       19.99
   Average ACT reading score                                           17.64      17.71      18.07      18.32      18.35       18.73
   Average ACT English score                                           18.99      18.93      19.04      19.36      19.21       19.54

Advanced Placement Exam Outcomes
  % took at least one exam †                     11.58%     14.75%    16.28%     16.95%     18.42%     19.70%     20.97%      22.02%
  % took at least one exam (math) †              5.09%      6.08%     6.47%      6.66%      7.20%      8.06%      8.29%       8.85%
  % took at least one exam (science) †            3.49%      5.35%     6.16%      6.29%      6.90%      7.54%      7.69%       8.32%
  number of exams †                                0.20       0.32      0.38       0.40       0.44       0.50       0.53        0.59
  number of exams (math) †                         0.05       0.07      0.07       0.08       0.08       0.09       0.10        0.10
  number of exams (science) †                      0.04       0.07      0.08       0.08       0.09       0.10       0.10        0.11
  Average score                                    3.03       2.88      2.84       2.81       2.77       2.69       2.76        2.78
  Average score (math)                             3.15       3.06      3.13       3.14       3.06       2.90       3.04        3.01
  Average score (science)                          3.10       2.94      2.84       2.76       2.77       2.77       2.79        2.82
  Maximum score                                    3.16       3.06      3.04       3.02       2.98       2.92       2.98        3.01
  Maximum score (math)                             3.16       3.09      3.17       3.18       3.11       2.96       3.10        3.08
  Maximum score (science)                          3.15       3.03      2.94       2.87       2.88       2.88       2.91        2.94
  Minimum score                                    2.90       2.69      2.63       2.59       2.55       2.46       2.53        2.52
  Minimum score (math)                             3.14       3.03      3.09       3.09       3.00       2.85       2.98        2.95
  Minimum score (science)                          3.06       2.84      2.73       2.66       2.66       2.65       2.67        2.70
  Score 3+ on at least 1 AP exam †                4.59%      5.59%     5.94%      5.95%      6.40%      6.83%      7.14%       7.83%
  Score 3+ on at least 1 AP math exam †           3.41%      3.94%     4.25%      4.41%      4.70%      4.92%      5.36%       5.70%
  Score 3+ on at least 1 AP science exam †        2.34%      3.38%     3.71%      3.60%      3.95%      4.35%      4.46%       5.14%

High School Outcomes
   % graduating in 4 years or fewer              74.93%     74.41%    73.75%     74.20%     76.26%     75.58%     75.83%      75.26%
   % enrolled in high school after 4 years        9.18%      9.31%     9.45%      9.48%      8.91%      9.86%      9.14%       7.83%
   % dropout within 4 years                      2.56%      2.73%     2.82%      2.91%      2.75%      2.64%      2.38%       2.45%
   % left Michigan public within 4 years         1.66%      2.10%     2.36%      2.70%      2.90%      2.87%      2.64%       2.52%
   % unknown within 4 years                      1.88%      1.82%     1.73%      1.95%      2.06%      2.10%      2.29%       2.19%
   % other within 4 years                        9.79%      9.63%     9.89%      8.76%      7.13%      6.95%      7.73%       9.75%
   % graduating in 5 years or fewer              78.07%     77.53%    77.05%     77.42%     79.24%     78.72%     78.76%      78.06%
   % enrolled in high school after 5 years ‡      2.17%      2.25%     2.34%      2.28%      2.33%      2.46%      1.97%
   % dropout within 5 years ‡                    3.67%      3.80%     3.94%      4.06%      3.58%      3.75%      3.52%
   % left Michigan public within 5 years ‡       1.77%      2.24%     2.43%      2.76%      2.95%      2.99%      2.68%
   % unknown within 5 years ‡                    2.57%      2.78%     2.85%      3.07%      3.12%      3.48%      3.45%
   % other within 5 years ‡                      11.75%     11.41%    11.38%     10.41%      8.78%      8.60%      9.62%

Sample
  Total students                                112,201    120,853    126,974    126,443    122,890    120,770    116,208    114,491
  Unique Schools                                  705        706        698        711        674        717        701        705

Notes: This table reports the mean of each variable for the sample including students who first attended a traditional high school in
grade 9 during 2003-2010 with non-missing 8th grade math test scores. † AP exam outcomes are unconditional, students who didn't
take an AP exam are coded to have 0 exam and 0 score in one exam. AP score is 1-5 point scale. ‡ We don't have the high school
graduation information (except graduation) within 5 years for the 2010 cohort.
Table 2 - Impact of the MMC on ACT Scores

                                                                 Pre-Policy
Outcome
                                                                 Mean/S.D.       (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)

Composite ACT score                                               [18.959]    0.400***     0.139***      0.167***        -0.096
                                                                  {4.890}      (0.057)      (0.053)       (0.062)       (0.059)
Number of Students                                                             624,316      624,316       624,316       624,316

Math ACT Score                                                    [19.052]    0.373***       0.068         -0.018      -0.333***
                                                                  {4.796}      (0.065)      (0.063)       (0.072)       (0.069)
Number of Students                                                             624,630      624,630       624,630       624,630

Science ACT Score                                                 [19.482]    0.407***     0.172***      0.432***      0.197***
                                                                  {4.914}      (0.058)      (0.060)       (0.065)       (0.065)
Number of Students                                                             624,354      624,354       624,354       624,354

Reading ACT Score                                                 [18.984]    0.357***      0.128**      0.295***        0.067
                                                                  {5.902}      (0.062)      (0.061)       (0.075)       (0.074)
Number of Students                                                             624,494      624,494       624,494       624,494

English ACT Score                                                 [17.803]    0.465***      0.191**        -0.046      -0.320***
                                                                  {6.019}      (0.087)      (0.083)       (0.090)       (0.087)
Number of Students                                                             624,696      624,696       624,696       624,696

Took ACT Math                                                     [0.846]     -0.012**      -0.013**     -0.027***     -0.027***
                                                                  {0.361}      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.006)
Number of Students                                                             727,776       727,776      727,776       727,776

Pre-Policy Trend                                                                No            No            Yes           Yes
Demographics, school characteristics and school FE                              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Prior 4th grade math test scores (individual and school level)                  Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Prior 8th grade math test scores (individual and school level)                  No            Yes           No            Yes

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions of interrupted time series design of the impact of
MMC on ACT outcomes. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a separate regression. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts without
imputed 8th grade test scores are included. “Took ACT math” is a dummy variable that is equal to one if a student has a non-
missing ACT composite score. All the ACT scores are the first time ACT exam raw scores of each subject. All the control variable
groups (demographics, school characteristics, prior 4th and 8th grade test scores at both individual level and school level) are
corresponding to those listed in Table 1, except not controlling for the unemployment rates and school/district expenditures in
grades 11 and 12. Pre-policy mean reports the mean and s.d. of each outcome in 2005-2007. Robust standard errors in parentheses
are clustered at high school level. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Table 3 - Impact of the MMC on ACT Scores, Relative to Illinois Score Trends

                                                                 Pre-Policy
Outcome
                                                                 Mean/S.D.         (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)

Composite ACT IL percentile                                       [43.528]      1.310***        -0.064       2.223***      0.886***
                                                                  {27.859}       (0.308)       (0.294)        (0.351)       (0.331)
Number of Students                                                               624,316       624,316        624,316      624,316

Math ACT Score IL percentile                                      [45.220]       0.813**      -0.737**       0.878**        -0.650*
                                                                  {26.608}       (0.343)       (0.324)       (0.388)        (0.370)
Number of Students                                                               624,630      624,630        624,630        624,630

Science ACT Score IL percentile                                   [47.391]      1.115***        -0.195       3.375***      2.111***
                                                                  {28.573}       (0.338)       (0.344)        (0.373)       (0.370)
Number of Students                                                               624,354       624,354        624,354      624,354

Reading ACT Score IL percentile                                   [44.559]      1.512***        0.402        2.913***      1.841***
                                                                  {28.215}       (0.295)       (0.291)        (0.363)       (0.356)
Number of Students                                                               624,494       624,494       624,494       624,494

English ACT Score IL percentile                                   [40.486]      1.812***       0.673*         0.644          -0.474
                                                                  {27.995}       (0.389)       (0.374)       (0.412)        (0.400)
Number of Students                                                               624,696       624,696       624,696        624,696


Pre-Policy Trend                                                                   No            No            Yes            Yes
Demographics, school characteristics and school FE                                 Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Prior 4th grade math test scores (individual and school level)                     Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Prior 8th grade math test scores (individual and school level)                     No            Yes           No             Yes

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions of interrupted time series design of the impact of
MMC on ACT outcomes. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a separate regression. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts without
imputed 8th grade test scores are included. The ACT outcome measures correspond to the percentile that the student’s raw score
would be in the distribution of Illinois test takers in the given year. See text for more discussion of this. All the control variable
groups (demographics, school characteristics, prior 4th and 8th grade test scores at both individual level and school level) are
corresponding to those listed in Table 1, except not controlling for the unemployment rates and school/district expenditures in
grades 11 and 12. Pre-policy mean reports the mean and s.d. of each outcome in 2005-2007. Robust standard errors in parentheses
are clustered at high school level. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Table 4 - Impact of the MMC on ACT Outcomes by Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile

                                                     Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile                Diff:
Outcome
                                          1 (Low)       2              3             4       5 (High)    Q1 - Q5

        ACT composite score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.361***     0.120         0.122         0.148*     0.196*      0.165
                                           (0.062)    (0.073)       (0.081)        (0.086)    (0.112)    (0.122)
                                          [14.108]   [16.060]      [18.004]       [20.481]   [24.718]
                                           {2.295}   {2.696}       {3.092}        {3.459}    {4.125}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      0.354***     0.105        -0.035       -0.261***    -0.239*    0.593***
                                           (0.073)    (0.085)       (0.093)        (0.101)    (0.129)     (0.143)

Number of Students                        112,294    119,788       124,796        137,931    129,507     241,801

           ACT math score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.211***     0.094       0.184**          0.058      0.111      0.100
                                           (0.051)    (0.064)       (0.076)        (0.100)    (0.140)    (0.148)
                                          [14.766]   [16.042]      [17.698]       [20.304]   [25.128]
                                           {1.709}   {2.061}       {2.734}        {3.479}    {4.337}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      -0.119**     -0.084        -0.047      -0.428***   -0.562***   0.443***
                                           (0.055)    (0.074)       (0.090)        (0.113)    (0.147)     (0.153)

Number of Students                        112,429    119,861       124,850        137,965    129,525     241,954

          ACT Science score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.391***    0.170*         0.105         0.168*    0.249**      0.142
                                           (0.081)    (0.096)       (0.090)        (0.096)    (0.122)    (0.142)
                                          [14.939]   [16.884]      [18.758]       [20.940]   [24.574]
                                           {3.307}   {3.459}       {3.525}        {3.597}    {4.150}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      0.726***   0.647***      0.337***        0.034     -0.314**    1.040***
                                           (0.099)    (0.111)       (0.104)       (0.110)     (0.133)     (0.163)

Number of Students                        112,312    119,799       124,800        137,934    129,509     241,821

         ACT Reading score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.409***     0.147         0.072         0.210*      0.152      0.257
                                           (0.084)    (0.100)       (0.116)        (0.122)    (0.139)    (0.159)
                                          [14.140]   [16.153]      [18.106]       [20.528]   [24.587]
                                           {3.413}   {4.071}       {4.627}        {5.093}    {5.577}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      0.660***     0.154        -0.074        -0.119       0.145     0.515***
                                           (0.104)    (0.117)       (0.135)       (0.149)     (0.169)     (0.195)

Number of Students                        112,368    119,838       124,823        137,949    129,516     241,884

          ACT English score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.449***     0.015         0.137          0.175    0.288**      0.161
                                           (0.113)    (0.110)       (0.126)        (0.118)    (0.143)    (0.165)
                                          [12.079]   [14.652]      [16.946]       [19.642]   [24.066]
                                           {3.569}   {4.025}       {4.337}        {4.589}    {5.168}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend       0.154     -0.346***    -0.367***      -0.512***    -0.217     0.371*
                                          (0.124)     (0.126)      (0.136)        (0.138)     (0.168)    (0.194)
Number of Students                          112,465         119,868         124,865         137,970        129,528         241,993

          Took ACT Math

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend      -0.014         -0.014*          -0.011         -0.011*          -0.003          -0.011
                                            (0.011)         (0.008)         (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.005)         (0.012)
                                            [0.675]         [0.812]         [0.879]         [0.925]         [0.955]
                                            {0.468}         {0.391}         {0.326}         {0.264}         {0.207}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend       -0.048***       -0.028***       -0.024***       -0.018**         -0.002        -0.046***
                                            (0.012)         (0.010)         (0.009)         (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.013)

Number of Students                          159,770         144,618         140,088         148,056         135,244        295,014

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions identical to columns (2) and (4) shown in Table 2,
but estimated separately for students in quintiles of 8th grade math achievement. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a
separate regression. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts with non-missing 8th grade test scores are included. The pre-policy mean
(standard deviation) of the outcomes is reported in square brackets (braces). Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
high school level. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Table 5 - Impact of the MMC on MME outcomes by Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile

                                                                         8th grade math quintile
Outcome
                                           1 (Low)               2                  3                  4              5 (High)

MME Math Score                               0.067             -0.035             -0.032           -0.090***          -0.073***
                                            (0.041)           (0.027)            (0.019)            (0.016)            (0.019)

MME Science Score                         0.107***            0.058**             0.006              -0.014             -0.008
                                           (0.033)            (0.027)            (0.022)            (0.019)            (0.017)

MME Reading Score                            -0.004          -0.058***          -0.074***          -0.063***            -0.006
                                            (0.031)           (0.022)            (0.022)            (0.021)            (0.022)

MME Social Studies Score                     0.020           -0.081***          -0.182***          -0.353***          -0.543***
                                            (0.023)           (0.024)            (0.027)            (0.029)            (0.034)

Number of Students Had Math Score          108,786            117,598            123,356            136,890            128,953

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions of interrupted time series design of the impact of
MMC on MME outcomes with full controls that are listed in Table 2, but estimated separately for students in quintiles of 8th grade
math achievement. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts with non-missing 8th grade test scores are included. Each coefficient-standard
error pair is from a separate regression. MME outcomes are standardized based on cohort 2005 MME test scores. The pre-policy
mean (standard deviation) of the outcomes is reported in square brackets (braces). Robust standard errors in parentheses are
clustered at high school level. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Table 6: Effect of MMC on Advanced Placement Course-taking and Scores by Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile

                                                                           Grade 8 Math Quintile
Outcome
                                                       3                            4                             5 (High)

Number of AP exams taken                             0.028                          -0.023                        0.172**
                                                    (0.020)                        (0.037)                        (0.081)
                                                    [0.166]                        [0.429]                        [1.434]
                                                    {0.583}                        {0.992}                        {2.003}

Number of AP science exams taken                     0.000                          -0.014                         0.047
                                                    (0.006)                        (0.011)                        (0.031)
                                                    [0.028]                        [0.076]                        [0.321]
                                                    {0.178}                        {0.300}                        {0.680}

Average score on AP exams taken                      0.096                          0.047                         0.154**
                                                    (0.144)                        (0.106)                        (0.071)
                                                    [1.738]                        [2.195]                        [3.179]
                                                    {1.000}                        {1.159}                        {1.280}

Score 3+ on at least 1 AP exam                       0.004                         -0.005                          0.022
                                                    (0.003)                        (0.007)                        (0.015)
                                                    [0.009]                        [0.044]                        [0.264]

Score 3+ on at least 1 AP science exam              0.005**                         0.001                        0.036***
                                                    (0.002)                        (0.005)                        (0.014)
                                                    [0.006]                        [0.026]                        [0.163]

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions of interrupted time series design of the impact of
MMC on Advanced Placement exam outcomes with full controls that are listed in column 4 of Table 2, but estimated separately for
students in quintiles of 8th grade math achievement. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts with non-missing 8th grade test scores are
included. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a separate regression. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
high school level. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Table 7 - Impact of the MMC on 5-Year High School Completion Outcomes

                                                               Outcome = Graduated                      Outcome = Still enrolled
Approach                                                  2003-10   2004-10    2005-10             2003-10    2004-10       2005-10
                                                            (1)        (2)         (3)                (4)        (5)           (6)
Difference-in-Differences                                  0.005      0.008      -0.002            0.006*** 0.006*** 0.005***
                                                          (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.011)             (0.002)    (0.002)       (0.002)

Interrupted Time Series                                   0.033**       0.013      -0.050**         0.004*        0.002         0.003
                                                          (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.004)

Pre-policy mean                                            0.779       0.778        0.779            0.023        0.023        0.023
Number of Students                                        960,830     848,629      727,776          960,830      848,629      727,776

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from difference-in-differences and interrupted time series models,
where the outcomes of graduation or enrollment are measured five years after high school entry. Each coefficient-standard error
pair is from a separate regression. Students with missing 8th grade test scores are excluded. All regressions include the full set of
control variables shown in Table 1, including demographics, school characteristics, prior 4th and 8th grade test scores at both
individual level and school level. Pre-policy mean reports the mean of each outcome in 2005-2007. Robust standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by high school. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Table 8 - Impact of the MMC on High School Outcomes by Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile, 2003-2010 Cohorts

                                                             Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile                           Diff:
Outcome
                                             1 (Low)            2              3            4               5 (High)        Q1 - Q5

      Graduated within 5 years

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend       -0.010          -0.004          0.005           0.006           0.020         -0.029*
                                              (0.015)         (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.014)         (0.014)        (0.018)
                                              [0.586]         [0.726]        [0.809]         [0.870]         [0.918]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend          -0.000           0.022         0.038**         0.050**        0.048**         -0.049**
                                              (0.016)         (0.017)        (0.019)         (0.021)        (0.021)          (0.021)

     Still enrolled within 5 years

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend      0.017***        0.010***         0.003           0.001           0.001        0.016***
                                              (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.001)        (0.004)
                                              [0.057]         [0.029]        [0.015]         [0.007]         [0.003]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend         0.013**           0.005         -0.002          -0.001           0.000         0.013**
                                             (0.006)          (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.006)

Number of Students                            207058          192876         186639          195378          178879         385,937

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions identical to those shown in Column (1) of Table 7,
but estimated separately for students in quintiles of 8th grade math achievement. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a
separate regression. Students for 2003-2010 cohorts with non-missing 8th grade test scores are included. The pre-policy mean of
the outcomes is reported in square brackets. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at high school level. * significant at
10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Table 9 - Cross-state analysis of high school completion

                                                                    Outcome = log (Average Freshman Graduation Rate)
                                                             States selected using synthetic
                                                                                                     All non-reform states
                                                                     control method
                                                               (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)          (6)
MMC Requirement                                              -0.045       -0.045      -0.053   -0.073       -0.086      -0.031

RMSPE of control                                             0.012
No. of valid placebos                                         29          29           29          29          29          29
Implied p-value from placebo test                            0.000       0.000        0.170       0.100       0.100       0.000


State and year fixed effects                                  Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes

State-year covariates                                          No         Yes         Yes          No          Yes         Yes

Prior trend                                                    No          No         Yes          No          No          Yes

                                                             Alabama (0.42), Alaska (0.12),     All 29 non-reform states listed in
Control states (weight)                                           Connecticut (0.28),             Appendix Table 6, weighted
                                                                   Vermont (0.18).                          equally.

Notes: The AFGR is collected by the National Center of Education Statistics (NCES) and reported in the Common Core of Data.
RMSPE = root mean squared prediction error. Synthetic control method described in Abadie et al. (2010). Covariates include all of
the variables listed in Appendix Table 7.
                              Appendix Figure 1: Impact of MMC on ACT scores (Quintile 1)




                                                                                                            .8
                  .8




                                                                                                            .6
                  .6




                                                                                                            .4
    ACT Points




                                                                                              ACT Points

                                                                                                            .2
                  .4




                                                                                                            0
                  .2




                                                                                                            −.2
                                                                                                            −.4
                  0




                       2005     2006           2007         2008          2009     2010                           2005   2006           2007         2008          2009     2010
                                              9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                    9th Grade Cohort Year

                                       Unadjusted                                                                               Unadjusted
                                       Demo + unemp + expen                                                                     Demo + unemp + expen
                                       Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                                Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                            (a) Math                                                                               (b) Science
                                                                                                           1.5
                 1




                                                                                                           1
                 .5
ACT Points




                                                                                          ACT Points

                                                                                                           .5
                 0




                                                                                                           0
                 −.5




                                                                                                           −.5




                       2005     2006          2007         2008          2009      2010                          2005    2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                             9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                    9th Grade Cohort Year

                                       Unadjusted                                                                               Unadjusted
                                       Demo + unemp + expen                                                                     Demo + unemp + expen
                                       Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                                Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                         (c) Reading                                                                              (d) English
                              Appendix Figure 2: Impact of MMC on ACT scores (Quintile 2)




                                                                                                            .8
                  1




                                                                                                            .6
                  .8




                                                                                                            .4
    ACT Points




                                                                                              ACT Points
                  .6




                                                                                                            .2
                  .4




                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                            −.2
                  .2




                                                                                                            −.4
                  0




                       2005     2006           2007         2008          2009     2010                           2005   2006           2007         2008          2009     2010
                                              9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                    9th Grade Cohort Year

                                       Unadjusted                                                                               Unadjusted
                                       Demo + unemp + expen                                                                     Demo + unemp + expen
                                       Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                                Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                            (a) Math                                                                               (b) Science
                 1.5




                                                                                                           1.5
                 1




                                                                                                           1
ACT Points




                                                                                          ACT Points
                 .5




                                                                                                           .5
                 0




                                                                                                           0




                       2005     2006          2007         2008          2009      2010                          2005    2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                             9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                    9th Grade Cohort Year

                                       Unadjusted                                                                               Unadjusted
                                       Demo + unemp + expen                                                                     Demo + unemp + expen
                                       Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                                Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                         (c) Reading                                                                              (d) English
                             Appendix Figure 3: Impact of MMC on ACT scores (Quintile 3)




                                                                                                           .6
                 1




                                                                                                           .4
                 .8
    ACT Points




                                                                                             ACT Points

                                                                                                           .2
                 .6
                 .4




                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                           −.2
                 .2




                                                                                                           −.4
                 0




                      2005     2006           2007         2008          2009     2010                           2005   2006           2007         2008          2009     2010
                                             9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                    9th Grade Cohort Year

                                      Unadjusted                                                                               Unadjusted
                                      Demo + unemp + expen                                                                     Demo + unemp + expen
                                      Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                                Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                           (a) Math                                                                               (b) Science
                                                                                                          1.5
                 1
                 .8




                                                                                                          1
                 .6
ACT Points




                                                                                         ACT Points
                 .4




                                                                                                          .5
                 .2
                 0




                                                                                                          0




                      2005     2006          2007         2008          2009      2010                          2005    2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                            9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                    9th Grade Cohort Year

                                      Unadjusted                                                                               Unadjusted
                                      Demo + unemp + expen                                                                     Demo + unemp + expen
                                      Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                                Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                        (c) Reading                                                                              (d) English
                               Appendix Figure 4: Impact of MMC on ACT scores (Quintile 4)
                  1.5




                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                             .8
                  1
    ACT Points




                                                                                               ACT Points

                                                                                                             .6
                                                                                                             .4
                  .5




                                                                                                             .2
                  0




                                                                                                             0




                        2005     2006           2007         2008          2009     2010                          2005   2006           2007         2008          2009     2010
                                               9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                   9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted                                                                              Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen                                                                    Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                               Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                             (a) Math                                                                              (b) Science
                 1.2




                                                                                                            1.5
                 1
                 .8




                                                                                                            1
ACT Points




                                                                                           ACT Points
                 .6
                 .4




                                                                                                            .5
                 .2
                 0




                                                                                                            0




                       2005      2006          2007         2008          2009      2010                          2005   2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                              9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                   9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted                                                                              Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen                                                                    Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                               Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                          (c) Reading                                                                             (d) English
                               Appendix Figure 5: Impact of MMC on ACT scores (Quintile 5)




                                                                                                             1.5
                  2
                  1.5




                                                                                                             1
    ACT Points




                                                                                               ACT Points
                  1




                                                                                                             .5
                  .5
                  0




                                                                                                             0




                        2005     2006           2007         2008          2009     2010                           2005   2006           2007         2008          2009     2010
                                               9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                    9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted                                                                               Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen                                                                     Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                                Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                             (a) Math                                                                               (b) Science
                 1.5




                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                            1.5
                 1
ACT Points




                                                                                           ACT Points

                                                                                                            1
                 .5




                                                                                                            .5
                 0




                                                                                                            0




                       2005      2006          2007         2008          2009      2010                          2005    2006          2007         2008          2009      2010
                                              9th Grade Cohort Year                                                                    9th Grade Cohort Year

                                        Unadjusted                                                                               Unadjusted
                                        Demo + unemp + expen                                                                     Demo + unemp + expen
                                        Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement                                                Demo + unemp + expend + prior achievement



                                          (c) Reading                                                                              (d) English
                         Appendix Figure 6: Impact of MMC on ACT math scores
         21
                                                                                 IL



                                                                             CO
               20.5
ACT Math Score




                                                                                 MI
     20  19.5
         19




                      2001   2002   2003   2004 2005 2006 2007            2008        2009   2010
                                           High School Graduation Class




                        Appendix Figure 7: Impact of MMC on ACT English scores
         21




                                                                                 IL
         20.5
ACT English Score




                                                                             CO
 19.5      20




                                                                                  MI
         19




                      2001   2002   2003   2004 2005 2006 2007            2008        2009   2010
                                           High School Graduation Class
                           Appendix Figure 8: Impact of MMC on ACT science scores
          21

                                                                      CO
                  20.5




                                                                      IL
ACT Science Score




                                                                                    MI
       20 19.5
          19




                         2001   2002   2003   2004 2005 2006 2007            2008        2009   2010
                                              High School Graduation Class




                           Appendix Figure 9: Impact of MMC on ACT reading scores
          21




                                                                                CO


                                                                                    IL
                20.5
ACT Reading Score
      20




                                                                                    MI
          19.5
          19




                         2001   2002   2003   2004 2005 2006 2007            2008        2009   2010
                                              High School Graduation Class
Appendix Table 1 - Impact of the MMC on ACT Outcomes by Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile

                                                       Controls for Grade 4 Math Scores                       Controls for Grade 4 & 8 Math Scores
                                                     Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile                    Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile
Outcome
                                          1 (Low)         2            3           4       5 (High)   1 (Low)      2            3           4       5 (High)

        ACT composite score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.439***    0.473***    0.471***    0.525***    0.534***    0.361***     0.120       0.122     0.148*      0.196*
                                           (0.059)     (0.071)     (0.081)     (0.094)     (0.115)     (0.062)    (0.073)     (0.081)    (0.086)     (0.112)
                                          [14.108]    [16.060]    [18.004]    [20.481]    [24.718]    [14.108]   [16.060]    [18.004]   [20.481]    [24.718]
                                           {2.295}     {2.696}     {3.092}     {3.459}     {4.125}     {2.295}   {2.696}     {3.092}    {3.459}     {4.125}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      0.409***    0.357***     0.228**     0.213**      0.013     0.354***     0.105      -0.035    -0.261***    -0.239*
                                           (0.071)     (0.084)     (0.094)     (0.105)     (0.126)     (0.073)    (0.085)    (0.093)     (0.101)     (0.129)

Number of Students                        112,294      119,788     124,796     137,931     129,507    112,294    119,788     124,796    137,931     129,507

           ACT math score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.264***    0.386***    0.545***    0.560***    0.512***    0.211***     0.094     0.184**      0.058       0.111
                                           (0.047)     (0.062)     (0.077)     (0.110)     (0.145)     (0.051)    (0.064)     (0.076)    (0.100)     (0.140)
                                          [14.766]    [16.042]    [17.698]    [20.304]    [25.128]    [14.766]   [16.042]    [17.698]   [20.304]    [25.128]
                                           {1.709}     {2.061}     {2.734}     {3.479}     {4.337}     {1.709}   {2.061}     {2.734}    {3.479}     {4.337}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      -0.076       0.125*      0.228**      0.193      -0.260*    -0.119**     -0.084     -0.047    -0.428***   -0.562***
                                          (0.052)      (0.071)     (0.090)     (0.121)     (0.146)     (0.055)    (0.074)    (0.090)     (0.113)     (0.147)

Number of Students                        112,429      119,861     124,850     137,965     129,525    112,429    119,861     124,850    137,965     129,525

          ACT Science Score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.445***    0.529***    0.458***    0.492***    0.567***    0.391***    0.170*       0.105     0.168*     0.249**
                                           (0.080)     (0.096)     (0.088)     (0.098)     (0.123)     (0.081)    (0.096)     (0.090)    (0.096)     (0.122)
                                          [14.939]    [16.884]    [18.758]    [20.940]    [24.574]    [14.939]   [16.884]    [18.758]   [20.940]    [24.574]
                                           {3.307}     {3.459}     {3.525}     {3.597}     {4.150}     {3.307}   {3.459}     {3.525}    {3.597}     {4.150}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      0.764***    0.910***    0.610***    0.438***      -0.073    0.726***   0.647***   0.337***      0.034     -0.314**
                                           (0.097)     (0.110)     (0.104)     (0.109)     (0.130)     (0.099)    (0.111)    (0.104)     (0.110)     (0.133)

Number of Students                        112,312      119,799     124,800     137,934     129,509    112,312    119,799     124,800    137,934     129,509

          ACT Reading Score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.480***    0.469***    0.397***    0.547***    0.428***    0.409***     0.147      0.072      0.210*       0.152
                                           (0.078)     (0.096)     (0.110)     (0.123)     (0.132)     (0.084)    (0.100)    (0.116)     (0.122)     (0.139)
                                              [14.140]      [16.153]     [18.106]     [20.528]     [24.587]         [14.140]     [16.153]     [18.106]     [20.528]     [24.587]
                                              {3.413}       {4.071}      {4.627}      {5.093}      {5.577}          {3.413}      {4.071}      {4.627}      {5.093}      {5.577}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend          0.705***     0.382***       0.166       0.307**      0.338**         0.660***       0.154        -0.074        -0.119       0.145
                                               (0.099)      (0.115)      (0.132)      (0.146)      (0.161)          (0.104)      (0.117)      (0.135)       (0.149)      (0.169)

Number of Students                             112,368      119,838      124,823      137,949      129,516          112,368      119,838      124,823      137,949      129,516

         ACT English Score

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend       0.599***     0.449***     0.488***     0.518***      0.640***        0.449***        0.015        0.137        0.175      0.288**
                                               (0.111)      (0.104)      (0.126)      (0.123)       (0.145)         (0.113)       (0.110)      (0.126)      (0.118)      (0.143)
                                              [12.079]     [14.652]     [16.946]     [19.642]      [24.066]        [12.079]      [14.652]     [16.946]     [19.642]     [24.066]
                                               {3.569}      {4.025}      {4.337}      {4.589}       {5.168}         {3.569}      {4.025}      {4.337}      {4.589}      {5.168}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend           0.265**      -0.041       -0.113         -0.063       0.047           0.154      -0.346***    -0.367***    -0.512***       -0.217
                                               (0.123)      (0.121)      (0.136)       (0.138)      (0.162)         (0.124)      (0.126)      (0.136)      (0.138)       (0.168)

Number of Students                             112,465      119,868      124,865      137,970      129,528          112,465      119,868      124,865      137,970      129,528

           Took ACT Math

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend         -0.001       -0.001       -0.003      -0.010*       -0.004           -0.014      -0.014*       -0.011      -0.011*       -0.003
                                               (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.005)      (0.005)          (0.011)      (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.005)
                                               [0.675]      [0.812]      [0.879]      [0.925]      [0.955]          [0.675]      [0.812]      [0.879]      [0.925]      [0.955]
                                               {0.468}      {0.391}      {0.326}      {0.264}      {0.207}          {0.468}      {0.391}      {0.326}      {0.264}      {0.207}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend          -0.037***    -0.019**      -0.018**     -0.017**       -0.003        -0.048***    -0.028***    -0.024***     -0.018**       -0.002
                                               (0.011)      (0.010)       (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.006)         (0.012)      (0.010)      (0.009)       (0.007)      (0.006)

Number of Students                             159,770      144,618      140,088      148,056      135,244          159,770      144,618      140,088      148,056      135,244

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions identical to columns (2) and (4) shown in Table 2, but estimated separately for students in
quintiles of 8th grade math achievement. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a separate regression. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts with non-missing 8th grade test
scores are included. The pre-policy mean (standard deviation) of the outcomes is reported in square brackets (braces). Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at high
school level. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Appendix Table 2 - Impact of the MMC on ACT Outcomes by Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile

                                                       Controls for Grade 4 Math Scores                       Controls for Grade 4 & 8 Math Scores
                                                     Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile                    Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile
Outcome
                                          1 (Low)         2           3           4        5 (High)   1 (Low)         2          3          4       5 (High)

     ACT composite IL percentile

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   2.848***    2.765***    2.297***    2.098***    1.107**     2.615***     0.608       0.069     -0.082      0.284
                                           (0.322)     (0.443)     (0.504)     (0.543)     (0.487)     (0.344)    (0.456)     (0.513)    (0.510)    (0.471)
                                          [14.679]    [26.281]    [38.784]    [54.095]    [75.298]    [14.679]   [26.281]    [38.784]   [54.095]   [75.298]
                                          {13.133}    {17.064}    {19.707}    {20.666}    {18.610}    {13.133}   {17.064}    {19.707}   {20.666}   {18.610}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      4.981***    4.217***    2.903***    2.187***      0.511     4.838***   2.674***    1.223**      -0.504     0.015
                                           (0.394)     (0.521)     (0.593)     (0.622)     (0.568)     (0.411)    (0.529)    (0.584)     (0.596)    (0.558)

Number of Students                        112,294      119,788    124,796     137,931      129,507    112,294     119,788    124,796    137,931     129,507

       ACT math IL percentile

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   1.074***    1.664***    1.922***    1.787***    1.214**      0.719*      -0.640      -0.386     -0.804     0.411
                                           (0.357)     (0.442)     (0.471)     (0.552)     (0.523)     (0.386)    (0.461)     (0.469)    (0.506)    (0.501)
                                          [17.691]    [28.149]    [40.091]    [55.319]    [76.676]    [17.691]   [28.149]    [40.091]   [55.319]   [76.676]
                                          {13.283}    {15.867}    {17.827}    {18.770}    {17.209}    {13.283}   {15.867}    {17.827}   {18.770}   {17.209}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend       0.275      1.345**     1.945***    2.145***      0.856      -0.025     -0.324       0.193     -0.999*     0.399
                                          (0.402)     (0.524)      (0.567)     (0.635)     (0.590)    (0.426)     (0.544)     (0.564)    (0.590)    (0.569)

Number of Students                        112,429      119,861    124,850     137,965      129,525    112,429     119,861    124,850    137,965     129,525

      ACT Science IL percentile

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   2.744***    3.188***    2.262***    1.675***     0.847*     2.722***    1.083*       -0.061    -0.368      0.085
                                           (0.420)     (0.584)     (0.567)     (0.604)     (0.512)     (0.419)    (0.587)     (0.582)    (0.598)    (0.488)
                                          [20.204]    [31.156]    [43.247]    [57.572]    [76.772]    [20.204]   [31.156]    [43.247]   [57.572]   [76.772]
                                          {16.821}    {20.513}    {22.609}    {22.907}    {19.426}    {16.821}   {20.513}    {22.609}   {22.907}   {19.426}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      6.323***    7.321***    5.173***    3.240***      -0.725    6.349***   5.773***    3.378***     0.763    -1.203**
                                           (0.491)     (0.665)     (0.667)     (0.680)     (0.584)     (0.501)    (0.675)     (0.663)    (0.679)    (0.571)

Number of Students                        112,312      119,799    124,800     137,934      129,509    112,312     119,799    124,800    137,934     129,509

      ACT Reading IL percentile

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   2.344***    2.211***    1.916***    2.463***    1.481***    2.071***     0.508       0.171      0.885      0.627
                                           (0.398)     (0.501)     (0.561)     (0.586)     (0.532)     (0.428)    (0.525)     (0.595)    (0.589)    (0.562)
                                                [20.398]     [30.791]     [41.033]     [53.084]     [70.505]          [20.398]     [30.791]    [41.033]     [53.084]    [70.505]
                                                {17.365}     {21.373}     {23.721}     {24.551}     {22.819}          {17.365}     {21.373}    {23.721}     {24.551}    {22.819}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend            6.131***     4.074***     2.544***     2.446***     1.856***          5.964***     2.850***     1.234*        0.481      1.299*
                                                 (0.510)      (0.604)      (0.673)      (0.703)      (0.649)           (0.536)      (0.614)     (0.689)      (0.715)     (0.676)

Number of Students                               112,368     119,838      124,823      137,949       129,516           112,368      119,838     124,823     137,949     129,516

      ACT English IL percentile

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend         3.530***     2.930***     2.856***     2.244***     1.372**           3.192***     1.042**      1.106*        0.533       0.458
                                                 (0.428)      (0.478)      (0.618)      (0.595)      (0.610)           (0.445)      (0.506)     (0.628)      (0.585)     (0.607)
                                                [14.301]     [24.979]     [36.045]     [49.709]     [69.755]          [14.301]     [24.979]    [36.045]     [49.709]    [69.755]
                                                {14.044}     {18.636}     {21.681}     {23.066}     {21.804}          {14.044}     {18.636}    {21.681}     {23.066}    {21.804}

All covariates, and pre-policy trend            3.151***     1.538***       0.793        0.501        0.308           2.937***       0.228       -0.471     -1.692**      -0.276
                                                 (0.478)      (0.561)      (0.679)      (0.687)      (0.710)           (0.489)      (0.581)     (0.678)      (0.689)     (0.718)

Number of Students                               112,465     119,868      124,865      137,970       129,528           112,465      119,868     124,865     137,970     129,528

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions identical to columns (2) and (4) shown in Table 2, but estimated separately for students in
quintiles of 8th grade math achievement. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a separate regression. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts with non-missing 8th grade test
scores are included. The pre-policy mean (standard deviation) of the outcomes is reported in square brackets (braces). Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
high school level. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Appendix Table 3 - Lee Bound Estimates of Relationship between MMC and ACT Scores

                                                                                  Analagous
                                                           Estimate from
                                                                                estimate using
                                                              primary                                Lower Bound         Upper Bound
                                                                                10 “tightening”
                                                           specification
                                                                                      bins
                                                                 (1)                   (2)                (3)                 (4)

Dependent Variable = ACT Composite Score
   Estimate                                                   -0.1027*            -0.0979***          -0.1563***           -0.0480**
   Conventional s.e.                                           (0.033)              (0.007)             (0.024)             (0.023)
   S.E. clustered by high school                               (0.059)              (0.017)
   Control Mean                                                 18.959               18.959             18.959              18.959
   Number of Students                                          617,241              617,241
Dependent Variable = ACT Math Score
   Estimate                                                  -0.3434***           -0.2370***          -0.2305***          -0.2075***
   Conventional s.e.                                           (0.032)              (0.007)             (0.023)             (0.023)
   S.E. clustered by high school                               (0.069)              (0.019)
   Control Mean                                                 19.052              19.0522             19.0522             19.0522
   Number of Students                                          617,550                617,550
Dependent Variable = ACT Science Score
   Estimate                                                  0.1911***            0.4774***           0.2668***           0.6887***
   Conventional s.e.                                           (0.040)              (0.009)             (0.024)             (0.023)
   S.E. clustered by high school                               (0.066)              (0.019)
   Control Mean                                                19.482              19.4818              19.4818             19.4818
   Number of Students                                         617,279              617279
Dependent Variable = ACT Reading Score
   Estimate                                                    0.0631              -0.0127            -0.1561***          0.0975***
   Conventional s.e.                                           (0.051)             (0.011)              (0.026)             (0.025)
   S.E. clustered by high school                               (0.075)             (0.019)
   Control Mean                                                18.985              18.9845              18.9845             18.9845
   Number of Students                                          617,415             617,415
Dependent Variable = ACT English Score
   Estimate                                                  -0.3258***           -0.6794***          -0.4307***          -0.7973***
   Conventional s.e.                                           (0.047)              (0.010)             (0.030)             (0.028)
   S.E. clustered by high school                               (0.087)              (0.026)
   Control Mean                                                 17.803              17.8027             17.8027             17.8027
   Number of Students                                          617,616              617,616

Notes: The sample for the analysis shown in this table is identical to the sample used to create the estimates in Table 2, with the
exception that we exclude schools that did not exist before or after the introduction of the policy. See the text for more detail on the
estimates in each column.
Appendix Table 4 - Impact of the MMC on High School Outcomes by Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile, 2005-2010
Cohorts

                                                                    Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile
Outcome
                                              1 (Low)               2                 3                4                  5 (High)

     Graduated within 5 Years

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend        -0.020             -0.021             -0.002             -0.001              0.019
                                              (0.015)            (0.014)            (0.014)            (0.015)             (0.015)
                                              [0.592]            [0.728]            [0.807]            [0.869]             [0.918]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend         -0.086***            -0.041            -0.055*            -0.063**             -0.016
                                              (0.027)            (0.028)            (0.029)             (0.026)            (0.025)

    Still Enrolled within 5 Years

All covariates, but no pre-policy trend      0.015***           0.011***             0.002              0.000              0.002*
                                              (0.005)            (0.004)            (0.003)            (0.002)             (0.001)
                                              [0.057]            [0.029]            [0.016]            [0.008]             [0.003]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend           0.009              0.000              -0.002              0.004              0.001
                                              (0.012)            (0.008)            (0.006)             (0.004)            (0.003)

Number of Students                            159,770            144,618            140,088            148,056            135,244

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions identical to those shown in Table 7, but estimated
separately for students in quintiles of 8th grade math achievement. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a separate
regression. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts with non-missing 8th grade test scores are included. The pre-policy mean of the
outcomes is reported in square brackets. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at high school level. * significant at
10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level.
Appendix Table 5 - Impact of the MMC on High School Outcomes by Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile

                                                           Student 8th Grade Math Score Quintile
Outcome
                                          1 (Low)           2                3                4         5 (High)

       Dropout within 5 Years
All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.020**        0.011*          0.017***         0.006**        0.001
                                          (0.009)        (0.006)          (0.005)         (0.003)       (0.002)
                                          [0.083]        [0.050]          [0.031]         [0.018]       [0.007]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend        0.007        -0.005            0.003            0.010        0.005
                                           (0.015)       (0.011)          (0.009)          (0.007)      (0.004)

Left MI Public Schools within 5 Years
All covariates, but no pre-policy trend    -0.006        -0.000            0.006          0.007**       0.007**
                                           (0.004)       (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.004)       (0.003)
                                           [0.036]       [0.030]          [0.026]         [0.023]       [0.020]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      -0.019**        0.001            0.001            0.003        0.006
                                           (0.008)       (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.007)      (0.009)

       Unknown within 5 Years
All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   -0.016**        -0.001         -0.008*            -0.002       -0.003
                                           (0.006)       (0.005)         (0.004)           (0.003)      (0.003)
                                           [0.068]       [0.039]         [0.023]           [0.013]      [0.005]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend        0.000        -0.001            0.000           -0.003        0.000
                                           (0.012)       (0.011)          (0.009)          (0.007)      (0.005)

         Other within 5 Years
All covariates, but no pre-policy trend     0.006         0.001            -0.015           -0.011      -0.026*
                                           (0.013)       (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.013)      (0.015)
                                           [0.164]       [0.125]          [0.097]          [0.070]      [0.048]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      0.089***       0.047*          0.052**          0.048**        0.003
                                           (0.023)       (0.025)         (0.026)          (0.023)       (0.023)

Number of Students                        159,770       144,618          140,088          148,056       135,244

       Dropout within 4 Years
All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   0.018***        0.007          0.011***         0.006**       0.003**
                                           (0.007)       (0.005)          (0.004)         (0.002)       (0.001)
                                           [0.061]       [0.036]          [0.023]         [0.013]       [0.005]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend        0.015        -0.004            0.011           0.009*       0.009***
                                           (0.011)       (0.009)          (0.007)          (0.005)       (0.003)

Left MI Public Schools within 4 Years
All covariates, but no pre-policy trend    -0.005         0.000           0.007*          0.009**       0.007**
                                           (0.004)       (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.004)       (0.003)
                                           [0.034]       [0.029]          [0.026]         [0.022]       [0.020]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend      -0.020**       -0.003            0.002            0.002        0.005
                                           (0.009)       (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.007)      (0.009)

       Unknown within 4 Years
All covariates, but no pre-policy trend   -0.014***       -0.004         -0.006*            -0.003      -0.004*
                                           (0.005)       (0.004)         (0.003)           (0.002)      (0.002)
                                           [0.042]       [0.025]         [0.015]           [0.009]      [0.004]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend        -0.004        -0.006           -0.000           -0.003       0.001
                                           (0.011)       (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.006)      (0.004)
         Other within 4 Years
All covariates, but no pre-policy trend          -0.001            -0.001            -0.015             -0.013           -0.027*
                                                (0.012)           (0.011)           (0.012)            (0.013)           (0.015)
                                                [0.131]           [0.103]           [0.083]            [0.063]           [0.045]

All covariates, and pre-policy trend           0.082***           0.051**           0.057**           0.052**             -0.000
                                                (0.022)           (0.024)           (0.025)           (0.023)            (0.023)

Number of Students                             159,770            144,618           140,088           148,056           135,244

Notes: This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from regressions identical to those shown in Table 7, but estimated
separately for students in quintiles of 8th grade math achievement. Each coefficient-standard error pair is from a separate
regression. Students for 2005-2010 cohorts with non-missing 8th grade test scores are included. Pre-policy means are in square
brackets. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at high school level. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5%
level. *** significant at 1% level.
Appendix Table 6 - High School Graduation Requirements Across States

                          Earliest high school graduating class to which    # of courses required for graduation (CGRs) for the
                                      the requirement applied                             class of 2006 (and 2012)
                           Exit exam                        At least 2 of
                                              At least
                          with content                         3 core
                Treat                        Algebra 1                                                                Social
   State                  at or above                         science         Math        English       Science
                State                           and                                                                   Studies
                           9th grade                       courses (Bio,
                                             Geometry
                              level                         Chem, Phy)
    AK           No           2004                                            2 (2)         4 (4)         2 (2)        3 (3)
    AL           No           2001              2013                          4 (4)         4 (4)         4 (4)        4 (4)
    CA           No           2006                                            2 (2)         3 (3)         2 (2)        3 (3)
    CO           No                                                           0 (0)         0 (0)         0 (0)       0 (.5)
    CT           No                           2018             2018           3 (3)         4 (4)         2 (2)        3 (3)
    FL           No           1993            2014             2017           3 (4)         4 (4)         3 (3)         3 (3)
    HI           No                           2016             2016           3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        4 (4)
    IA           No                                                           0 (3)         0 (4)         0 (3)       1.5 (3)
    MA           No           2003                                            0 (0)         0 (0)         0 (0)        1 (1)
    MD           No           2009                                            3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    ME           No                                                           2 (2)         4 (4)         2 (2)         2 (2)
    MO           No                                                           2 (3)         4 (4)         2 (3)        2 (3)
    MT           No                                                           2 (2)         4 (4)         2 (2)         2 (2)
    NC           No                           2013                            3 (4)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    ND           No                                                           2 (3)         4 (4)         2 (3)         3 (3)
    NE           No                           2018             2018           0 (0)         0 (0)         0 (0)        0 (0)
    NH           No                                                          2 (2)b         4 (4)         2 (2)      2.5 (2.5)
    NJ           No           1985                                            3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    NM           No                           2013            2013*          3 (3)c         4 (4)         2 (3)       3 (3.5)
    NV           No           2003                                            3 (3)         4 (4)         2 (2)        2 (2)
    NY           No           2000                                            3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        4 (4)
    OH           No           2007            2014             2014           3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    OR           No           2012                                            2 (3)         3 (4)         2 (2)        3 (3)
    PA           No                                                           0 (0)         0 (0)         0 (0)         0 (0)
    RI           No                                                           2 (4)         4 (4)         2 (3)         2 (3)
    SC           No           2006                                            4 (4)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    VA           No           2004                                            3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    VT           No                                                           3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)         3 (3)
    WA           No           2008                                            2 (2)         3 (3)         2 (2)      2.5 (2.5)
    WI           No                                                           2 (2)         4 (4)         2 (2)         3 (3)
    WY           No                                                           3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)         3 (3)
    AR           Yes          2010            2009             2010           3 (4)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    AZ           Yes          2006            2013             2012          2 (2)a         4 (4)         2 (2)      2.5 (2.5)
    DC           Yes                          2011             2011           3 (4)         4 (4)         3 (4)       3.5 (4)
    DE           Yes                          2011                            3 (4)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    GA           Yes          1995                             2012           3 (4)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    ID           Yes          2007            2014             2012           2 (2)        4 (4.5)        2 (2)      2.5 (2.5)
    IL           Yes                          2010                            2 (3)         3 (3)         1 (2)         2 (2)
    IN           Yes          2000            2011             2011           2 (3)         4 (4)         2 (3)        2 (3)
    KS           Yes                          2009             2009           2 (3)         4 (4)         2 (3)         3 (3)
    KY           Yes                          2012             2012           3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)         3 (3)
    LA           Yes          1991            2012                            3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    MI           Yes                          2011             2011           0 (4)         0 (4)         0 (3)        .5 (3)
    MN           Yes                          2008             2015           3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)      3.5 (3.5)
    MS           Yes          2003            2012             2012           3 (4)         4 (4)         3 (3)        4 (3)
    OK           Yes          2012            2010             2010           3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    SD           Yes                          2010             2010          2.5 (3)        4 (4)        2.5 (3)       3 (3)
    TN           Yes          2005            2012             2012           3 (3)         4 (4)         3 (3)        3 (3)
    TX           Yes          1993            2011             2011           3 (4)         4 (4)         2 (4)        3 (4)
    UT           Yes                          2011             2011           2 (3)         3 (4)         2 (3)       2.5 (3)
    WV           Yes                         2012**            2012           3 (4)         4 (4)         3 (3)         3 (4)
Notes: * = 3 lab sciences required. ** = 3 units Algebra 1 and above. (a) Arizona required three math courses for cohorts
graduating in 2008, 2009, and 2010. (b) New Hampshire required three math courses for cohorts graduating in 2008, 2009, and
2010. (c) New Mexico required four courses of math for the cohorts graduating in 2008, 2009, and 2010.
Appendix Table 7 - Summary statistics for the cross-state analysis



                                                                                          All states except those
                                                                                          that implement MMC
                                                                All States    Michigan   like policies as of 2012
             Number of states                                       51           1                   30
Outcomes
             Average Freshman Graduate Rate (AFGR)                   0.77      0.75               0.78
             ACT Composite                                           21.40     20.53              21.79
             Fraction of students taking the ACT                     49.80     86.00              41.10

Policies
             Exit exam, low level                                     0.07      0.00              0.05
             Exit exam, higher level                                  0.38      0.00              0.38
             Any End-of-Course (EOC) exams                            0.27      0.00              0.19
             # of EOC exams (including zeros)                         1.48      0.00              1.08
             Math CGR (course graduation requirements)                2.54      2.22              2.31
             English CGR                                              3.49      2.22              3.26
             Science CGR                                              2.35      1.67              2.14
             Social Studies CGR                                       2.69      1.88              2.53

Covariates
             Log(population)                                         15.14      16.12            15.06
             Fraction < 18 years old                                  0.25      0.26              0.25
             Fraction Asian                                           0.04      0.03              0.05
             Fraction Black                                           0.10      0.14              0.09
             Fraction Hispanic                                        0.06      0.03              0.07
             Fraction population with BA or higher                    0.27      0.26              0.29
             Median HH income ($2013)                                51,429    50,177            54,187
             Unemployment rate                                        6.29      9.08              6.17
             Fraction enrolled in private schools                     0.10      0.09              0.11
             Per pupil expenditures ($2013)                          11,123    11,424            12,125


Notes: See text for details on the data and sample.
