                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  IS IDIOSYNCRATIC RISK CONDITIONALLY PRICED?

                                        Rajnish Mehra
                                         Sunil Wahal
                                          Daruo Xie

                                      Working Paper 22016
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22016


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2016, Revised April 2019




This paper has circulated under the title “The Demand for Diversification in Incomplete
Markets”. We thank Kerry Back, Jennifer Conrad, George Constantinides, Kevin Crotty, John
Donaldson, Alex Horenstein, Pedram Jahangiry, Robert Merton, Kalle Rinne, Manuel Santos,
Yuhang Xing, and the seminar participants at Aalto University, Miami University, Rice
University, Vienna University and the WU Gutmann Center for helpful comments. The usual
caveat applies. Wahal is a consultant to Dimensional Fund Advisors. DFA provided no funding
or data for this research. he views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Rajnish Mehra, Sunil Wahal, and Daruo Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Idiosyncratic Risk Conditionally Priced?
Rajnish Mehra, Sunil Wahal, and Daruo Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 22016
February 2016, Revised April 2019
JEL No. G11,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

In Merton (1987), idiosyncratic risk is priced in equilibrium as a consequence of incomplete
diversification. We modify his model to allow the degree of diversification to vary with average
idiosyncratic volatility. This simple recognition results in a state-dependent idiosyncratic risk
premium that is higher when average idiosyncratic volatility is low, and vice versa. The data
appear to be consistent with a positive state-dependent premium for idiosyncratic risk both in the
US and in other developed markets.

Rajnish Mehra                                   Daruo Xie
Department of Economics                         Australian National University
W. P. Carey School of Business                  College of Business and Economics
Arizona State University                        Canberra, Australia
PO Box 879801                                   Australia
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801                            daruo.xie@anu.edu.au
and NBER
rajnish.mehra@asu.edu

Sunil Wahal
Arizona State University
Sunil.Wahal@asu.edu
                                                                                                         1


1. Introduction

        A major research initiative in financial economics focuses on the determinants of

the cross-sectional and time series properties of asset returns. There are two prominent

classes of asset pricing models with microeconomic foundations that address this issue:

the CAPM and the consumption CAPM (along with their numerous extensions). These

models, while theoretically elegant, prove inadequate when confronted with data.1 This

has led to a third class of largely ad hoc empirical factor models that attempt to connect

the expected returns on the assets with their ‘betas’.2 While these models invoke some

version of the arbitrage pricing theory (APT) and the ICAPM (Merton (1973)) for

theoretical justification, it is not clear that they succeed as asset pricing models, in the

sense of connecting returns to ‘risk premia’.3 A key abstraction common to these models

is that information is costless and investors hold fully diversified portfolios. A fourth model

class, where asset prices are determined by individual preferences and beliefs but where

investors have incomplete information (and hence hold under diversified portfolios), has

received less attention. This paradigm has its genesis in the early work of Levy (1978)

and Mayshar (1979, 1981). It forms the basis of the asset pricing model proposed by

Robert Merton in his 1986 presidential address to the American Finance Association. The


1
  See, for example, Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), Mossin (1966), Black (1972), Rubinstein (1976), Lucas
(1978), Breeden (1979), and Ross (1976). The list of empirical studies that reject these models is long and
catalogued in numerous review papers.
2
  Harvey et al. (2015) catalogue 316 anomalies proposed as potential factors in asset-pricing models and
they note that there are others that do not make their list.
3
  The APT was introduced by Ross(1976) and extended by Huberman (1982), Chamberlain (1983),
Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983), Connor (1984), Reisman (1988) and Gilles and LeRoy (1991), amongst
others.
                                                                                                            2


central insight of Merton’s model is that when investors hold under diversified portfolios,

idiosyncratic risk should be priced, leading to a positive premium for bearing idiosyncratic

risk. This is in sharp contrast to the implications of the CAPM and the CCAPM, which

are predicated on frictionless markets with no role for idiosyncratic risk.

        In this paper, we modify Merton’s model. Our point of departure is the empirical

observation that average idiosyncratic volatility varies considerably over time. This is

illustrated in Figure 1, which shows average idiosyncratic volatility from July 1931 to

December 2014. The figure shows that the variation in average idiosyncratic volatility

over the entire time series is large. Even within decades, average idiosyncratic volatility

can vary significantly.4 Our economic intuition is that since the marginal benefit from

diversification is likely to be higher in states of the world characterized by high average

idiosyncratic volatility, the idiosyncratic risk premium should be lower in such periods

(and vice versa). This is perhaps most obvious in periods like the financial crisis of 2008

when diversification was especially valuable. The implication is that time series variation

in average idiosyncratic volatility should lead to a state-dependent risk premium. In

contrast to Merton’s original model where the risk premium is positive and constant, in

our modification, the risk premium varies inversely with the degree of diversification,

which in turn, varies with average idiosyncratic volatility. This leads to an asset pricing




4
  Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001) argue that average idiosyncratic volatility has increased over
time, although that conclusion is controversial since much of the attributed increase occurred in the 1990s.
For our purpose, what matters is not an increase in average idiosyncratic volatility but time series variation
over an investor's investment horizon.
                                                                                           3


model where the time series variation in the idiosyncratic risk premium is linked to

average idiosyncratic volatility. We illustrate this in Figure 2, highlighting the difference

between Merton’s (1987) formulation and our modification.

       Our aim in the empirical section is to test the implications of the model developed

in this paper; an additional outcome is that our results shed light on the (mostly empirical)

idiosyncratic volatility literature. All prior investigations of the Merton model, whether

re-examining the theory, or its empirical content, ignore time series variation in average

idiosyncratic volatility.   For instance, Wu et al. (1996) allow for heterogeneous

expectations and short-sale restrictions, which generate offsetting effects, but remain

unconditional. Empirical investigations are far more voluminous. Most prominent and

puzzling is Ang et al. (2006, 2009) who find that contrary to Merton’s (1987) prediction,

there is a negative relation between expected returns and lagged idiosyncratic volatility.

Fu (2009) questions this result, claiming that it is expected, rather than lagged,

idiosyncratic volatility that should matter.       He finds a positive relation between

contemporaneous returns and expected idiosyncratic volatility. Guo, Kassa and Ferguson

(2014) point out that Fu’s (2009) findings are driven by a look-ahead bias in his tests,

and that there is in fact no statistically discernible relation between average returns and

expected idiosyncratic volatility.
                                                                                                         4


        All of these tests, as well as numerous others that seek to understand this

connection, are unconditional.5         Our formal model says that the premium should be

positive and for the model to be meaningful, that pricing should be conditional. If the

relevant state variable in conditional pricing was persistent, or deviated by small amounts

in the time series, the economic impact of conditional versus unconditional pricing would

be empirically unimportant. Indeed, this is precisely the point that Lewellen and Nagel

(2006) make with respect to tests of the conditional CAPM – that CAPM betas move so

slowly that conditional tests are not very different from unconditional tests. That is

clearly not the case for idiosyncratic volatility; Figure 1 shows that average idiosyncratic

volatility varies substantially over time. Since most existing empirical evidence is based

on unconditional tests, it cannot be used to draw inferences about our conditional version

of Merton’s model.

        The most direct way to determine if the model has any traction in the data is to

ask whether in the cross-section, the risk premium on idiosyncratic risk is positive and

depends on average idiosyncratic volatility.            We do so by estimating Fama-MacBeth

regressions of monthly returns on contemporaneous expected idiosyncratic volatility,

scaled by expected average idiosyncratic volatility.                  Scaling by expected average

idiosyncratic volatility is important from both a theoretical and empirical standpoint.



5
  The results in Ang et al. (2006) spawned a large literature attempting to explain this idiosyncratic risk
“puzzle”. A partial list of papers includes Bali and Cakici (2008), Chen and Petkova (2012), Duarte et al.
(2014), Han and Lesmond (2011), Herskovic et al. (2015), Hou and Lo (2016), and Spiegal and Wang (2006).
Idiosyncratic risk is also often invoked as an impediment to arbitrage. See Pontiff (2006) for a detailed
discussion.
                                                                                           5


Conceptually, the scaling variable is not ad hoc and follows directly from our theory – it

lies at the very heart of the model which says that the marginal benefit of diversification

is high when expected average idiosyncratic volatility is high. The fact that the model

identifies the relevant state variable is a significant advantage, particularly in light of

Cochrane’s (2001) assertion that the conditional CAPM is technically not testable because

the econometrician cannot know the “right” state variable. Empirically, the scaling allows

us to test the conditional model in a unified framework without resorting to subsample

tests with limited power.

       In US data from 1931 to 2014, controlling for conditional market betas, the slope

on expected idiosyncratic volatility scaled by expected average idiosyncratic volatility is

positive. This is in stark contrast to the unconditional idiosyncratic volatility literature

which finds a negative slope or no relation between idiosyncratic volatility and expected

returns. We also estimate similar regressions in markets outside the US. Since the tests

require an adequate cross-section and a time series of returns, we restrict our attention to

Canada, France, Japan and the UK. In these markets too, the slopes on scaled expected

idiosyncratic volatility are positive and statistically significant. Overall, the data appear

to be consistent with a conditional version of Merton (1987) in which the positive premium

for idiosyncratic risk varies over time with average idiosyncratic risk.

       A natural question that arises is whether the slopes on scaled expected idiosyncratic

volatility are sensitive to the inclusion of size, momentum, and other empirically

motivated variables. Our purpose is to evaluate the theoretical model developed in this
                                                                                          6


paper. The null hypothesis against which our (and Merton’s) model should be judged is

the CAPM, not an empirically motivated factor model.         This is because the CAPM

becomes a special case of our model when information costs go to zero.          One could

potentially generate any number of variables from the so-called factor zoo that drive out

a theoretically motivated construction. Our position is that there is something to be

learned from the conditional model, even if one can find factors that dominate it

empirically. Our results suggest that perhaps it is premature to reject the ideas in Merton

(1987).

       The paper is organized as follows: in section 2, we present the model, both in

summary and detail form. Section 3 describes our sample, measurement approach, and

results. Section 4 concludes.




2. The Model

       We provide a summary of the model and its intuition below, followed by a formal

derivation. In the formal derivation, we describe Merton’s (1987) original formulation as

well as our critical modifications.

2.1 Model Summary

       Merton (1987) presents a model where investors are under-diversified, the market

portfolio is not mean – variance efficient, the CAPM does not hold and idiosyncratic risk

is priced in equilibrium. In this paper we extend the Merton model by making two

modifications:
                                                                                            7


          1. We assume that the fraction of all investors who know about a security is

              proportional to its market value, relative to the value of the market

              portfolio. An intuitively appealing implication of this is that the

              idiosyncratic risk premium varies inversely with the average number of

              securities in an investor’s portfolio.

          2. In addition to the conditions in Merton (1987), we require that, in

              equilibrium, there is no incentive for investors to further diversify. We

              achieve this by imposing the condition that the marginal increase in utility

              due to increased diversification is offset by the marginal disutility due to

              the (implicit) costs, I, of information acquisition. As a result, the degree of

              diversification varies inversely with the costs of diversification and directly

              with average idiosyncratic volatility.

       The rest of our model follows Merton (1987): investors are risk averse, have

identical preferences, are price-takers, have the same initial wealth, are mean variance

optimizers, and have conditional homogenous beliefs.          Investors are less than fully

diversified as they only invest in a security if they ‘know’ about that security in the sense

that they know the mean and variance of its return distribution. This leads to an asset-

pricing model with clear, testable implications.

       The equilibrium expected return on security i in this model is:

                                                       σi2δ
                                    Ri = Rf +bib δ +                                     (1)
                                                       Q*
                                                                                              8



where δ is the coefficient of risk aversion, Rf is the risk free rate, σi2 is the idiosyncratic


volatility of security i, bi is its beta, Q * is the average number of stocks held by an

investor in equilibrium, and b is the average beta of the investor’s portfolio. As in Merton

(1987), there is a positive premium for idiosyncratic volatility. The key deviation from

his model is that the parameterQ * , representing portfolio diversification, is determined in

equilibrium as follows:


                                              *    δσ 2
                                           Q =                                             (2)
                                                   2I

Q * is determined by risk aversion, average idiosyncratic volatility ( σ 2 ) and the cost of

information acquisition ( I ), which accords with our intuition. Combining equations (1)

and (2), we can express (1) as:

                                    Ri = Rf +bib δ + πσi2                                  (3)


                                            2I δ
where                                π=
                                            σ2




is the state dependent idiosyncratic risk premium. Equation (3) highlights the role of

both average idiosyncratic volatility ( σ 2 ) and the costs of information (I) in portfolio

diversification. In the limiting case, with perfect information (I = 0), investors are fully

diversified and the idiosyncratic risk premium π disappears. When I is not zero, changes
                                                                                                           9


in average idiosyncratic volatility influence the disutility of under-diversification and

therefore the idiosyncratic risk premium.6

2.2 The Formal Model

                                                      ! from investing in firm i has a
          The economy has N firms, N ≫ 1 . The return Ri



factor structure:

                                      R!i = Ri +biY! + σi ε!i ,    i = 1,…,N                             (4)


                                                                  ( )
where Y! is a common factor with E (Y! ) = 0 , E Y! 2 = 1 , bi is the factor loading of


security i, ε!i is a firm-specific random variable with


                     E (ε!i ) = E (ε!i | ε!1,…, ε!i−1, ε!i+1,…, ε!N ,Y ) = 0, i = 1,…,N                  (5)


    ( )
E ε!i2 = 1 , σi2 is the idiosyncratic volatility of security i , and σ 2 is the value weighted


average idiosyncratic volatility across the N securities. RM denotes the value weighted

expected return of the N securities.

          In addition to the N securities issued by firms, the economy has two “inside”

securities with zero net supply:




          (a)   a ‘factor mimicking’ security with return, R!N +1 = RN +1 +Y!


          (b)   a riskless security with return Rf


6
  Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2012), Brown and Kapadia (2007) and others offer explanations for the
source of time series variation in average idiosyncratic volatility, but for our purpose, it is exogenous and
outside the model.
                                                                                               10


          The economy has K investors, K ≫ N . Investors are risk averse, with identical

mean-variance preferences:

                                              δ
                                          ( )
                                U k = E R! k − Var R! k ,
                                              2
                                                         ( )       k = 1,...,K                (6)


! k denotes the portfolio return, and δ is the coefficient of risk aversion. Investors are
R

price takers and assumed to have identical initial wealth Wo , which we normalize to 1.

          An investor only includes security i in his portfolio if he is “informed” in the sense

                     (          )
that he knows Ri ,bi , σi2 . Information is costly and as a consequence investor k selects


only a subset of the N available securities to include in his portfolio.7 We assume that

the securities he selects, Qk are much smaller than N (Qk ≪ N ) and that the probability


of selecting a firm is proportional to its value relative to the market portfolio. Θk is the


set of integers that index the Qk firms selected by investor k.8

          In addition to firm-specific knowledge, each investor’s information set contains


                            (
common knowledge: Rf ,RN +1,RM , σ 2 .          )
          Equilibrium in capital markets is characterized as follows:

(a)       Given the set of securities selected, each investor chooses an optimal portfolio.

(b)       Markets clear.

          The optimal portfolio holdings, for any investor k is determined as follows:


7
    These subsets will in general differ across the K investors.
8
    They are a subset of the first N natural numbers.
                                                                                          11


 From (4) and (6), an investor’s portfolio return can be specified as:

                                  R! k = R k +bkY! + σk ε!k                              (7)

where:

                                  bk = ∑wikbi + wNk +1                                   (8)
                                             i∈Θk




                                  (σ ) = ∑ (w ) σ
                                         2                        2
                                     k                        k       2
                                                              i       i
                                                                                         (9)
                                                    i∈Θk




wik and wNk +1 denote the fraction of investor k ’s wealth allocated to security i and N + 1

. The expected portfolio return and variance are:

                          ( )
                          ! k = R + bk (R − R ) + w k Δ
                        E R      f       N +1 f  ∑i i                                   (10)
                                                                              i∈Θk




                            ( ) ( ) + ∑ (w ) σ
                                               2                      2
                           !k = bk
                       Var R                                      k       2
                                                                                        (11)
                                                                  i       i
                                                       i∈Θk



where:

                        Δi = (Ri − Rf ) −bi (RN +1 − Rf ) , i ∈ Θk                      (12)


The investor’s optimal portfolio choice is the solution to the following problem:

                                    ⎡                    ⎤
                        max      ( )⎢E R! k − δ Var R! k ⎥ , i ∈ Θ
                                                           ( )                          (13)
                        {bk ,wik } ⎢⎣         2          ⎥        k
                                                         ⎦


                                     ∑w
                                              k
                      Subject to              i
                                                    + wNk +1 + w kf = 1
                                     i∈Θk


From (10) and (11), the first-order conditions for (13) are:

                                 RN +1 − Rf −bk δ = 0                                   (14)
                                                                                           12



                               Δi −wik σi2δ = 0, i ∈ Θk                                  (15)

From (8), (14), and (15), the investor’s optimal portfolio solution is:


                               bk =
                                      (R    N +1
                                                   − Rf )
                                                                                         (16)
                                                 δ

                                       Δi
                               wik =             , i ∈ Θk                                (17)
                                       σi2δ


                               wNk +1 = bk − ∑wikbi                                      (18)
                                                     i∈Θk




                               w kf = 1 −bk + ∑wik (bi −1)                               (19)
                                                         i∈Θk



       We aggregate to determine equilibrium expected returns. From (16), all investors

choose the same bk . Let bk = B, k = 1,…,K . Thus, from (16), we have:

                               RN +1 = Rf + Bδ                                           (20)

From (17), the aggregate demand for security i is:

                                       Ki                       Ki
                                                                       Δi
                               Di = ∑Wow = ∑Wo       k
                                                     i
                                                                                         (21)
                                       k=1                      k=1    σi2δ


In the equation above, K i is the number of investors who know about the firm i .

From (18) and (19), the aggregate demand for “inside” securities is:

                                             K                        K            N

                               DN +1 = ∑WowNk +1 = ∑WoB − ∑bi Di                         (22)
                                            k=1                       k=1          i=1


                                        K                        K          N +1

                               Df = ∑Wow kf = ∑Wo − ∑Di                                  (23)
                                       k=1                      k=1         i=1
                                                                                              13



In equilibrium the demand for these securities is zero: DN +1 = Df = 0 . As a consequence

                                               N

                                B=
                                   ∑           i=1 i
                                                    b Di        N

                                                             = ∑x ibi = b                   (24)
                                                K

                                   ∑           k=1
                                                    Wo         i=1




where x i is the fraction of investors’ total wealth allocated to security i . Using (24), we

can rewrite (20) as:

                                RN +1 = Rf +b δ                                             (25)


       If Vi denotes the equilibrium value of firm i , then


                                Vi
                        xi =       K
                                                                                            (26)
                               ∑   k=1
                                       Wo


is the fraction of investors’ total wealth invested in firm i . Market clearing implies that

Vi = Di , and hence:

                                               Vi                   Di               Δi
                                xi =           K
                                                           =         K
                                                                              = qi          (27)
                                                                                     σi2δ
                                         ∑     k=1
                                                    Wo         ∑     k=1
                                                                         Wo


and

                                         Ki              K

                                qi = ∑Wo / ∑Wo = K i / K                                    (28)
                                         k=1           k=1



where qi is the fraction of investors who invest in firm i . Equation (27) corresponds to

equation 15 in Merton (1987).

       Our first modification is that we assume that probability of an investor knowing

about a security is proportional to the security’s market capitalization. This assumption
                                                                                                       14


suggests that the fraction of all investors who know about a security is proportional to

the weight of the security in the market portfolio.9 This implies that qi is proportional


to x i


                                      x i = φqi                                                      (29)

Using (17), (27), and (29),

                                             xi
                                    wik =         = φ , i ∈ Θk                                       (30)
                                             qi

Since

                                       K  ⎡                    ⎤
                                          ⎢                  k⎥
                                      ∑   ⎢ ∑ wi + wN +1 + w f ⎥ = K
                                      k=1 ⎢ i∈Θ
                                                k   k

                                                               ⎥⎦
                                                                                                     (31)
                                          ⎣ k

using (30) we get

                                  K                   K                    K     K
                            K = ∑ ∑ φ + ∑ (wNk +1 + w kf ) =∑ φQk = φ ∑Qk                            (32)
                                  k=1 i∈Θk        k=1                      k=1   k=1




         Here we have used the observation that the number of firms in Θk is Qk and that

the holdings of security N + 1 and the risk-free asset sum to zero across all investors.

Hence

                                                  1       K
                                      φ = 1/
                                                  K
                                                      ∑Q
                                                      k=1
                                                              k
                                                                  = 1 /Q                             (33)




9
 We are implicitly assuming the law of large numbers, as investors N >> I . The law of large numbers
implies an equality between the actual fraction of investors who know about a security and the probability
of knowing it.
                                                                                            15


               K
          1
where Q =
          K   ∑Q
               k=1
                     k
                         is the average number of securities in a portfolio.


From (18), (19), (24), (30), (33), we have:

                                           1
                                   wik =                                                  (34)
                                           Q

                                                          bi
                                   wNk +1 = b − ∑                                         (35)
                                                   i∈Θk
                                                          Q


                                                            bi −1
                                   w kf = 1 −b + ∑                                        (36)
                                                     i∈Θk
                                                               Q


       As noted in (34), wik is the same for each investor in firm i , while wNk +1,w kf can be


different across investors. From (10), (25-29) and (33), we observe that the expected

security returns

                                            σi2δ
                         Ri = Rf +bib δ +          , i = 1,…,N                            (37)
                                               Q

                                                                                  δ
are linear in idiosyncratic volatility and the idiosyncratic risk premium (         ) varies
                                                                                  Q

inversely with the average number of securities:

       Our second modification is that we assume that in equilibrium investors have no

incentive to increase their holdings Qk . We achieve this by imposing the condition that

the marginal increase in utility due to increased diversification is offset by the disutility

due to the (implicit) costs of information acquisition, I.

       From (10-12) and (34-37), the expected portfolio return and portfolio variance are:
                                                                                                          16



                                   ! k = R + b 2δ + δ
                                    ( )              2 ∑ i
                                 E R      f
                                                          σ2                                           (38)
                                                   Q i∈Θk


                                                  1
                                      ( )
                                 Var R! k = b 2 + 2 ∑σi2
                                                 Q i∈Θk
                                                                                                       (39)


Thus, the utility of investor k is:

                                    δ            b 2δ   δ
                                !( )
                                  k

                                    2
                                        ! k
                        U k = E R − Var R = Rf +
                                                  2
                                                      ( )
                                                      + 2 ∑σi2
                                                       2Q i∈Θk
                                                                                                       (40)



       With access to an additional security a , where                    a is an element of {N } \ Θk , the

investor’s new optimal portfolio allocation is the solution to the maximization problem:

                                    ⎡                    ⎤
                        max      ( )⎢E R! k − δ Var R! k ⎥ , i ∈ Θ ∪ {a}
                                                      ( )                                              (41)
                        {bk ,wik } ⎢⎣         2          ⎥        k
                                                         ⎦

       The resulting expected portfolio return and variance conditional on selecting

security a are:

                                                                ⎛             ⎞
                                                             δ ⎜⎜            2⎟
                        E (R!k | a ) = Rf +b 2δ +             2⎜  ∑  σ 2
                                                                         + σa⎟
                                                                              ⎟⎟                       (42)
                                                                ⎜
                                                            Q ⎜⎝i∈Θk  i
                                                                               ⎟⎟⎠


                                                ⎛             ⎞⎟
                                             1 ⎜
                             (        )
                        Var R! k | a = b 2 + 2 ⎜⎜∑σi2 + σa2 ⎟⎟⎟
                                            Q ⎜⎜⎝i∈Θk          ⎟⎟⎠
                                                                                                       (43)


       Since the probability of selecting an additional security is proportional to its market

capitalization, the expected idiosyncratic volatility of the additional security is the value

weighted average idiosyncratic volatility across the securities he doesn’t hold:

                                 E ⎡⎢σa2 ⎤⎥ =     ∑     x i σi2                                        (44)
                                    ⎣ ⎦
                                                i∈{N }\Θk
                                                                                      17



where {N } is the set of integers 1,…,N . Since N ≫ Qk (the investor only knows a small


fraction of all securities) E ⎡⎢σa2 ⎤⎥ can be approximated as:
                               ⎣ ⎦

                                              N

                                  E ⎡⎢σa2 ⎤⎥ ≅ ∑x i σi2 = σ 2                       (45)
                                     ⎣ ⎦
                                             i=1



Using (45), the unconditional expected portfolio return and variance can be written as:

                                            ⎛         ⎞
                                         δ ⎜⎜       2⎟
                           !( )
                         E R = Rf +b δ + 2 ⎜∑σi + σ ⎟⎟⎟
                             k      2

                                        Q ⎜⎜⎝i∈Θk
                                                  2
                                                      ⎟⎟⎠
                                                                                    (46)


                                        ⎛         ⎞
                                     1 ⎜⎜       2⎟
                             !( )
                         Var R = b + 2 ⎜∑σi + σ ⎟⎟⎟
                               k  2

                                    Q ⎜⎜⎝i∈Θk
                                              2
                                                  ⎟⎟⎠
                                                                                    (47)


and the expected utility of investor k becomes:

                                                                   ⎛    ⎟  ⎞
                              δ                b 2δ   δ ⎜
                  U = E (R ) − Var (R ) = Rf +
                    '    ! k        ! k
                                                    + 2 ⎜⎜ ∑σi2 + σ 2 ⎟⎟⎟           (48)
                    k
                              2                 2    2Q ⎜⎜⎝i∈Θ         k
                                                                        ⎟⎟
                                                                         ⎠

Comparing (40) with (48), we see that the expected increase in utility ΔU k is:

                                                           δ 2
                                  ΔU k =U k ' −U k =           σ                    (49)
                                                          2Q 2

       Note that as a result of the approximation in (45) ΔU k is same for all investors

and we have

                                                    δ 2
                              ΔU = ΔU k =               σ ∀k
                                                   2Q 2
                                                                                                      18


         For investors to have no incentive to learn about an additional security ΔU must

be no greater than the disutility of the cost of information acquisition I: 10

                                    ΔU − I ≤ 0                                                      (50)

From (49) and (50) we have:

                                     δ 2
                                          σ =I                                                      (51)
                                    2Q *2

where Q * is the average number of stocks held by investor k in equilibrium.

Hence:


                                     * δσ 2
                                   Q =                                                              (52)
                                       2I




Using (37) and (52), the expected return on asset i can be written as:

                                                        σi2δ
                                  Ri = Rf +bib δ +                                                  (53)
                                                        Q*


After substituting forQ * , we can rewrite equation 53 as

                                         Ri = Rf +bib δ + πσi2                                     (54)


                                                 2I δ
where                                    π=
                                                 σ2

is the state dependent idiosyncratic risk premium. This corresponds to equation (3) in the

model summary above.


10
  In this framework U (I) = a constant x I. We have normalized the constant to be 1 as it does not affect
the subsequent analysis.
                                                                                                                  19




3. Empirical tests

3.1 Testing Strategy

            To test the model, we transform the beta coefficients in equation (53) to their

counterparts with respect to the market, resulting in the following equation:


                                                       2     σi2δ
                                      Ri = Rf + βi σ δ +
                                                       m
                                                                    (1 −qi )                                  (55)
                                                             Q*

where βi = Cov(R!i , R!m ) / σm2 and σm2 =Var(R
                                              ! ).
                                               m



            We make the approximation that 1 −qi ≈ 1 where 1 −qi is the fraction of investors

who do not hold asset i.11 This results in the following equation that we test:

                                                                       σi2δ
                                              Ri = Rf + βi σm2 δ +                                             (56)
                                                                       Q*

            Our interest is in the risk premium in the last term of equation 55. The most


                                                                                      δσ 2
straightforward way to test the model is to recognize that Q * =                           . Substituting
                                                                                      2I

this expression into the last term of equation 55 we get




11
     Alternatively we could assume that βi σm2 − x i σi2 ≈ βi σm2 to get to equation 56.   This is similar to the
approximation in equation 9 in Dybvig and Ross (1985). Quantitatively the approximation is innocuous,
the fraction of the market portfolio invested in asset i, x i , is of the order of 10−2 or less. Using typical values
for the other parameters, ( βi ≈ 1, σm2 ≈ 0.04, σi2 ! 0.16 ) we see that while βi σm2 is of the order 10−2 , the
neglected term x i σi2 is of order 10−3 . For the indicated parameters the approximation involves using 0.04
instead of the exact value 0.0384.
                                                                                           20



                                                       σi2
                              Ri = Rf + βi σm2 δ + γ                                    (57)
                                                             2
                                                       σ

       where                           γ = 2I δ

Equations 56 and 57 say that controlling for conditional betas, the average slope of

regressions of stock returns on the ratio of expected idiosyncratic volatility to the (square

root of) expected average idiosyncratic volatility should be positive. More precisely, the

regression coefficient is identified as γ .

3.2 Sample Construction

       Our sample of US stocks is derived from the CRSP-Compustat universe with CRSP

share codes 10 or 11 that restrict the universe to common stocks, and with exchange codes

1, 2 and 3 corresponding to NYSE, Amex and Nasdaq listed securities. We eliminate

stocks with a share price below $1 at the beginning of the month. The tests are based on

a sample period from 1931 to 2014 because we need at least 5 years of data to calculate

expected idiosyncratic volatility.

       For the international sample, we obtain a time series of market information from

Datastream.     We start with an unconstrained universe of all firms in the following

developed markets between 1990 and 2014: Canada, France, Japan, and the United

Kingdom.     We restrict our attention to these countries because the tests require an

adequate cross-section of securities as well as a reasonable time series. The universe of

stocks includes live as well as dead stocks. We apply the sequence of filters described in

Goyal and Wahal (2015), retaining only equity issues from the primary exchange of the
                                                                                                                       21


country, and ensuring that we only sample local (not cross-listed) stocks.                                     US dollar

returns are computed by converting local currency returns using the conversion function

built into Datastream, which uses spot rates. Market values are similarly converted to

US dollar equivalents.

3.3 Measurement

      For each security-month, we estimate daily time series market model regressions

of excess stock returns on the excess market return. We use the market to generate

residuals because the CAPM serves as the natural theoretical counterpart to Merton’s

(1987) model and our modification.                    The idiosyncratic component εi from these

regressions is assumed to be normally distributed. The model says that that conditional

expected returns should be positively related to expected (not lagged) idiosyncratic

volatility. We model expected idiosyncratic volatility for stock i in month t using the

EGARCH process used by Guo, Kassa and Ferguson (2014) as follows.

                                                          ⎪⎧⎪     ⎛ ε ⎞⎟                  ⎡ε              1/2 ⎤ ⎪⎫
                          p                       q
                                                            ⎪     ⎜⎜ i,t−k ⎟              ⎢ i,t−k ⎛⎜ 2 ⎞⎟⎟ ⎥ ⎪⎪
       ln σ = ai,t−1 + ∑ bi,l,t−1 ln σ
           2                         2
                                             + ∑ ci,k,t−1 ⎨θi,t−1 ⎜            ⎟ + γi,t−1 ⎢       − ⎜ ⎟ ⎥⎬           (58)
           i,t
                         l=1
                                     i,t−l
                                               k=1          ⎪⎪     ⎜⎝ σi,t−k ⎟⎟⎠          ⎢ σi,t−k ⎜⎝ π ⎟⎠ ⎥ ⎪⎪
                                                             ⎪⎩                           ⎣                   ⎦ ⎪⎭

      In estimating the above, we ensure that the sample used stops in month t-1 so that

there is no look-ahead bias in the estimates. As in Guo, Kassa, and Ferguson (2014), we

require at least 60 monthly observations to estimate month t idiosyncratic volatility. We

consider nine EGARCH specifications, corresponding to values of p and q from {1,2,3}

and choose the one that converges with the lowest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).
                                                                                          22


Estimates of expected idiosyncratic volatility are trimmed at the 95th percentile to prevent

outliers from influencing the tests.

       We calculate the empirical counterpart of the market-wide average expected

idiosyncratic volatility ( σ 2 ) using a two-step process as follows.


                                        1 ⎛⎜ S          L        ⎞
                                           ⎜⎜∑ ws σs + ∑ wl σl ⎟⎟⎟
                                2                  2          2
                               σSL =                                                   (59)
                                        2 ⎝ s=1        l=1
                                                                 ⎟⎠


where the subscripts s and l refer to small and large stocks respectively, the weights ws


and wl are market capitalization weights within small and large stocks, and the expected


idiosyncratic volatility estimates ( σi2 ) are derived from equation 58 above. We use the

NYSE median market capitalization in the prior month to designate each security into

small and large stock groups. This process of value-weighting expected idiosyncratic

volatility for small and large stocks separately, and then taking a simple average of the

two, ensures a balance between small and large stocks. As a robustness check, we also

compute average expected idiosyncratic volatility using market-wide equal- and value-

weights as below.

                                               ⎛1      N     ⎞
                                                            2⎟
                                        2
                                       σEW = ⎜⎜⎜      ∑   σ  ⎟
                                                           i ⎟
                                                                                       (60)
                                               ⎝N     i=1
                                                             ⎟⎠


                                               ⎛N          ⎞
                                        2
                                       σVW = ⎜⎜⎜∑ wi σi2 ⎟⎟⎟                           (61)
                                               ⎝ i=1       ⎟⎠


where wi is a market capitalization weight across all stocks. We caution, however, that

equal-weighted average idiosyncratic volatility is heavily influenced by the large number
                                                                                                              23


of more volatile small stocks. In the value-weighted average, a small number of large less

volatile stocks dominate the calculation.

3.4 Results

        Panel A of Table 1 contains average slopes and t-statistics from monthly Fama-

MacBeth regressions of returns on conditional market betas measured over the prior 3

months using daily returns (Lewellen and Nagel (2006)), and expected idiosyncratic

                                                                                                       σi2
volatility scaled by the square root of average expected idiosyncratic volatility (                           ).
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                        σSL



The slopes are multiplied by 100 for expositional convenience. Conditional betas are

statistically indistinguishable from zero. This is inconsistent with the model as specified

in equation 55. It is, however, consistent with existing evidence that the conditional

CAPM does not perform much better than the unconditional CAPM. More importantly,

from our perspective, the slopes on expected idiosyncratic volatility scaled by average

expected idiosyncratic volatility are positive. In equal-weighted regressions, the slope is

0.91 with a t-statistic of 2.04. In value-weighted regressions, which are less subject to the

presence of outliers and to the large number of stocks in the sample, the slope on expected

volatility rises to 2.22 with a t-statistic of 4.00.12




12
   Since the slopes are equal to 2I d , it is tempting to make assumptions about either the cost of information
(I) or risk reversion (δ), and infer the other. We resist this temptation because the cost of information and
risk aversion jointly determine the slope.
                                                                                           24


       Panels B and C show estimates when average expected idiosyncratic volatility is

                                                    2       2
measured using equal- or value-weighted averages ( σEW and σVW respectively). These

approaches do not appear to make a difference to inferences.            The coefficients on

conditional betas do not move and the slopes on scaled expected idiosyncratic volatility

are quite similar.

       It is also interesting to examine the variation in the regression slopes over time.

Individual coefficients from monthly Fama-MacBeth regressions are quite noisy so we

compute 10-year rolling averages. These, along with a 10-year rolling average of average

expected idiosyncratic volatility, are plotted in Figure 3. Visual inspection, which is only

suggestive, is indicative of an inverse relation between the risk premium and average

idiosyncratic volatility.

       Prima facie, these results suggest that the data are consistent with a conditional

version of Merton’s model. Models are parsimonious descriptions of the behavior of homo

economicus and are agnostic to countries. It is therefore useful to test them in other

countries as a crude out of sample test. Since power is an important consideration, we

can only do so in markets that have a sufficiently large cross-section of securities and a

long enough time series.     Four countries for which we have data meet that criteria:

Canada, France, Japan, and the UK.         Table 2 contains similar regressions for these

countries. As in the US data, the slopes on conditional betas are statistically insignificant.

In value-weighted regressions, the slopes on scaled expected idiosyncratic volatility are

reliably positive in Canada, Japan and the UK, with t-statistics above 2.00. In France,
                                                                                                          25


the slope is positive but with a t-statistic of only 1.67. In equal-weighted regressions, the

slopes on scaled idiosyncratic volatility are positive for Canada and France with t-

statistics of 2.29 and 1.65 respectively. In Japan and the UK, the slopes are insignificantly

different from zero, suggesting that the relation is weaker in small stocks.13

        While unconditional tests of Merton (1987) provide little empirical support for his

model, our regressions suggest that a conditional version of Merton’s model has a footprint

in the data. One could complain that these regressions ignore the existing evidence on

size, value, profitability, investment, accruals, and other such variables that have

explanatory power for returns. This omission is willful. Empirically motivated variables

may have explanatory power but do not constitute tests of asset pricing models and are

subject to the factor zoo problem. We avoid the inclusion of ad hoc variables to maintain

the integrity of the test of the theory in section 2. We include conditional betas because

the CAPM generates that natural equilibrium counter to the under-diversification that is

at the heart of both Merton’s original model and our modification.

4. Conclusion

        The key insight in Merton’s (1987) model of asset pricing under incomplete

diversification is that there should be a positive premium for bearing idiosyncratic risk.

We propose a simple, yet important modification to his model – the premium for bearing




13
  It is tempting to ask whether the returns on portfolios sorted by scaled idiosyncratic volatility are
monotonic across the sorting variable. This is not feasible. Since average idiosyncratic volatility does not
vary across securities, the scaling variable generates no dispersion; the sorts are effectively just sorts on
(unscaled) idiosyncratic volatility, which are uninformative about the empirical content of the model.
                                                                                         26


idiosyncratic risk should vary with average idiosyncratic risk. When average idiosyncratic

risk is high, the marginal benefit from diversification is also high, implying a lower risk

premium (and vice versa). This simple intuition delivers a conditional asset pricing model

in the spirit of Merton (1987), where the relevant state variable, average idiosyncratic

risk, is identified by the theory.

       We test the model in the spirit of classical tests of the CAPM (Fama and MacBeth

(1973)): regressions of returns on expected idiosyncratic volatility scaled by average

expected idiosyncratic risk. The coefficient on this scaled variable is positive in the US

between 1931 and 2014. This variable also has a positive slope Canada, France, Japan

and the UK between 1990 and 2014. These results are in stark contrast to the negative

relation between lagged idiosyncratic volatility and expected returns documented by Ang

et al. (2006) and explored by numerous others. The key difference is that the theory

demands conditional tests because the state variable (average idiosyncratic risk) is

economically meaningful and readily identifiable. Both the model and results suggest that

a rejection of the ideas in Merton (1987) might be hasty.
                                                                                      27




                                      References

Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006. The cross-
section of volatility and expected returns. Journal of Finance 51, 259-299.

Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2009. High
idiosyncratic volatility and low returns: International and further US evidence. Journal
of Financial Economics 91, 1-23.

Bali, Turan and Nusret Cakici, 2008. Idiosyncratic volatility and the cross-section of
expected returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 29-58.

Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2012. Aggregate idiosyncratic
volatility. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47, 1155-1185.

Black, Fisher, 1972. Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing, Journal of
Business 45, 444-455.

Brown, Gregory and Nishad Kapadia, 2007. Firm-specific risk and equity market
development. Journal of Financial Economics 84, 358-388.

Breeden, Douglas, 1979.    An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic
consumption and investment opportunities. Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.

Campbell, John, Martin Lettau, Burton Malkiel and Yexiao Xu, 2001. Have individual
stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of
Finance 56, 1-43.

Cochrane, John, 2001. Asset pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Chamberlain, Gary, 1983. Funds, factors and diversification in arbitrage pricing models.
Econometrica 51, 1305–1323.

Chamberlain, Gary and Michael Rothschild, 1983. Arbitrage, factor structure and mean
variance analysis in large asset markets. Econometrica 51, 1281–1304.

Chen, Zhanhui and Ralitsa Petkova, 2012. Does idiosyncratic volatility proxy for risk
exposure. Review of Financial Studies 25, 2745-2787.




                                                                                      27
                                                                                        28


Duarte, Jefferson, Avraham Kamara, Stephan Siegel, and Celine Sun, 2014. The
systematic risk of idiosyncratic volatility. Working paper, Rice University.

Dybvig, Philip and Stephen A. Ross, 1985. Yes, the APT is testable. Journal of Finance
40, 1173-1188.

Connor, Gregory,1984. A unified beta pricing theory. Journal of Economic Theory 34, 13–
31.

Fama, E., MacBeth, J., 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests. Journal of
Political Economy 81, 607–636.

Fu, Fangjian, 2009, Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected stock returns.
Journal of Financial Economics 91, 24-37.

Gilles, Christian and Stephen F. LeRoy. On the arbitrage pricing theory. Economic
Theory 1, 213–229.

Goyal, Amit and Sunil Wahal, 2015. Is momentum an echo? Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 50, 1237-1267.

Guo, Hui, Haimanot Kassa, and Michael F. Ferguson, 2014. On the Relation between
EGARCH Idiosyncratic Volatility and Expected Stock Returns. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 49, 271-296

Han, Yufeng and David Lesmond, 2011. Liquidity biases and the pricing of cross-sectional
idiosyncratic volatility. Review of Financial Studies 24, 1590-1629.

Harvey, Campbell, Y. Liu, and H. Zhu, 2015. …and the cross-section of expected returns.
The Review of Financial Studies 29, 5-68.

Herskovic, Bernard, Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2016. The
common factor in idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications. Journal
of Financial Economics 199, 249-283.

Huberman, Gur, 1982. A simple approach to arbitrage pricing theory. Journal of
Economic Theory 28, 183–192.

Hou, Kewei, and Roger Loh, 2016. Have we solved the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle?
Journal of Financial Economics 121, 167-194.




                                                                                        28
                                                                                         29


Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang, 1996. The conditional CAPM and the cross-section
of expected returns. Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.

Lucas, Robert, 1978. Asset prices in an exchange economy 46, 1429-1445.

Levy, Haim, 1978. Equilibrium in an imperfect market: A constraint on the number of
securities in a portfolio. American Economic Review 68, 643-658.

Lintner, John, 1965. The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in
stock portfolios and capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13-37.

Malkiel, Burton and Yexiao Xu, 2003. Investigating the behavior of idiosyncratic
volatility, Journal of Business 76, 613-6144.

Mayshar, Joram, 1979.Transaction costs in a model of capital market equilibrium. Journal
of Political Economy, 87, 673-700.

Mayshar, Joram, 1981. Transaction costs and the pricing of assets. Journal of Finance,
36, 583-597.

Merton, Robert C., 1973. An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41,
867-887.

Merton, Robert C., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
information. Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.

Pontiff, Jeffrey 2006. Costly arbitrage and the myth of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 42, 35-52.

Mossin, Jan, 1966. Equilibrium in a capital asset market, Econometrica 35, 768-783.

Reisman, Haim, 1988, A General Approach to the Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT).
Econometrica 56, 473-476.

Ross, Steven, 1976. The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic
Theory 13, 341-360.

Rubinstein, Mark, 1976. The valuation of uncertain income streams and the pricing of
options. The Bell Journal of Economics 7, 407-425.

Sharpe, William, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
conditions of risk. Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.


                                                                                         29
                                                                                   30




Spiegel, Mathew and Xiaotong Wang, 2005. Cross-sectional variation in stocks returns:
Liquidity and idiosyncratic risk. Working paper, Yale School of Management.

Wu, Chunchi, Li Qiang, and John Wei, 1996. Incomplete information capital market
equilibrium with heterogenous expectations and short sale restrictions. Review of
Quantitative Finance and Accounting 7, 119-136.




                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                                      31




                                     0.035



                                      0.03



                                     0.025
  Average idiosyncratic volatility




                                      0.02



                                     0.015



                                      0.01



                                     0.005



                                        0
                                       07/01/31   07/01/41   07/01/51   07/01/61   07/01/71   07/01/81   07/01/91   07/01/01   07/01/11


Figure 1. We compute the value-weighted average idiosyncratic volatility for small and
large capitalization stocks, and then calculate a simple average of the two to obtain
average idiosyncratic volatility for each month. We use NYSE median breaks to separate
small and large cap stocks. Each month is classified as a low or high average idiosyncratic
risk month if the month’s average idiosyncratic volatility is above or below the trailing
10 year average.




                                                                                                                                      31
                                                                                          32




   $




                        Our Model



                                                   Merton (1987)




                                                                                    !"#




Figure 2: The x-axis shows average idiosyncratic volatility. The y-axis shows the premium
associated with idiosyncratic volatility.




                                                                                          32
                                                                                                                                                                                                               33




                                                    0.05                                                                                   0.014




                                                                                                                                                   10 year rolling average expected idiosyncratic volatility
                                                    0.04
  Average slopes from EW Fama-MacBeth regressions




                                                                                                                                           0.012


                                                    0.03
                                                                                                                                           0.01

                                                    0.02
                                                                                                                                           0.008

                                                    0.01

                                                                                                                                           0.006
                                                       0
                                                            06/01/41
                                                            03/01/44
                                                            12/01/46
                                                            09/01/49
                                                            06/01/52
                                                            03/01/55
                                                            12/01/57
                                                            09/01/60
                                                            06/01/63
                                                            03/01/66
                                                            12/01/68
                                                            09/01/71
                                                            06/01/74
                                                            03/01/77
                                                            12/01/79
                                                            09/01/82
                                                            06/01/85
                                                            03/01/88
                                                            12/01/90
                                                            09/01/93
                                                            06/01/96
                                                            03/01/99
                                                            12/01/01
                                                            09/01/04
                                                            06/01/07
                                                            03/01/10
                                                            12/01/12
                                                                                                                                           0.004
                                                    -0.01


                                                                                                                                           0.002
                                                    -0.02



                                                    -0.03                                                                                  0

                                                            10 year rolling average slope from EW regressions   10 year rolling average ivol




Figure 3: The figure reports 10-year rolling average slopes from the equal-weighted Fama-
MacBeth regressions in Table 1, along with 10-year rolling average expected idiosyncratic
volatility over the same period.




                                                                                                                                                                                                               33
                                                                                       34


Table 1

Fama-MacBeth regressions of returns on conditional CAPM beta and scaled expected
idiosyncratic volatility for US markets, 1931-2014

The table reports average slope estimates and t-statistics from monthly Fama and
MacBeth (1973) regressions on stock returns on conditional market betas and expected
idiosyncratic volatility scaled by average expected idiosyncratic volatility. The sample
is from July 1931 through 2014. Conditional market betas are measured over the prior
three months using daily returns. Expected idiosyncratic volatility is measured over
the prior 60 months using an EGARCH(1,3) model but employing the lowest Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC) to generate estimates. All coefficients are multiplied by
100. T-statistics are based on Newey-West standard errors with 4 lags.


                             Equal-weighted Regressions Value-weighted Regressions

Panel A
β                                        0.02                          -0.10
                                        (0.02)                        (-1.10)
 σi2                                     0.91                           2.22
   2
                                        (2.04)                        (4.00)
  σSL
Panel B
β                                        0.02                          -0.10
                                        (0.02)                        (-1.10)
  σi2                                    1.00                           2.67
   2
                                        (1.96)                        (4.19)
  σEW
Panel C
β                                        0.02                          -0.10
                                        (0.02)                        (-1.10)
  σi2                                    0.70                           1.68
   2
                                        (1.93)                        (3.84)
  σVW




                                                                                       34
                                                                                        35


Table 2

Fama-MacBeth regressions of returns on conditional CAPM beta and scaled expected
idiosyncratic volatility for international markets, 1990-2014

The table reports average slope estimates and t-statistics from monthly value-weighted
Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions on stock returns on conditional market betas
and expected idiosyncratic volatility scaled by average expected idiosyncratic volatility
for four international markets. The sample period is from July 1990 through 2014.
Conditional market betas are measured over the prior three months using daily returns.
Expected idiosyncratic volatility is measured over the prior 60 months using an
EGARCH(1,3) model but employing the lowest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) to
generate estimates. All coefficients are multiplied by 100. T-statistics are based on
Newey-West standard errors with 4 lags.


                      Canada             France            Japan               UK

Value-Weighted Regressions
β                    0.20                 -0.31             0.31              0.32
                    (0.28)               (0.59)            (1.58)            (1.01)
   2
  σi                 4.28                  3.77             2.61              5.33
     2
                    (2.18)               (1.67)            (2.13)            (2.92)
  σSL


Equal-Weighted Regressions
β                    -0.18                -0.18             0.11              0.12
                    (1.35)               (1.02)            (0.60)            (0.93)
   2
  σi                  .33                  1.10             0.85              -0.15
     2
                    (2.29)               (1.65)            (0.94)            (-0.22)
  σSL




                                                                                        35
