                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MISMATCH IN HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION

                                           Russell Cooper
                                            Huacong Liu

                                        Working Paper 22010
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22010


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Russell Cooper and Huacong Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
MisMatch in Human Capital Accumulation
Russell Cooper and Huacong Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 22010
February 2016
JEL No. E24,I26,J24,O43

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper studies the allocation of heterogeneous agents to levels of educational attainment. The goal
is to understand the magnitudes and sources of mismatch in this assignment, both in theory and in
the data. The paper presents evidence of substantial mismatch between ability and educational attainment
across 21 OECD countries, with a focus on Germany, Italy, Japan and the US. In the model, mismatch
originates from: (i) taste shocks, (ii) binding borrowing constraints and (iii) noisy measures of ability
in test scores. The model is estimated using a simulated method of moments approach. The main finding
is that measured mismatch arises largely from noise in test scores and does not reflect borrowing constraints.
Differences in tastes for education across households play a minor role in explaining mismatch. Further,
the estimation allows us to decompose the college wage premium, isolating cross-country differences
in selection effects from the return to education.


Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
611 Kern
State College, PA 16802
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com

Huacong Liu
College of Education
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16801
hxl39@psu.edu
                           MisMatch in Human Capital Accumulation∗

                                             Russell Cooper†and Huacong Liu‡

                                                         February 9, 2016


                                                               Abstract
          This paper studies the allocation of heterogeneous agents to levels of educational attainment. The goal is to
      understand the magnitudes and sources of mismatch in this assignment, both in theory and in the data. The paper
      presents evidence of substantial mismatch between ability and educational attainment across 21 OECD countries,
      with a focus on Germany, Italy, Japan and the US. In the model, mismatch originates from: (i) taste shocks, (ii)
      binding borrowing constraints and (iii) noisy measures of ability in test scores. The model is estimated using a
      simulated method of moments approach. The main finding is that measured mismatch arises largely from noise in
      test scores and does not reflect borrowing constraints. Differences in tastes for education across households play
      a minor role in explaining mismatch. Further, the estimation allows us to decompose the college wage premium,
      isolating cross-country differences in selection effects from the return to education.
      JEL classification: I26, J24




1       Introduction
This paper studies the allocation of heterogeneous agents to levels of educational attainment. Observed outcomes are
often at odds with the stark predictions of assortative matching: i.e. mismatch occurs whereby high ability agents
are not always the most educated and some low ability agents have high educational attainment. Our primary goal
is to understand the magnitudes and sources of this mismatch, both in theory and in the data.
    The paper presents and analyzes cross-country OECD data on mismatch. The measure of education attainment
is dichotomous: (i) below college and (ii) college and above. PIACC scores, an OECD sponsored assessment of adult
skills, are used in our analysis as noisy measures of ability for each individual by country.1 The use of these data is
key to facilitating a cross-country comparison of the relationship between ability and education attainment.2
   ∗ Comments and suggestions from Jonathan Eaton, Martin Hackmann, Eric Hanushek, Marc Henry, Immo Schott, Jon Willis and

Guozhong Zhu as well as seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, The University of Montreal, the Pennsylvania
State University and the University of Alberta are greatly appreciated.
   † Department of Economics, the Pennsylvania State University and NBER, russellcoop@gmail.com
   ‡ College of Education, the Pennsylvania State University, hxl39@psu.edu
   1 See http://www.oecd.org/site/piaac/ for a complete description of this “survey of adult skills”. The use of this test in our analysis

as a proxy for ability is explained in detail below.
   2 Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015) use the PIACC score as a measure of cognitive skills in Mincer wage

regressions. It is clear from that analysis that the PIACC score is highly correlated with labor market outcomes, it is not simply noise.
The PIACC score is significant in predicting wages even when schooling is included. We use these results as moments in our estimation.
Section 5 of Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015) discusses causal interpretations, particularly the reverse causality
whereby individuals with particular high skilled jobs, say obtained as the outcome of a training program, consequently score higher on
the PIACC test.


                                                                    1
                                                                                                             1    INTRODUCTION


    The empirical analysis starts with the relationship between PIACC scores and educational attainment across
countries. Not surprisingly, the distributions of these scores conditional on educational attainment overlap: there
are individuals with a low level of education (no college) but a higher PIACC score than those with high education
(college). This is a simple, but informative, indicator of mismatch.
    Our formal analysis of mismatch estimates the probability an individual will obtain higher education given an
observed PIACC score.3 Using these estimates, “under-matching” occurs if the predicted probability of a college
education is relatively high but the agent does not have a college degree. In a similar manner, “over-matching”
occurs for individuals with a college degree but a relatively low predicted probability of attending college. These
estimates are obtained using country specific regressions.
    The theoretical framework focuses on the assignment of individuals to education levels. It allows individuals to
differ in a number of dimensions: (i) ability, (ii) tastes and (iii) wealth. If the only source of heterogeneity is ability,
then the optimal allocation will assign higher ability agents to higher levels of education. There is no mismatch.
Once differences in tastes are present, the optimal allocation assigns education attainment based on both ability and
tastes so that some high ability agents will attain relatively low levels of education. The methodology described
above would indicate mismatch, though the allocation may still be efficient. Differences in wealth are relevant to the
assignment process in a decentralized setting with borrowing restrictions. In this case, relatively high ability agents
may choose a low level of education simply because of a binding borrowing constraint.
    In the model, there is another source of mismatch associated with ability being measured rather than observed.
Individuals make education decisions based upon their true ability. Test scores, such as the PIACC assessment, are
an imperfect indicator of ability. Hence, some agents may appear to be high ability based upon test outcomes though
they choose low education based upon their true, relatively low, ability. This form of mismatch reflects noise in the
measure of ability. As we shall see, this is an important source of measured mismatch in the data.
    The analysis uses this theoretical framework to identify the sources of measured under- and over-matching. To
do so, the country-specific parameters of the individual choice problems are estimated using a simulated method of
moments approach.4 The degrees of over- and under-matching, the mean education rate, the coefficients from the
logistic regression used to predict education outcomes and coefficients relating wages to PIACC scores are computed
for each of the countries.5 These moments are used as a basis for the estimation of model parameters. The estimation
allows us to determine the source of mismatch across countries.
    In this project, the emphasis is on the choice of education based on ability rather than the matching of workers
by skill to appropriate jobs. This complements the study of mismatch in labor markets. To the extent high ability
individuals have low educational attainment and thus low skill jobs, these forms of mismatch are related.6
    There are four main findings in this study. First, there is evidence of substantial mismatch in our sample, including
both over-matching and under-matching. Countries with high education rates tend to have low under-match and
high over-match rates.
   3 This follows Dillon and Smith (2013), Smith, Pender, and Howell (2013) and others.
   4 The  parameters estimated include the borrowing constraint of the household, the distributions of ability, taste shocks and noise in
the test score as well as the returns to education.
   5 Some of these moments are taken from Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015).
   6 An example is the famous taxi driver in Singapore with a PhD https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cai_Mingjie. Is he under-matched

in his job or over-matched in education? Section 8.3 returns to this theme and discusses the contribution of education mismatch to
apparent job mismatch.




                                                                   2
                                                                                                                 2   MOTIVATION


     Second, by country, mismatch reflects noise in the test scores and is not due to imperfect capital markets nor to
variations in tastes for education across agents. The estimation of the model finds no support for the presence of
binding borrowing constraints. Further, taste shocks contribute essentially nothing to the fit of the model. Instead the
noise in the test score is enough to generate the observed mismatch in a manner that is consistent with the estimated
dependence of the education decision and compensation on the test score. Matching these latter moments in the
estimation critically disciplines the explanatory power of the noise in the test score. From this over-identification,
matching these moments from noise in the test score is non-trivial.
     Third, mismatch is not a signal of inefficiency. Our simple model, relying solely on a noisy test score, does a
remarkable job of capturing cross country variations in education rates, mismatch and wage premia. It does so
by estimating differences in the distribution of ability, the noise in test scores and the return to higher education
across countries. None of these sources of variation signal an inefficiency in the allocation of individuals to education
attainment.
     Finally, the estimated model facilitates the decomposition of the college wage premium into two sources: the
returns to college (relative to no college) and the selection by ability into college. There are substantial cross country
differences in the returns to education even though wage premia are similar. This reflects differences in selection into
higher education.



2      Motivation
The paper is motivated by evidence of mismatch, i.e. the stark difference between the predictions of the sorting
model of education attainment and the data. This section presents an initial model and an initial look at the data
to make this inconsistency clear. The remainder of the paper uses a richer model to understand the sources and
consequences of the mismatch through a simulated method of moments approach.


2.1      A Framework
This section presents a simple education choice.7 It provides a benchmark for considering the evidence relating
education attainment to measured ability. The framework is enriched as the analysis progresses to become the basis
of the structural estimation.
     Consider an economy with multiple agents, who differ in terms of their ability, denoted θ, with a cdf G(θ).8 The
lifetime utility of household θ is given by u(c(θ)) where c(θ) is the consumption of a household with ability θ, u(·) is
strictly increasing and strictly concave.
     Each agent has a unit of time which is allocated to work and education. The resource constraint for the economy
is given by:                       Z                            Z
                                        [c(θ) + pe(θ)]dG(θ) =        [(1 − e(θ)) + h(e(θ))θ]dG(θ).                                 (1)
                                    θ                            θ

Here e(θ) is the time allocated to education. The left side is the use of output to finance consumption and education,
    7 Models of sorting such as this appear throughout the literature. See Spence (1973) and Weiss (1983) for early examples of sorting
in equilibrium models of human capital accumulation and signaling. A key assumption is those models, retained here, is that education
choice depends on actual ability.
   8 For this discussion, agents are indexed by ability.




                                                                     3
2.2    An Initial Look at the Data                                                                     2   MOTIVATION


with a resource costs of p per unit of time spent in school. The right side is total output, comprised of the output from
unskilled work time, 1 − e(θ), and the type-specific return to education, h(e(θ))θ. The human capital accumulation
function, h(e), is assumed to be strictly increasing and strictly concave. The ability of the agent is complementary
to time spent in school.
   The planner chooses consumption allocations and education levels for all types (c(θ), e(θ)) to maximize social
          R
welfare of θ [Λ(θ)u(c(θ))]dG(θ) subject to the resource constraint, (1). In this expression of social welfare, Λ(θ) is a
welfare weight.
      The education decision, for each type θ, is characterized by:


                                                     p + 1 = θh0 (e(θ)).                                               (2)

The left side is the marginal cost of education in period 1 and the right side is the marginal return to education for
ability θ. The optimal level of education is increasing in θ from the strict concavity of h(·). Note that the efficient
allocation of time between work and education is independent of the welfare weight given to the type of an agent.
      As for the consumption allocation, the necessary condition is:


                                                      Λ(θ)u0 (c(θ)) = λ                                                (3)

for all θ, where λ is the multiplier on (1). This condition equates the weighted marginal utility of consumption
across agents. It captures the optimal redistribution of output in the economy. In this economy, the assignment of
households to education is independent of the allocation of total output.
      If the education choice was discrete, say e ∈ {0, ē}, then the solution of the planner’s problem is to set e = 0 for
agents with θ < θ∗ and e = ē for agents with θ > θ∗ . The critical level of ability, θ∗ solves


                                                     (p + 1)ē = θ∗ h(ē).                                             (4)


2.2      An Initial Look at the Data
The model makes a stark prediction about sorting: agents with higher ability obtain higher levels of education. This
section analyzes that prediction across countries. It requires a measure of ability and education attainment.


2.2.1     Data

The primary data source for this study is PIAAC, also called the Survey of Adult Skills. PIAAC assesses the
proficiency of adults aged 16-65 in literacy, numeracy, and problem solving in technology-rich environments. It is
an ongoing data collection effort at the OECD, with 22 countries participating in the first round of data collection
that took place between 2008 and 2012 in most participating countries. These countries include Austria, Flanders
(Belgium), Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Russian Federation, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, England and N. Ireland (United
Kingdom), and the United States. This first round of PIAAC data include a total of 152,514 individuals between 16
and 65 years of age from these 22 countries, with a majority of countries having 4,000 to 9,000 participants.


                                                              4
2.2     An Initial Look at the Data                                                                             2   MOTIVATION


      For this analysis, we included participants aged 25-39 who have finished the initial cycle of formal schooling.
Given that our main interest is the mismatch between ability and schooling choice, the PIAAC numeracy score
serves as a signal of cognitive ability since it is highly correlated with literacy and problem-solving skills. In the
analysis, we use standardized numeracy scores in each country.
      There are a couple of concerns with the use of the PIACC score as a measure of ability. First, as with all tests,
the results are signals not direct measures of ability. Second, and more importantly for the PIACC score, the exam
is given during working years as a measure of adult skills. Thus the exam reflects not only innate ability but also
acquired skills from work experience and training. These concerns are confronted in our estimation by adding noise
to the PIACC score and controlling, as best as possible, for the effects of experience.
      Our study uses two samples of countries. We present evidence on mismatch for 21 OECD countries.9 For these
countries, we characterize the magnitude of mismatch and estimate our structural model.
      We then go into considerable detail on the evidence for four countries: Germany, Italy, Japan and the US. As
explained below, these countries stand out from the sample and provide particular insights into mismatch. For these
countries, we discuss aspects of institutional structures that underlie the observed assignment of agents to education
attainment.
      For education attainment, we specify a dichotomous variable indicating two levels: (i) no college degree and
(ii) college degree and beyond. The PIACC data does not contain any indicators of college quality so that a finer
breakdown of education attainment is not feasible. Accordingly our focus is on the choice between a college degree or
not rather than the ordering of agents relative to the quality of their college education. We rely on the International
Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) to identify individuals who have obtained college and/or beyond
degrees (ISCED 5 and above) and those whose highest educational attainment is below college (ISCED 1 through
4).10


2.2.2     Attainment and Ability

Figure 1 shows the distribution of PIACC scores by education attainment for Germany, Italy, Japan and the US.
Table 1 reports moments from these distributions. In viewing these results, it is important to keep in mind that the
same PIACC exam was given in each country, though translated into the local language.11 A couple of patterns are
clear.
      First, for each of the countries, the distribution of PIACC scores for those with college degrees appears to be a
rightward shift of the scores for the low education group. This difference in means between “no college” and “college”
is clear from Table 1. These differences are statistically significant.
      Second, for each of these countries, there is a wide dispersion of PIACC numeracy scores for each of the education
attainment levels. Distributions of ability conditional on education attainment are far from degenerate. Except for
Germany, the dispersion is lower for the college educated group. The dispersion is particularly low for those with
college attainment in Japan.
  9 Russia  was dropped due to measurement problems.
 10 Importantly,  ISCED 5B is included as college for this analysis as seems customary.
  11 To be specific, the same set of questions was presented at each interview but the actual set of questions answered was determined

through the interview process.




                                                                  5
2.2    An Initial Look at the Data                                                                             2   MOTIVATION


                                       Figure 1: Distributions of PIACC Numeracy Scores




                                (a) US                                                           (b) Germany




                               (c) Italy                                                           (d) Japan


               These figures show the distribution of PIACC numeracy scores by education (row) by country (columns).
               For each country, the first row is less than college and the second row is college and beyond.


      Third, and most importantly for the purposes of our study, there is considerable overlap in these distributions.
That is, many agents with low education attainment have scores that exceed those with high education attainment.
This is true for each of these and the large sample of 21 countries.12
      It is instructive to compare these figures against the model prediction. The model predicts the perfect sorting
of agents by ability maps into education attainment. It is never the case that the education attainment of an agent
with a given ability is strictly less than the attainment of an agent with a lower ability.
      This property of perfect sorting by ability is clearly rejected by the data. This is the essence of mismatch: some
lower ability agents obtain higher education and some high ability individuals do not. The next subsection goes on
to better understand the determinants of this mismatch.
 12 Section   3.2 presents evidence for all 21 countries, measuring the levels of under- and over-matching.




                                                                     6
                                                                                               3   EVIDENCE OF MISMATCH


                                               Table 1: PIACC Numeracy Scores


                                                         no college              college
                                                       mean      std.        mean      std.
                                         Germany       246.80 50.39          309.48 37.58
                                           Italy       253.60 45.61          284.31 40.12
                                          Japan        281.99 35.52          309.11 32.21
                                            US         235.55 50.71          293.71 40.40
          This table reports the moments of the distribution of test scores by country and education attainment.


3     Evidence of MisMatch
This initial look at the data indicates a significant amount of mismatch. The next step of the empirical analysis is
more formal. We study the empirical determinants of mismatch, separating over- and under-matching. To do so, we
estimate state contingent probabilities of obtaining high education. Over-matching is defined by an agent obtaining
a high level of education when the predicted probability of doing so is sufficiently low. Similarly, under-matching
occurs if an agent does not obtain a high level of education despite a sufficiently high prediction probability of going
to college.13 A key part of the analysis is to determine, by country, the magnitude and sources of over-matching and
under-matching.
    Overall, this section is intended to answer two questions. How much mismatch is there in our sample? What
are the magnitudes and empirical determinants of under- and over-matching? Using these results, we return to the
theory models to infer the underlying sources of mismatch.


3.1      Under- and Over-Matching
This section goes beyond the unconditional distributions provided by Figure 1 to condition individual choices on
individual attributes. In this manner, we generate empirical measures of mismatch, following the methodology of
Dillon and Smith (2013) and Smith, Pender, and Howell (2013).
    Specifically, consider a logistic model of education choice:

                                                                        eα0 +α1 ai
                                                   P r(ei = 1) =                                                                  (5)
                                                                      1 + eα0 +α1 ai

where ai is the PIACC score, treated as a proxy for ability, of individual i. The PIACC data reports ten plausible
values for the numeracy score for each individual. The regression uses the mean of these plausible values as a proxy
for ability. These regressions are run at the individual level by country generating country specific estimates of these
parameters and ultimately rates of mismatch. Here ei = 0 signifies that an individual has no college degree and
ei = 1 signifies college attainment and beyond.
    This regression per se does not impose a direct interpretation of the coefficients (α0 , α1 ). The structural estima-
tion, based upon indirect inference, provides a framework for understanding (α0 , α1 ) as they are used as moments.
    The predicted values from these logistic regressions are used to obtain measures of under- and over-matching. In
  13 Throughout the paper, the terms under-match and over-match refer to the outcome of this empirical exercise and are not related to

the efficiency of the assignment.



                                                                  7
3.1     Under- and Over-Matching                                                              3   EVIDENCE OF MISMATCH


particular, a household is categorized as under-matched if: (i) the predicted probability that ei = 1 exceeds the 80th
percentile of all predicted values and (ii) the agent chooses ei = 0. In a similar manner, a household is categorized
as over-matched if: (i) the predicted probability that ei = 0 is less than the 20th percentile of all predicted values
and (ii) the agent chooses ei = 1.
      To be clear, at this point these cut-off values of 20th and 80th percentiles are arbitrary. The structural estimation
provides an interpretation of this measure of under- and over-matching.14

                                                        Table 2: Moments


                                      college    under-match      over-match       α0         α1        N
                         Germany       0.373        0.104            0.062        −0.720     1.160     1440
                                                                                    (0.07)    (0.09)
                           Italy       0.230         0.146            0.069       −1.510     0.890     1381
                                                                                    (0.08)    (0.09)
                          Japan        0.597         0.078            0.108        0.230     0.860     1559
                                                                                    (0.06)    (0.07)
                            US         0.455         0.055            0.045       −0.360     1.510     1495
                                                                                    (0.07)    (0.1)

           This table reports data moments including α0 and α1 from (5). Standard errors are provided for the logistic
           coefficient estimates. N is the sample size.


      The results from these exercises are reported in Table 2. The first column reports college attainment rates by
country. These are all advanced economies so that college attainment is relatively high, though it is noticeably lower
in Germany and Italy than in Japan.
      The second and third columns report the estimated under- and over-match rates. These are calculated as the
ratio of the number of agents in an education group that is mismatched divided by the number of agents in that
group.15 The mismatch rates depend on the underlying regression, (5). The results for the logistic regression are
shown in the fourth and fifth columns.16
      The mismatch rate is highest in Germany and Italy and lowest in the US. There is some asymmetry in the
mismatch rates: the under-match rate exceeds the over-match rate except for Japan. The asymmetry is particularly
apparent in Italy. As we shall see, this difference will be important in assessing the role of capital market imperfections.
      This discussion points to an important aspect of this methodology. Mismatch comes from large prediction errors
which, in turn, depend on the specification of the model. One virtue of the structural estimation exercise, partly based
upon indirect inference as discussed below, is that inference about the sources of mismatch are not coming directly
from these regression results. So, for example, the argument that education and test scores are both influenced by
unobserved ability is a valid criticism of any structural interpretation of α1 . In our model, this omitted variable bias
is included in the structure since the agent’s ability will impact both the education decision and test score. The
estimates of the underlying parameters come indirectly from the reduced form coefficients in regressions such as (5).
 14 Section 6.4 explores the estimates with other cut-off values.
 15 For example, the under-match rate in the US is the ratio of the number of agents without a college degree (e = 0) and a predicted
probability of ei = 1 in excess of the 80th percentile divided by the number of agents without a college degree in the US.
  16 The model with additional controls, such as parent’s education, is studied below.




                                                                 8
3.2    Larger Sample                                                                   4   SOURCES OF MISMATCH


3.2       Larger Sample
This analysis was performed on all 21 countries in our sample. The top panel of Table A2 contains the same moments
reported in Table 2 for all of the countries.17
      There is significant variation across countries. The college attainment rates range from a high of 64.8% in Korea
to a low of 23% in Italy. For some countries, such as the U.S. the under-match rates is very low, only 5.5%. While
for Italy it is 14.6%. There is also large variations in the over-match rate, from a low of 4% in the Czech Republic
to a high of 10.9% in Korea. Across these countries, the estimate of α1 is positive, indicating the correlation of the
PIACC score with the education decision.
      Countries with high education rates tend to have relatively low under-match rates and high over-match rates.
These correlations across the 21 countries are −0.648 and 0.725 respectively. Evidently, higher education rates entail
a reduction in under-matching and an increase in over-matching. We return to these patterns later through the lens
of the estimated model.



4       Sources of Mismatch
This section studies models of the education decision structured to provide insight into the sources and consequences
of mismatch. The initial framework from section 2.1 is reformulated as an intertemporal choice problem with
heterogeneous agents and borrowing constraints. It is this model we ultimately take to the data.
      The model has three stages of the lifecycle: (i) education, (ii) early employment and (iii) late employment. The
framework is simplified by the assumption of stationary earnings within these stages. Nonetheless the structure
allows us to study the potential impact of borrowing constraints during the education period as well as match with
observations on the lifecycle pattern of labor earnings.
      To study heterogeneity, we allow agents to differ along three dimensions. First, as in the baseline model, assume
that the earnings of a college educated household are proportional to their human capital h(ē)θ. Here agents differ
by their productivity, denoted θ, once they are educated. For agents with a higher value of θ, education is more
productive.
      Second, households have choice specific shocks which influence their education decision. These shocks are observed
to households but not to the researcher.
      Third, household can have different levels of wealth. This wealth can either come from an inheritance or stand
for parental support. In the end, this third dimension of heterogeneity plays no role.
      There are two sources of mismatch in the theory model: (i) shocks to the tastes of agents and (ii) borrowing
restrictions. The next section uses these models to determine the sources of mismatch by country. The empirical
model adds a third source of measured mismatch through a noisy test score. The test, as with the PIACC, is not
linked to information about ability at the time of the education.
      Importantly, the baseline model makes the informational assumption that is common to the literature linking
ability and schooling: agents make their education decision knowing their true ability. This precludes mismatch
arising from an uninformed education decision. College admissions based upon “luck” with a standardized exam are
 17 The   coefficients (ν1 , ν2 ) in Table A2 are explained below.




                                                                     9
4.1    LifeCycle                                                                                    4   SOURCES OF MISMATCH


less likely to lead to a degree. Since our measure of attainment is college completion, the ex ante uncertainty about
ability is reduced. But some educational systems, via an early tracking system, do force “early” college decisions.
In Germany, for example, by age 10 individuals are sorted into multiple tracks, with only one leading to a college
degree. We return to this variation in our framework in evaluating extensions of the baseline model in sub-section
7.1.
      The model provides a structural interpretation of the estimates from (5): the test score is a proxy for ability
which is an input into the education decision. The model imposes a restriction that education does not improve the
test score.18 Even with this restriction, the model fits the data quite well. We discuss the robustness of our results
to this restriction in sub-section 7.2 where we extend the model to allow education to affect the test score.


4.1      LifeCycle
To study education choice and mismatch we consider a lifecycle model of the household. There are three phases of
the lifecycle illustrated in Figure 2. In the first, termed education, phase, the household chooses an education level.
This phase last T s periods. The household works in the next two phases, termed early and late, of the lifecycle,
lasting T e and T l periods respectively. The difference between these periods reflects experience: i.e. productivity
increases with age, interacting with the education choice in the first stage. Let T = T s + T e + T l be the total lifetime
of the household.

                                                        Figure 2: Phases of Lifecycle


                                  education              early work                late work
                              0                     s                 s        e
                                                T                 T +T                         Ts + Te + Tl
                              This figure shows the phases over the lifecycle of the household.




4.2      Discrete Choice
As our empirical analysis focuses on two levels of education attainment, the model does as well. In the education
phase the household chooses e ∈ {0, ē}. When e = 0, the household obtains only a high school education. When
e = ē, the household attains a college degree and works (1 − ē) > 0 in youth.
      The discounted present value of income over the education phase is given by:

                                                                      ω1 (1 − e) − pe
                                                          Y s (e) =                                                                    (6)
                                                                            R̃T s
                                                                                   s
for e ∈ {0, ē}. Here p is tuition, ω1 is the initial real wage and R̃T discounts this flow over the T s periods back to
the initial period.19
      Agents differ by their productivity, denoted θ. For agents with a higher value of θ, education is more productive.
The return to education is evident from labor earnings in the second and third phases of the lifecycle. Specifically,
  18 Thisis explicit in the specification of (18).
  19 Throughout  this discussion, define R̃x = (1 + R + R2 + ... + Rx−1 )/Rx−1 where R is the real interest rate and x is the length of the
period of the flow that is being discounted.




                                                                          10
4.2    Discrete Choice                                                                    4   SOURCES OF MISMATCH


a household of ability θ that chooses education e obtains labor income of ωj H(e, θ) for j = 1 (early work) and j = 2
(late work). If e = ē, H(ē, θ) = h(ē)θ where h(ē) represents the accumulation of human capital from college. In this
specification, there is a complementarity between ability and the return to school. If instead the agent chooses no
college, e = 0, then labor income is ωj in period j = 1, 2, where H(0, θ) = 1 for all θ.
      The discounted present value of income over the early work phase of life is:

                                                                   ω1 H(e, θ)
                                                    Y e (e, θ) =                                                     (7)
                                                                      R̃T e
                          e
for e ∈ {0, ē} where R̃T discounts the flow of income during the middle phase back to the start of the early work
period. Similarly, the discounted present value of income over the late work phase of life is:

                                                                   ω2 H(e, θ)
                                                    Y l (e, θ) =                                                     (8)
                                                                      R̃T l
                              l
for e ∈ {0, ē} where R̃T discounts the flow of income during the final phase back to the start of the late work
period. Both of these flows depend on ability, θ, only if the agent attends college. Assume ω2 ≥ ω1 to allow for some
experience effect on wages.
      These three phases capture a couple of key dimensions of the education choice. First, in the initial phase the
household bears the direct cost of education. In addition, if there are borrowing constraints (introduced below),
the household bears an additional cost due to imperfect consumption smoothing. Second, in the second and third
phases, the ability specific returns of education to the household accrue and interact with the phase of the lifecycle.
Thus the gains to education have an individual component and an intertemporal component reflecting the shape of
the lifecycle profile of wages. The distinction between the education and working phases is most important once
borrowing constraints are present.
      The lifetime discounted present value of income for the household is simply the sum of the discounted values from
the three periods:
                                                                 Y e (e, θ) Y l (e, θ)
                                          Y (e, θ) = Y s (e) +             + T s +T e .                              (9)
                                                                   RT s     R
Here the flows defined earlier are further discounted back to the initial period. Let c(e, θ) be the level of constant
consumption such that over the T periods of life the discounted present value of consumption would equal Y (e, θ).
That is

                                                                   Y (e, θ)
                                                      c(e, θ) =             .                                      (10)
                                                                     R̃T
                                                                                                                     1
If the household has strictly concave utility over consumption in a period, u(ct ), and discounts at a rate of β =   R,
then absent borrowing constraints, the household will choose to consume c(e, θ) in each period, given (e, θ). Let


                                                   V (e, θ) = u(c(e, θ))β̃ T                                       (11)

denote the lifetime flow of utility with β̃ T = 1 + β + β 2 + ...β T −1 .
      If there are no capital market imperfections, then the household choice of education is simply a comparison of



                                                                 11
4.3    Tastes                                                                                 4   SOURCES OF MISMATCH


Y (0, θ) and Y (ē, θ). This is equivalent to maximizing lifetime utility since consumption and utility flows are ordered
by the discount present values of income associated with the two choices.
      Since Y (ē, θ) is an increasing function of ability, there will exist a critical value of ability, denoted θ∗ such that
Y (ē, θ∗ ) = Y (0, θ∗ ). For this ability and above, college is the optimal choice of the household, ie. e∗ (θ) = ē iff θ ≥ θ∗ .
      As in the static framework presented in section 2.1, this model predicts perfect sorting, i.e. the education choice
depends only on a comparison of the individual’s ability relative to a critical level of ability. There is no mismatch.
We enrich the model to include sources of mismatch.


4.3       Tastes
So far the model assumes that agents have the same taste for education. In this discussion a choice specific shock,
denoted ε, is added to the household problem to allow for taste differences.20
      These taste differences can have multiple origins. For example, these taste could reflect differences in attitudes
about education from parents and/or peer groups. In this case, the choice, for example, by high ability people not to
go to college could simply indicate a taste for work relative to school. There is nothing inefficient about this choice.
Alternatively, the taste variation may be interpreted as an added social cost of obtaining an education.
      Assume ε affects the value associated with a college education, i.e. e = ē.21 Then the value of attending college
becomes


                                                  V (ē, θ) = u(c(ē, θ))β̃ T + ε.                                           (12)

      The college choice again has a cut-off property. It entails a critical value of ability, denoted θ∗ (ε), that depends
on the taste shock. For θ > θ∗ (ε) the agent chooses higher education, e = ē; else the optimal decision is e = 0. For
the optimal choice, θ∗ (ε) will be decreasing in ε.
      Figure 3 summarizes the solution. The function θ∗ (ε) is shown as the downward sloping curve. To the right of
this curve, the agent will choose e = ē, and to the left the optimal choice is e = 0. To be clear, this choice reflects
both ability and the taste shock. Thus a high ability agent drawing a low taste shock, i.e. a large negative value of
ε, may optimally choose e = 0. This is not mismatch.
      However this specification allows for measured mismatch if taste shocks are not directly observed. Consider a
high ability agent with a large negative value of ε who chose e = 0. Conditioning on ability but not on tastes, this
appears to be a mismatch.


4.4       Borrowing Constraints
The analysis focuses on the impact of borrowing constraints during the education phase. While the issue of outstand-
ing student loans has been prominent in the US recently, student loans are important for higher education demand
in other countries, such as Japan, where tuition is relatively high.22
 20 See Keane and Wolpin (2001) as a leading example of adding taste shocks to an education choice model.
 21 For now, assume that θ and ε are independently distributed.
 22 See http://www2.jasso.go.jp/about_jasso/documents/e2015_01_28.pdf for a presentation of facts about student loans in Japan.




                                                                12
4.4    Borrowing Constraints                                                                                             4       SOURCES OF MISMATCH


                                      Figure 3: Under- and Over-Matching with Taste Shocks

                                      ε


                                                  measured over-match




                                                                                                               e = ē

                                      0




                                                            e=0
                                                                                 measured under-match
                                                                                                                        θ∗ (ε)



                                                                                                                             θ
                                                                        θ∗ (0)
                        This figure shows the optimal choice of education given taste shocks. It also shows under-
                        and over-matching based on merit alone.


      To do so, we need to keep track of the debt of the household as well as initial assets. A borrowing constraint
applies to the amount of debt accumulated during the school phase.23 For the other phases of the lifecycle, the
household is able to perfectly smooth consumption.
      Let B represent the debt outstanding (assets held) at the start of the early working phase. Then the value of
income over the early and late working years discounted back to the start of the early work period is given by

                                                                                    Y l (e, θ)
                                                  Y el (e, θ, B) = Y e (e, θ) +                −B                                                (13)
                                                                                      R̃T e
with Y e (e, θ) and Y l (e, θ) defined above.
      Given the absence of borrowing constraints after the first phase, the household will smooth consumption over the
last two phases of life generating a flow of utility captured by the value V el (e, θ, B) given by

                                                                                            e
                                                                                                +T l )
                                                   V el (e, θ, B) = u(cel (e, θ, B))β̃ (T                                                        (14)

                          Y el (e,θ,B) 24
where cel (e, θ, B) =                 .
                             R̃T el
      During the school years, the household borrows b each period and consumes cs = ω(1 − ē) − pē + b. At the end
                                                                                                 s
                                                                                                     −1
of the school period, their debt outstanding is B = b(1 + R + R2 + ...RT                                  ).
      Let B̄ be a ceiling on debt outstanding at the end of the school period and b̄ the borrowing limit imposed in each
period of the school phase.25 If the amount borrowed in each period of the school phase needed to finance the flow
of consumption under the assumption of perfect capital markets, given by (10) with e = ē, is less than b̄, then the
  23 The model does not include an endogenous borrowing constraint along the lines of Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011). But the

specification is flexible in that the constraint is ultimately estimated.
  24 Here, following the notation developed earlier, R̃T el = (1+R+R2 +...RT e +T l −1 )/RT e +T l −1 and β̃ T e +T l = 1+β+β 2 +....+β T e +T l −1 .
  25 These are linked by B̄ = b̄(1 + R + ....RT s −1 ).




                                                                         13
                                                                                                                  5   ESTIMATION


borrowing constraint is irrelevant.
    Alternatively, if b̄ is sufficiently low, then the borrowing constraint will bind. When the constraint binds, household
consumption during each period of the school phase is given by

                                                                           s
                                                                               −1        ω1 (1 − ē)
                                 cs (ē, θ, B̄)(1 + β + β 2 + .... + β T            )=               − pē + B̄                    (15)
                                                                                            R̃T s
where B̄ is the amount of debt outstanding at the end of the school phase from borrowing b̄ each period. The
household will smooth consumption during the school phase but it is not able to smooth consumption between the
school and working phases. The binding borrowing constraint creates an additional cost of college that distorts
school choice.
    During the school period the household choosing e = ē has utility of

                                                                                             s
                                                  V s (ē, θ, B̄) = u(cs (ē, θ, B̄))β̃ T .                                        (16)


Using (14) a household that chooses to go to college with a binding borrowing constraint has lifetime utility of

                                                                                     s
                                           V (ē, θ, B̄) = V s (ē, θ, B̄) + β̃ T V el (ē, θ, B̄).                                (17)

    In the presence of borrowing constraints, the household chooses e = ē iff V (ē, θ, B̄) ≥ V (0, θ). Clearly if the
borrowing constraint binds the value of obtaining a college degree is lower, i.e. V (ē, θ) > V (ē, θ, B̄).26
    Thus the borrowing constraint distorts the education decision. It produces undermatching since some high ability
household who would have chosen college do not do so given the additional cost of education created by the borrowing
limit.27 This will be more costly if b̄ is close to zero and if the household is sufficiently risk averse so that the lack of
consumption smoothing is costly. The magnitude of the under-matching due to a binding borrowing constraint will
be a focus of the estimation.
    Thus far we have assumed household wealth of zero. Of course, agents may have additional resources available to
them during the school stage, say as transfers from parents. Denote this form of wealth, evaluated as a flow during
each period of the school phase, as z, and the value of these transfers at the end of the school phase as Z. If, despite
these transfers, the borrowing constraint binds, then the debt outstanding at the end of the school phase will remain
B̄. Of course, the transfer of z each period will increase utility during the school phase and reduce under matching.
The magnitude of this affect is, again, an empirical issue studied below.



5          Estimation
The section puts the model and moments together. The point is to identify the factors that determine the levels of
under and over-matching across the countries. While other studies have documented various measures of mismatch,
the contribution here is to estimate the relative importance of the sources introduced by the theory model. In
  26 V(0, θ) and V (ē, θ), the values of no education and education respectively, are given in (11).
  27 SeeKim (2013) for a discussion of this in an equilibrium model and the consideration of the affects of education subsidies to relax
these constraints.




                                                                     14
5.1    Functional Forms and Parameterization                                                                     5    ESTIMATION


addition, the estimation is informative about the returns to college, h(ē), by country and the economic costs of
mismatch.


5.1      Functional Forms and Parameterization
In order to take the models to the data, a number of functional form assumptions are necessary. Some parameters
are set and others, as described next, are estimated. After the baseline estimation, a lengthy robustness section
explores alternative specifications of the model and these functional forms.
      We assume a Pareto distribution for ability, with a shape parameter denoted φ. That is the CDF of ability, θ, is
                                        φ 28
given by 1 − θ−φ with a mean of        φ−1 .    Lower values of φ translate into larger tails of the Pareto distribution. We
will estimate φ, allowing it to differ across countries.
      The taste shocks are assumed to be uniformly distributed in the interval [−ε̄, ε̄]. The parameter ε̄ controls the
dispersion of taste shocks and is estimated as well. Note that taste shocks are symmetrically distributed around 0
by assumption.29
      Agents make education decisions based on their true ability, θ. But, in the data analysis, the PIACC test score,
which is assumed to be a noisy signal of ability, is observed and used to predict the education outcome. To mimic
this, each household receives a test score, tsi , equal to its true ability plus a normally distributed noise term with
mean zero. The precision of the signal is parameterized by σ: i.e.


                                                           tsi = θi + σζi .                                                        (18)

      Importantly, in the baseline model the test score does not factor directly into the individual’s education choice.
That decision is based on observed ability. Instead, as reported in Table 2, the test score is an input into the logistic
regression predicting the education choice of an individual. It is thus a basis for the measured mismatch.
      In our framework, only ability has a causal effect on the test score. Education and training are not included as
covariates in (18).30 Instead, both the college choice and the test score reflect differences in ability. As we shall see,
the model does a very good job matching the data despite restricting the college choice not to have a direct influence
on the test score. We return to the issue of other factors influencing test scores in two exercises reported in section
6.1. First, we add additional covarites to (18). Second, the model is re-estimated using moments for the US from the
NLSY where the exam is taken prior to college. In addition, section 7.2 considers an alternative structural model
where the test score depends on ability.
      As noted earlier, the PIACC score is given to working adults, not to secondary or tertiary level students. The
test captured in (18) could be given any time during the agent’s life within the model. The education decision and
return to experience are both, in our structural model, functions of ability and thus captured by (18).
      As a normalization, set ω1 = 1 in each country. So all variables are relative to the compensation rate in period 1.
For ω2 , we draw on Table 3 in Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015) which reports wage profiles
from PIACC. We match that wage profile with the two periods of work in our model, early and late.
  28 See Jones (2015) for a recent discussion of the origins and implications of the Pareto distribution for studying income and wealth

inequality.
  29 The section on robustness considers another specification of taste shocks without bounded support.
  30 Arum and Roksa (2011) study the performance of over 23,000 students from 24 universities using the College Learning Assessment.

They test students prior to the start of college and then after. They find little difference in performance after four years of college.


                                                                  15
5.2    Simulated Method of Moments: Approach                                                                    5    ESTIMATION


      As a check on these profiles, a similar calculation was made using estimates of the lifecycle profile for someone
without a college degree using data from the PSID. The calculated intertemporal return for the US was very close
to that calculated from the regression results in Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015).31
      Finally, the model includes a country specific price of education, p, and a time spent in school, ē, during the
school phase. For the estimation, ē = 0.75 so that a student is in school for 9 or the 12 months of each college year.
Our calibration of the price is from OECD, Education at a Glance and is determined for each of the 21 countries.32
As a fraction of the US tuition, for our four countries, the price of education was near zero in Germany, 26% in Italy
and 93% in Japan.
      The distribution of outside wealth of agents, Z, is assumed to be Pareto with a shape parameter of aZ. We set
aZ to be the same for all countries. We do not have information on household or parental wealth in the PIACC
data. Thus we have not direct information allowing us to correlate tastes and household wealth induced by parental
background. Accordingly the baseline model assumes that wealth is independent of other unobserved household
attributes. In fact, for the baseline model we set outside wealth to zero, thus allowing the borrowing constraint to
have a large affect. As we shall see, the borrowing constraint is not estimated to bind and thus has no influence on
mismatch.


5.2      Simulated Method of Moments: Approach
The simulated methods of moments (SMM) approach finds the parameter vector, Θ, to minimize the weighted
difference between simulated and actual data moments:


                                          £(Θ) ≡ (M d − M s (Θ))W (M d − M s (Θ))0 .                                              (19)

The logic is that the moments computed from the data summarize the relevant sources of variation. By choosing
the parameters to match these data moments with the simulated data counterpart, the estimation brings the model
and data together.33
      The parameters estimated by SMM are Θ ≡ (φ, ε̄, σ, h(ē), b̄) where: φ is the shape parameter for the Pareto
distribution of ability, ε̄ parameterizes the taste shocks, σ parameterizes the noise in the test, h(ē) is the return to
college and b̄ is the borrowing constraint.
      The data moments are those presented in Table A2 for the 21 countries. These include the moments presented in
Table 2. These moments are supplemented by regression results reported in Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and
Woessmann (2015), Table A5, that link the wages to test scores.34 For their exercise, the sample was workers aged
35-54, similar to our late working phase. Specifically, letting i be an individual, there are two regressions that we
use:


                                                    E[ω2,i |·] = ν01 + ν1 ∗ testi                                                 (20)
  31 To obtain this, lifecycle income profiles were estimated by education group for the PSID and the return for the two age groups was

calculated from those estimates. Thanks to Guozhong Zhu for this cross-check on the PIACC based results.
  32 See http://www.oecd.org/education/eag.htm indicator B5.
  33 See Adda and Cooper (2003) and references therein for a discussion of this approach and properties of the estimates.
  34 We rely on Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015) for these moments as we do not have access to these data.




                                                                  16
5.2    Simulated Method of Moments: Approach                                                           5    ESTIMATION


and
                                            E[ω2,i |·] = ν02 + ν2 ∗ testi + ν3 ∗ edi                                   (21)

The ν1 coefficient relates the wage of individual i in the late work phase with that agent’s test score. The ν2 coefficient
is similar though education is an added regressor.
      In the results of Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015), the test results have significant
explanatory power. Among other things, this implies that the PIACC score is not simply noise, uncorrelated with
economic outcomes.
      The simulated moments are constructed in exactly the same manner as those constructed from the data. So, for
example, in the logistic regression of (5), the test score was normalized within each country to have a mean of zero
and a standard deviation of unity. This was also done in the simulated data, using the test score generated by (18)
as the raw input. Likewise, the (ν1 , ν2 ) coefficients were created in a way parallel with the data-based regressions.
      To be clear, the PIACC test results reported in Table 1 were not used directly as moments in the estimation.
This is simply because of our inability to literally simulate the PIACC exam. Thus the raw test scores are normalized
and used in the logistic regression, as in (5).
      It is important to explain intuitively how these moments identify the key parameters. This discussion is continued
in a more formal way after the presentation of the baseline estimates since the mapping is multidimensional. i.e.
variations in some parameters are reflected in many moments.
      The parameter controlling the distribution of ability, φ, has a direct affect on the college rate. If there were no
taste shocks, as in the model of section 4.2, then φ could determine the college rate. There would be no mismatch.
      The presence of the taste shocks, parameterized by ε̄ creates mismatch and also breaks the tight link between
the test score and the education outcome. The addition of a noisy test score also creates mismatch since true ability
is not reflected in the PIACC score. This noise also weakens the link between the test score and education since the
education choice is assumed to depend on true not measured ability.
      Importantly, the taste shock directly influences the education choice while the noise in the test score has no affect
on this decision. In theory, these are distinct channels.
      The return to education, h(ē), directly influences the college rate. It also underlies the relationship between wages
in the late work period and the level of education, i.e. the (ν1 , ν2 ) moments.
      A more formal way to understand local identification is to look at the affects of variations in the parameters
on the moments near the parameter estimates. The point, in part, is to be sure that for each parameter there is a
moment responding to it so there is local identification. Table 5 presents the elasticities of the moments with respect
to variations in the parameters. These calculations are conducted at the baseline parameter estimates. From this
table, variations in the ability shape parameter has large effects on all the moments, particularly the college rate, the
mean of the logistic regression and the wage regressions. Variations in ε̄ influence the mean of the logistic regression
and the over-match rates. The test score noise σ has no influence on the college rate as that choice is based on true
ability. It has a large and asymmetric affect on under- and over-match rates. The return on education matters for
all moments, particularly the college rate and the constant in the logistic regression.
      The estimation is undertaken with an identify matrix as a weighting matrix. The model has more moments than
parameters so that the choice of the identity matrix matters. The estimates are consistent with the identify matrix



                                                              17
5.3    Baseline Results                                                                                         5   ESTIMATION


but are inefficient, in large sample, compared to using the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the moments.
For our study, we do not have access to the data underlying the estimates of (ν1 , ν2 ) and thus cannot compute the
variance-covariance matrix directly from the data.


5.3      Baseline Results
The estimation starts with the baseline model of no borrowing constraints. We then allow for borrowing constraints.
We initially focus on the 4 key countries and then broaden the sample to include all 21 countries.
      There are a couple of key findings. First, there is no evidence of binding borrowing constraints in any of the
countries. Second, noise in the test score, parameterized by σ, plays the major role in matching the country specific
moments. Third, the taste shocks, parameterized by ε̄, plays a minor role.


5.3.1     No Borrowing Constraints

For this part of the analysis, capital markets are perfect. In this case, b̄ is set at a large enough value that agents
are able to borrow as much as needed to smooth consumption between the school and work phases.
      The parameter estimates for all countries are presented in Table A1 and those for the select group of four countries
are in Table 3. The data and simulated moments are presented in Tables A2 and A3 for all the countries and in
Table 4 for the four countries. Table 5 is informative about the effects of the parameters on the moments and is used
to interpret the estimation results.

                                                 Table 3: Parameter Estimates


                                                      φ         ε̄  σ     h(ē)      b̄
                                                                Baseline
                                      Germany       2.545 1.354 1.186 0.803         na
                                        Italy       2.835 0.893 1.586 0.728         na
                                       Japan        4.243 0.464 0.511 1.227         na
                                         US         3.137 0.498 0.583 1.056         na
                                                                   BC
                                      Germany       2.545 1.354 1.186 0.803 2.634
                                        Italy       2.836 0.893 1.586 0.729 1.638
                                       Japan        4.243 0.464 0.511 1.227 2.622
                                         US         3.137 0.498 0.583 1.056 2.622
                                                     Estimated No Taste Shocks: ε̄ = 0
                                        Ger.        2.542   na    1.198 0.804       na
                                         It.        2.837   na    1.584 0.729       na
                                        Jap.        4.247   na    0.510 1.227       na
                                         US         3.143   na    0.582 1.056       na

                     This table reports parameter estimates for the baseline, the endogenous borrowing constraint
                     and no taste shock models for the four leading countries.


      These estimates are best understood relative to the moments presented in Table 4 for the countries. The education
rate is lowest in Italy and Germany and highest in Japan. As noted earlier, tuition is relatively low in Italy and
almost zero in Germany. A challenge is matching the college rates with the costs of education.



                                                                     18
5.3    Baseline Results                                                                                5    ESTIMATION


      The estimated return to education is key. From Table 5, the education rate is very sensitive to h(ē). The
estimated return to education is relatively low in Italy and Germany and much higher in Japan. In this way, the
college rate is low in these countries despite the low tuition rates.
      From Table 4, mismatch is relatively high in Italy and lowest in the US. Only Japan has more over-matching than
under-matching. From Table 5, a high return to education leads to a high over-match and low under-match rate, as
in Japan. For Italy, the high value of σ leads to a high level of mismatch, with the asymmetry in the direction of
under-matching.
      The estimated coefficient on the test score is relatively low in Italy and Japan and highest in the US. From Table
5, the value of α1 is influenced (inversely) by the ability distribution, φ, and the return to education, since these
impact the education decision, as well as the noise in the test score, σ. The low value of α1 in Italy largely reflects
the high level noise in the test score. For Japan there is relatively little noise in the test but a very high values of
both the ability parameter and the returns to education. Evidently this implies that the education decision is less
correlated with the test score. As for the US, the test score is not very noisy, i.e. α1 is relatively large, and this is
not offset by the ability estimate.
      The coefficients from the wage regressions largely reflect the estimated returns to education and the ability
distribution. For Italy the low return to education translates into low values of (ν1 , ν2 ). In Japan, the high return
to education is partially offset by a low estimated mean ability to match the (ν1 , ν2 ) moments.
      Looking across the parameter estimates, a couple of features stand out. First, the return to education is relatively
low for Germany. This arises from two features: (i) the relatively low college education rate in Germany and (ii) the
low tuition rates in Germany. To offset the low cost, the estimated return to college is low. Note that this return
is relative to what is obtained without going to college. Germany has a well structured program of apprenticeships
which increases the productivity and wages of those not going to college.
      Second, the estimated mean ability is relatively low in Japan compared to, say, Germany and Italy. As noted
above, this estimate comes from matching the college rate moment which, for Japan, would be very high with
the estimated high return to education. To be clear, the raw PIACC scores were not included as moments for the
estimation since we have no way to simulate those test results directly. These scores, normalized within each country,
are used in the logistic regression as noisy signals of ability.
      The fit is the unweighted sum of squared differences between the data and simulated moments, as in (19). From
Table 4, the estimated model with only 4 parameters does a good job of matching the 7 moments.
      To better understand the identification of the various parameters, Table 6 presents the simulated moments for
parameter perturbations based on the estimated values. In particular, the block labeled ε̄ sets the dispersion in taste
shocks to 0, the block labeled σ = 0 eliminates the noise in the test score and the h(ē) = 1 case eliminates the return
to college. For each of these treatments, the table presents the simulated moments when all other parameters are
kept at their baseline values. From this analysis, it seems clear that the measurement error in the test
score is key element to matching the moments.
      As is clear the fit column, the noise in the test score plays a very prominent role in the analysis. Not surprisingly,
the noise has a large influence on the mismatch rates and on the logistic regressions of education on the test score.
Without the noise in the score, the model does not come close to matching those regression coefficients.
      The deterioration in the fit from eliminating the taste shocks is minimal. This is consistent with the small


                                                             19
5.3    Baseline Results                                                                                           5         ESTIMATION


                                            Table 4: Moments: Data and Simulated


                              college    under-match  over-match   α0      α1                   ν1        ν2          fit
                                                        Data
                Germany       0.373          0.104       0.062   -0.720 1.160                 0.235     0.144         na
                  Italy       0.230          0.146       0.069   -1.510 0.890                 0.132     0.071         na
                 Japan        0.597          0.078       0.108   0.230 0.860                  0.184     0.111         na
                   US         0.455          0.055       0.045   -0.360 1.510                 0.279     0.149         na
                                                       Baseline
                Germany       0.345          0.104       0.087   -0.715 1.161                 0.225     0.143     0.002
                  Italy       0.209          0.143       0.079   -1.507 0.891                 0.135     0.065     0.001
                 Japan        0.548          0.082       0.122   0.240 0.860                  0.189     0.103     0.003
                   US         0.414          0.068       0.075   -0.353 1.512                 0.261     0.153     0.003
                                           Estimated No Taste Shocks: ε̄ = 0
                  Ger.        0.345          0.104       0.086   -0.714 1.162                 0.225     0.142     0.002
                   It.        0.209          0.143       0.079   -1.507 0.891                 0.135     0.064     0.001
                  Jap.        0.548          0.082       0.122   0.241 0.860                  0.189     0.103     0.003
                   US         0.414          0.068       0.075   -0.352 1.512                 0.261     0.152     0.003

              This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models.


elasticities with respect to ε̄ reported in Table 5. This does not mean that in general the taste shocks do not matter.
At other points in parameter space, variations in ε̄ can have large effects on moments. In particular, the taste shock
can produce mismatch. But this is not the case at the estimated values.

                                                Table 5: Elasticities of Moments


                  parameter      college    under-match       over-match         α0         α1         ν1          ν2
                      φ          -0.591         2.555           -0.107         -5.325     -1.587     -1.245     -1.819
                      ε̄         -0.000         0.003           -0.001         -0.005     -0.003     -0.000      0.001
                      σ           0.000         1.576            0.565         -0.920     -1.145     -0.353     -0.457
                     h(ē)        3.685        -1.498            4.710        -70.420     -1.843     0.269      1.603
                      b̄          0.000         0.000            0.000         0.000       0.000     0.000      0.000
              This table reports elasticities of moments with respect to parameters for the Baseline model, US estimates.


      Given these results on the apparent irrelevance of the taste shock, the model was re-estimated with the restriction
of ε̄ = 0. The results appear in Tables 3 and 4 in the “Estimated No Taste Shocks: ε̄ = 0” block. Clearly, these
estimates and moments are quantitatively very close to the baseline results indicating that taste shocks are adding
almost nothing to the baseline model.
      Shutting down the return to education has the expected affect of reducing the college rates in all countries except
for Germany and Italy, where h(ē) was estimated to be less than unity. Interestingly, this reduces the under-match
rate a little in Italy and increases the over-match rate significantly.
      Returning to the sources of mismatch. From the results in Table 6, it is clear that the estimated model points to
the measurement error in the test score as the source of mismatch. To be clear, the role of the test is solely through
its use in predicting the likelihood of college, both in the actual and simulated data sets. The score is not used by
agents in making the education decision. We return to this below.



                                                                  20
5.3    Baseline Results                                                                                            5     ESTIMATION


                                              Table 6: Moments from Perturbations


                           college    under-match  over-match      α0     α1                     ν1       ν2           fit
                                                    Baseline
             Germany        0.345         0.104       0.087      -0.715  1.161                 0.225    0.143       0.002
               Italy        0.209         0.143       0.079      -1.507  0.891                 0.135    0.065       0.001
              Japan         0.548         0.082       0.122       0.240  0.860                 0.189    0.103       0.003
                US          0.414         0.068       0.075      -0.353  1.512                 0.261    0.153       0.003
                                         Simulated No Taste Shocks: ε̄ = 0
                Ger.        0.343         0.103       0.086      -0.724  1.175                 0.226    0.142       0.002
                 It.        0.209         0.143       0.079      -1.509  0.892                 0.135    0.064       0.001
                Jap.        0.547         0.082       0.122       0.237  0.859                 0.189    0.103       0.003
                 US         0.413         0.068       0.075      -0.354  1.516                 0.262    0.153       0.003
                                                 No Noise: σ = 0
                Ger.        0.345         0.000       0.000       4.466 46.215                 0.302    0.217     2056.900
                Italy       0.209         0.002       0.000      -9.074 46.242                 0.255    0.174     2114.073
                Jap.        0.548         0.000       0.000      24.699 66.936                 0.293    0.195     4964.765
                 US         0.414         0.000       0.000      18.079 96.689                 0.326    0.217     9398.981
                                                No Return: h(ē) = 1
                Ger.        0.602         0.089       0.143       0.478  0.816                 0.250    0.189       1.616
                Italy       0.512         0.124       0.145       0.055  0.532                 0.173    0.111       2.667
                Jap.        0.231         0.111       0.046      -1.520  1.363                 0.158    0.059       3.458
                 US         0.349         0.074       0.058      -0.723  1.667                 0.253    0.140       0.169

              This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models for large variations in parameters.


5.3.2     Borrowing Constraints

One of the key features of the model is the possibility that mismatch reflects capital market imperfections. This
section builds upon the baseline and considers the role of these frictions in matching the moments. It adds the
parameter b̄ to the estimation. For this exercise, assume u(c) = ln(c).35
      For this analysis, outside wealth of the household was set to zero. If anything, this restriction will lead to an
overstatement of the affects of capital market imperfections.
      The panels of Tables 3 and 7 labeled “BC” present results for the estimation in which borrowing constraints were
allowed. These are results for the four countries. Comparable results for all countries are reported in Tables A1 and
A3.36
      The results are striking: the estimates and moments with endogenous borrowing constraints are
identical to those without them. That is, the estimation selects a level of the borrowing constraint such that it is
not binding. In contrast to the a priori reasoning, capital market frictions are not needed to produce under-matching.
      To be clear, this is not to say that borrowing is irrelevant. The panels labeled “No Borrowing” report simulation
results when b̄ = 0 is imposed. From Table 4, the fit is considerably worse than the baseline. The borrowing restriction
reduces the college rate and produces much more mismatch, particularly through under-matching. Clearly borrowing
is not irrelevant.
      One concern with this finding is that perhaps the estimation procedure would not find a binding borrowing
   35 Allowing more risk aversion would increase the costs of a binding borrowing constraint. But, as seen below, the borrowing constraint

is estimated to be non-binding and so the choice of risk aversion is not pertinent.
   36 These estimates were obtained from many different starting values, including setting b̄ = 0.




                                                                   21
5.4    All Countries                                                                                          5         ESTIMATION


                            Table 7: Moments with Borrowing Constraints: Data and Simulated


                              college    under-match     over-match    α0           α1       ν1       ν2          fit
                                                          Baseline
                Germany        0.345         0.104          0.087    -0.715       1.161    0.225     0.143    0.002
                  Italy        0.209         0.143          0.079    -1.507       0.891    0.135     0.065    0.001
                 Japan         0.548         0.082          0.122    0.240        0.860    0.189     0.103    0.003
                   US          0.414         0.068          0.075    -0.353       1.512    0.261     0.153    0.003
                                                             BC
                Germany        0.345         0.104          0.087    -0.715       1.161    0.225     0.143    0.002
                   It.         0.209         0.143          0.079    -1.507       0.891    0.135     0.065    0.001
                 Japan         0.548         0.082          0.122    0.240        0.860    0.189     0.103    0.003
                  US           0.414         0.068          0.075    -0.353       1.512    0.261     0.153    0.003
                                                        No Borrowing
                  Ger.         0.139         0.133          0.025    -2.451       1.852    0.217     0.089     3.534
                  Italy        0.030         0.180          0.005    -5.101       1.998    0.094     0.018    14.176
                  Jap.         0.370         0.094          0.082    -0.612       1.082    0.200     0.081     0.812
                   US          0.328         0.077          0.053    -0.856       1.717    0.264     0.136     0.306

                This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models. The “No Borrowing” treatment
                uses the baseline parameter estimates but sets the borrowing limit to zero.


constraint even if it was present: i.e. can we identify b̄ when borrowing constraints are present?37 To study this, we
simulated data with a binding borrowing constraint. The same set of moments was calculated from the simulated
data and used in an estimation exercise. Trying multiple initial guesses of the parameters, the estimation exercise
did uncover the binding borrowing constraint when it was present.


5.4      All Countries
This discussion focuses largely on the four key countries. But, to be clear, Tables A1 , A3 and A4 show that our
principal results hold for all of the 21 countries. That is: (i) there is no evidence of a binding borrowing constraint,
(ii) the ability of the model to fit the data moments depends crucially on the presence of noisy test scores and (iii)
taste shocks add very little.
      As noted earlier, there are interesting correlations across countries between education rates and mismatch. As
seem in Table 8, countries with higher education rates tend to also have higher over-match and lower under-match
rates. These same patterns are seen in the simulated data from the estimated model.
      Looking across countries, one of the most important factors influencing education rates is the return to college,
h(ē). As indicated by the bottom panel in Table 8, from the simulated data, cross-country variations in the estimated
value of h(ē) are positively correlated with the education rate and the over-match rate and negatively correlated
with the under-match rate.
 37 Thanks   to Immo Schott for suggesting this exercise.




                                                                 22
                                                                                                                    6   ROBUSTNESS


                                              Table 8: Cross-Country Correlations


                                            correlation     actual data     simulated data
                                           (ed., under)        -0.65             -0.62
                                            (ed., over)        0.73              0.77
                                             (h(ē), ed)        na               0.90
                                          (h(ē), under)        na               -0.75
                                           (h(ē), over)        na               0.53

                      This table reports cross-country correlations from actual and simulated data. Here “ed.” is
                      the education rate, “under” is the under-match rate and “over” is the over-match rate.


6       Robustness
This section considers various alternative specifications to inspect the robustness of our findings. This includes
looking at other moments of the data. Throughout, the presentation focuses on the role of borrowing constraints
and the contributions of the taste shocks and the noise in test score. The tables for these exercises are in the text for
the four main countries and in the Appendix for all countries. Though the parameter estimates respond to changes
in the moments, the conclusions regarding the insignificance of borrowing constraints and the taste shocks remain
intact.38


6.1      Isolating Ability
The baseline results rely on a framework in which the PIACC score proxies for ability which in turn influences the
college choice. In the model, the test score itself is independent of education attainment and work experience.
    Here we discuss three ways to isolate ability in the PIACC score. The first limits the data to a younger cohort.
The second adds regressors and produces a conditional PIACC score used in the logistic regression. The third looks
at a sample from the US in which the ability measure precedes college attainment. For all cases, we find that our
results hold: mismatch reflects noise in the measurement of ability and not borrowing constraints nor taste shocks.


6.1.1      Young Cohort

The baseline results are for individuals aged 25-39. Pooling across cohorts generates a benefit of providing a large
sample. But, particularly for older individuals, the PIACC test results may be far removed from their measured
ability at the time of their college choice.
    Here, we restrict attention to a sub-sample with individuals aged 25-29. The estimates and moments are reported
in Tables 9 and 10 respectively. For this exercise, the ν1 and ν2 coefficients are the same as in the baseline.39
    Many features of the baseline results remain. First, the fit is about the same despite the difference in the cohort.
In fact, the fit is slightly better for Italy and a bit worse for the US. Second, estimating an endogenous borrowing
constraint does not improve the fit: the estimated constraint does not bind. Third, the noise in the test score matters
a lot for the fit of the model, the taste shocks matter little.
 38 With   respect to the taste shocks, they do play a larger role when they are linked to parent’s education.
 39 We   do not have access to the restricted PIACC data necessary to estimate these parameters for this young cohort.




                                                                  23
6.1    Isolating Ability                                                                                        6     ROBUSTNESS


                                        Table 9: Young Cohort: Parameter Estimates


                                                   abil      ε̄     σ    h(ē)           b̄
                                                             Young Baseline
                                          Ger.    2.085    0.019 2.536 0.703             na
                                           It.    2.844    1.195 1.646 0.761             na
                                          Jap.    4.296    0.678 0.484 1.244             na
                                           US     3.157    0.556 0.603 1.068             na
                                                                Young, BC
                                          Ger.    2.085    0.020 2.536 0.703           6.788
                                           It.    2.850    1.284 1.638 0.762           2.978
                                          Jap.    4.301    0.563 0.484 1.244           3.074
                                           US     3.139    0.252 0.611 1.066           6.196

                             This table reports estimates from a sub-sample of 25-29 year olds.

                                           Table 10: Young Cohort: Data Moments


                   college    under-match        over-match        α0           α1            ν1    ν2              fit
                                                      Data
            Ger.    0.332         0.146             0.072        -0.840       0.880      0.235     0.144            na
             It.    0.241         0.147             0.096        -1.310       0.800      0.132     0.071            na
            Jap.    0.621         0.104             0.115         0.370       0.860      0.184     0.111            na
             US     0.474         0.070             0.044        -0.300       1.400      0.279     0.149            na
                                                    Baseline
            Ger.    0.316         0.131             0.108        -0.836       0.884      0.213     0.137        0.002
             It.    0.236         0.143             0.091        -1.309       0.800      0.136     0.067        0.000
            Jap.    0.578         0.077             0.127         0.379       0.857      0.190     0.108        0.003
             US     0.427         0.070             0.082        -0.289       1.403      0.258     0.151        0.004
                                                 No Noise; σ    =0
            Ger.    0.316         0.000             0.000       421.804     5947.227     0.295     0.206     35537671.469
             It.    0.236         0.000             0.000        -4.642      37.289      0.266     0.182       1342.616
            Jap.    0.578         0.000             0.000        18.108      44.933      0.290     0.196       2257.142
             US     0.427         0.000             0.000        17.674      86.497      0.327     0.219       7564.661

              This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models for the young cohort.


      Given that the college decision of the young cohort is closer to the time of their PIACC exam, one might expect
there to be less noise in the score, i.e. σ to be lower. Comparing the estimates with the young cohort against the
baseline, the opposite seems to be the case. This can be traced to the logistic regression results where the coefficient
on the test score for the young cohort is smaller for all countries (only slightly so for Italy) compared to the baseline.
This is indicative of more noise in the score.
      Further, compared to the baseline, the (unconditional) returns to education is lower for all countries but Italy.
Still the order remains the same.


6.1.2     Inferred Ability

Beyond ability, there are a number of factors such as labor market experience, parent’s education, gender, etc. that
impact an individual’s PIACC score. These effects are not in the model. To offset them, the test score in the data


                                                                  24
6.1    Isolating Ability                                                                                           6   ROBUSTNESS


was regressed on a set of covariates.
      Specially, this regression was estimated at the individual level in each country:


                               numi = Γ0 + Γ1 ∗ agei + Γ2 ∗ genderi + Γ3 ∗ P arent0 sEdi + θ̃i                                (22)


The residual, θ̃i , is a proxy for ability and is used in (5) to produce a new set of logit regression coefficients, (α0 , α1 )
as well as revised measures of under- and over-matching from the data.
      Using these moments, Tables 11 and 12 present the parameter estimates and simulated moments. The estimates
for this case differ from the baseline estimates. The ordering of countries by ability, φ, noise in the test score σ and
the returns to college, h(ē), remain the same.

                                        Table 11: Inferred Ability: Parameter Estimates


                                                      φ       ε̄    σ     h(ē)  b̄
                                                       Inferred Ability Baseline
                                            Ger.    2.252 1.693 1.949 0.752 na
                                             It.    2.592 2.795 2.144 0.683 na
                                            Jap.    3.812 0.534 0.685 1.206 na
                                             US     2.839 0.609 0.815 1.026 na
                                                     Estimated: No Taste Shocks
                                            Ger.    2.229    0.0  2.019 0.749 na
                                             It.    2.588    0.0  2.172 0.687 na
                                            Jap.    3.811    0.0  0.683 1.206 na
                                             US     2.793    0.0  0.845 1.021 na

               This table reports parameter estimates for the baseline for the four leading countries using the residual of
               (22) as a measure of ability in the logistic regression instead of the PIACC numeracy score.


      Though not shown in the tables, allowing a borrowing constraint did not alter the simulated moments. Further,
eliminating the noise in the test score led, once again, to a large deterioration in the fit. Finally, the model was
reestimating with no taste shocks, i.e. ε̄ = 0. As indicated in the blocks “Estimated: No Taste Shocks”, the simulated
moments and thus the fit of the model is almost identical to the baseline with inferred ability.


6.1.3     US Data: NLSY 1997

In this section of the paper we report estimates of the model using data from the National Longitudinal Study of
Youth 1997 (NLSY97). The value added of this exercise comes from the inclusion in the data of an ASVAB score,
which we use as a proxy for ability, that individuals took prior to their college years.40 Thus concerns about the
PIACC score reflecting the accumulation of human capital during college and after are mitigated. Our findings about
the noisy test score being the main source of mismatch remains.
      The individuals in the sample were between 12 and 16 at the end of 1996.41 The sample has 8,894 observations.
Individuals were between 28 and 32 years old in 2012 when the moments for the estimation were collected.42
  40 The ASVAB measures the respondents knowledge and skills in 12 components (detailed in NLSY97 Userss Guidebook p.82), including

math and reading comprehension as measured in SAT or ACT. Individuals in the sample were between 13 and 17 years old when they
took the ASVAB.
  41 For a full discussion of the data see http://www.bls.gov/nls/nlsy97.htm.
  42 The regressions for the two wage regressions are from the PIACC sample not from the NLSY97.




                                                                   25
6.2    Controlling for Parents’ Education                                                                    6      ROBUSTNESS


                                 Table 12: Inferred Ability: Data and Simulated Moments


                      college    under-match over-match      α0     α1                    ν1       ν2         fit
                                          Data: Inferred Ability
              Ger.    0.373         0.123        0.078     -0.749  0.908                 0.235    0.144       na
               It.    0.230         0.154        0.072      -1.50  0.780                 0.132    0.071       na
              Jap.    0.597         0.094        0.125     0.207  0.747                  0.184    0.111       na
               US     0.455         0.085        0.061     -0.359  1.253                 0.279    0.149       na
                                           Simulated Moments
              Ger.    0.336         0.123        0.106     -0.739  0.912                 0.216    0.139      0.003
               It.    0.205         0.150        0.090     -1.495  0.782                 0.132    0.066      0.001
              Jap.    0.546         0.094        0.130     0.218  0.746                  0.188    0.106      0.003
               US     0.415         0.082        0.090     -0.352  1.255                 0.261    0.155      0.003
                                                No Noise
              Ger.    0.241         0.000        0.000     -3.391 42.304                 0.270    0.188     1720.663
               It.    0.379         0.000        0.000     0.552  8.501                  0.195    0.128      63.881
              Jap.    0.507         0.000        0.000    39.405 125.454                 0.307    0.205    17088.314
               US     0.164         0.043        0.000    -30.301 51.685                 0.189    0.099     3440.030
                                       Estimated: No Taste Shocks
              Ger.    0.336         0.124        0.106     -0.741  0.912                 0.217    0.138      0.003
               It.    0.205         0.150        0.090     -1.497  0.783                 0.132    0.065      0.001
              Jap.    0.546         0.094        0.130     0.218  0.746                  0.188    0.106      0.003
               US     0.415         0.083        0.090     -0.352  1.254                 0.263    0.157      0.003

              This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models using the residual of (22) as a
              measure of ability in the logistic regression instead of the PIACC numeracy score.

                                      Table 13: NLSY97: Moments: Data and Simulated


                            college    under-match     over-match        α0       α1        ν1       ν2       fit
                                                          1997
                Data          0.306       0.097           0.036        -0.884    1.139    0.279    0.149      na
               Baseline       0.313       0.114           0.087        -0.884    1.145    0.244    0.141    0.0042
                 BC           0.312       0.114           0.087        -0.884    1.145    0.244    0.141    0.0042
                     This table reports data from NLSY97 and simulated moments for the estimated models.


      Table 13 presents the moments for the sample. Compared to the moments for the US sample from the PIACC
data, reported in Table 4, the NLSY97 sample has a lower education rate, a higher under-match rate and a lower
over-match rate.43 The response of the education decision to the test score is lower in the NLSY97 sample.
      Table 14 reports the parameter estimates. Compared to the estimates from the PIACC sample, the estimate of
φ is smaller, there is considerably more noise in the test score (i.e. the estimate of σ is higher) and the return to
education is lower. These parameter differences are consistent with the lower education rate in the NLSY97 sample
as well as the lower response of the education choice to the test score. Though larger, the estimated variability of
the taste shock remains irrelevant for the moments: i.e. setting ε̄ = 0 does not change the fit of the model.




                                                                26
6.2    Controlling for Parents’ Education                                                                        6   ROBUSTNESS


                                             Table 14: NLSY: Parameter Estimates


                                                   abil        ε̄           σ      h(ē)          bbar
                                                                         1997
                                    Baseline     2.3446     1.6495       1.5158   0.8500            na
                                      BC         2.3446     1.6495       1.5158   0.8500          19.997
                      This table reports parameter estimates using moments from the NLSY97.

                                Table 15: Adding Parental Education: Parameter Estimates


                                                   abil       ε̄   σ     h(ē)               b̄
                                                                Baseline
                                          Ger.    2.509    5.588 1.309 0.799                na
                                           It.    4.163    6.442 0.635 0.942                na
                                          Jap.    4.091    3.146 0.572 1.225                na
                                           US     3.114    3.439 0.619 1.055                na
                                                                  BC
                                          Ger.    2.504    5.617 1.316 0.798               2.946
                                           It.    4.163    6.442 0.635 0.942               3.062
                                          Jap.    4.091    3.146 0.572 1.225               2.622
                                           US     3.114    3.439 0.619 1.055               4.520

               This table reports parameter estimated for the models with Parental Education and the taste shock equated.


6.2      Controlling for Parents’ Education
The data includes very little additional information except parent’s education. There is no direct counterpart in the
model. But it is natural to associate the taste for education with parental education.44
      The implications of doing so are explored by making two adjustments to the baseline specification. First, the
logistic regression includes parental education with a coefficient α2 . Second, when the logistic regression is run on
the simulated data, the realized taste shock is used as a proxy for parental education. Thus an additional moment,
the regression coefficient on parent’s education from the logistic regression, is added.
      The estimation and moments are reported in Tables 15 and 16. The parameter estimates are quite different from
the baseline. Matching the regression coefficient α2 evidently requires much more variability in the taste shock than
estimated in the baseline model.
      The fit of the model, with the exception of Italy, remains quite good. This is particularly true for the regression
coefficients, including the new moments. For Italy, this specification is unable to match the low college rate. This
was not the case for the baseline. Also, there is more mismatch for Germany, Italy and the US in the simulated
model relative to the baseline.
      Still, the main results of the baseline are intact. There is no evidence of a borrowing constraint and the test noise
is very important for matching the moments. However, in this specification the taste shocks are assumed to be a
proxy for the effect of parent’s education. So, the taste shocks play a larger role. As seen in Table 16, the fit worsens
 43 These  differences in moments may reflect differences in the age of the sample and in the sampling structure.
 44 As  suggested to us by Eric Hanushek, another exercise would allow parental education to also impact the return to education and
not just tastes alone. Here we focus on the effect of parent’s education on tastes in an attempt to generate a more prominent role for
tastes and hence mismatch in our estimation.



                                                                    27
6.3    Distribution of Taste Shocks                                                                                  6    ROBUSTNESS


                                 Table 16: Parental Education Moments: Data and Simulated


                     college     under-match       over-match     α0            α1        α2        ν1          ν2        fit
                                                          Data
             Ger.     0.373          0.101            0.042    -1.200         1.030      1.120    0.235    0.144          na
              It.     0.230          0.131            0.053    -1.730         0.860      1.970    0.132    0.071          na
             Jap.     0.597          0.064            0.086    -0.270         0.800      1.310    0.184    0.111          na
              US      0.455          0.049            0.026    -0.760         1.390      0.890    0.279    0.149          na
                                                        Baseline
             Ger.     0.366          0.101            0.065    -1.198         1.033      1.121    0.219    0.150         0.001
              It.     0.358          0.097            0.033    -1.753         0.856      1.955    0.129    0.081         0.019
             Jap.     0.577          0.072            0.096    -0.266         0.800      1.313    0.184    0.110         0.001
              US      0.426          0.069            0.069    -0.754         1.394      0.893    0.257    0.155         0.004
                                                     No Taste; ε̄ = 0
             Ger.     0.344          0.109            0.091    -0.717         1.084      0.000    0.221    0.139         1.494
              It.     0.291          0.115            0.076    -1.038         1.008      0.000    0.135    0.060         4.386
             Jap.     0.556          0.086            0.128     0.269         0.798      0.000    0.187    0.104         2.011
              US      0.416          0.071            0.079    -0.346         1.428      0.000    0.258    0.150         0.970
                                                    No Noise; σ = 0
             Ger.     0.366          0.000            0.000    -1.140         24.397     6.585    0.302    0.230     575.896
              It.     0.358          0.001            0.000    -3.930          7.774     6.404    0.226    0.179      72.360
             Jap.     0.577          0.000            0.000     4.481         20.753     6.325    0.293    0.206     445.884
              US      0.426          0.000            0.000     2.174         29.026     6.356    0.326    0.223     802.258

               This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models with Parental Education and the
               taste shock equated.


if the taste shocks are removed since α2 = 0 must hold in the simulated data.
      According to Brunello and Checchi (2007) and Dustmann (2004), education attainment is more dependent on
parental education in high early tracking countries. Evidently, parental intervention on teacher’s recommendation
can influence the choice of tracking and this effect seems more potent for more highly educated parents. In our
estimates, the education decision does seem particularly sensitive to parental education in Italy, but not excessively
in Germany.


6.3       Distribution of Taste Shocks
The baseline model restricts taste shocks to be uniformly distributed on a bounded interval while the test noise is
not bounded. It might be that this restriction is the source of the prominent role of noisy test scores for our results.
Here we explore our findings by allowing tastes to be normally distributed with a mean of zero.45
      The results of the new estimation are reported in Tables 17 and 18. The estimates, except for ε̄, are similar
across countries to the baseline estimates. The fit of this model is about the same as the baseline. Further, there is
no evidence of capital market imperfections, as indicated by the “BC” estimates and moments being so close to the
baseline. The noisy signal remains critical to our results.46
      As another gauge of the relative importance of taste relative to test scores as a source of variation, the model was
re-estimated using the normally distribution taste shocks assuming no noise in test scores. The results are reported
 45 Martin   Hackmann and Jonathan Eaton drew our attention to this point.
 46 The   other cases of no taste shocks and no return to education are not shown in the interest of brevity.



                                                                    28
6.4   Alternative Measures of MisMatch                                                                      6      ROBUSTNESS


                                        Table 17: Normal Taste Shocks: Moments


                      college   under-match       over-match    α0     α1                ν1      ν2         fit
                                                            Baseline
              Ger.    0.345         0.104             0.087   -0.714  1.161            0.227   0.145      0.002
               It.    0.209         0.143             0.080   -1.507  0.891            0.135   0.065      0.001
              Jap.    0.548         0.082             0.122    0.240  0.861            0.189   0.104      0.003
               US     0.413         0.068             0.075   -0.353  1.512            0.261   0.153      0.003
                                                    Simulated No Noise: σ = 0
              Ger.    0.345         0.000             0.000    2.825 30.150            0.302   0.218     853.014
               It.    0.209         0.005             0.000   -6.006 30.145            0.255   0.174    876.097
              Jap.    0.548         0.000             0.000   16.100 43.727            0.292   0.195    2089.503
               US     0.413         0.000             0.000   15.908 85.188            0.326   0.217    7266.602
                                                    Estimated No Noise: σ = 0
              Ger.    0.328         0.108             0.104   -0.713  1.162            0.179   0.180      0.008
               It.    0.200         0.138             0.088   -1.505  0.893            0.086   0.093      0.004
              Jap.    0.541         0.097             0.148    0.242  0.852            0.206   0.158      0.008
               US     0.393         0.078             0.094   -0.349  1.514            0.219   0.174      0.011

            This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models allowing normal taste shocks.


in Tables 17 and 18 in the block labeled “Estimated No Noise: σ = 0”. The fit is worse for all of the models though
clearly this specification captures much of the variation in the data captured by these moments. We return to this
specification in our discussion of output losses due to mismatch.

                                 Table 18: Normal Taste Shocks: Parameter Estimates


                                                φ        ε̄        σ    h(ē)   b̄
                                                      Normal    Taste Shocks
                                      Ger.    2.524    1.196     1.203 0.799   na
                                       It.    2.842    0.806     1.577 0.729   na
                                      Jap.    4.255    0.399     0.506 1.227   na
                                       US     3.139    0.323     0.581 1.056   na
                                                                 BC
                                      Ger.    2.524 1.196        1.203 0.799 3.713
                                       It.    2.842 0.806        1.577 0.729 3.696
                                      Jap.    4.255 0.399        0.506 1.227 4.216
                                       US     3.139 0.323        0.581 1.056 3.053
                                                 Estimated      No Noise: σ == 0
                                      Ger.    3.663 11.212         0   0.739   na
                                       It.    5.447 8.815          0   0.751   na
                                      Jap.    5.016 11.995         0   1.235   na
                                       US     4.292 8.757          0   1.019   na
            This table reports parameter estimates for models allowing normal taste shocks.




6.4    Alternative Measures of MisMatch
The results presented thus far rest on a particular view of the tails of the distributions of ability by education. Under-
match rates were calculated as the fraction of those obtaining a predicted value of college attendance over 80% who


                                                               29
                                                                                            7    ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURES


                                  Table 19: Additional Moments: Parameter Estimates


                                                   φ        ε̄    σ          h(ē)     b̄
                                                              Baseline
                                         Ger.    2.690    1.096 1.054        0.823    na
                                          It.    3.077    6.801 1.230        0.730    na
                                         Jap.    4.267    0.370 0.507        1.228    na
                                          US     3.309    0.394 0.530        1.072    na

            This table reports parameter estimates for a specification with additional moments.


did not go to college. Over-match rates were calculating using a cut-off of below 20% probability of attaining college.
These same cut-offs are used in the structural estimation.
    It is useful to study the robustness of our findings to alternative cut-off values. To do so, we re-estimated the
models for the four countries using under-matching (over-matching) cut-off values of 90% (10%) and 95% (5%). The
estimates and moments are presented in Tables 19 and 20. The main results about the irrelevance of the borrowing
constraint and the prominent role of noise in the test score remain.

                                  Table 20: Additional Moments: Data and Simulated


            col.   u(80)     u(90)    u(75)     o(20) o(10) o(25)            α0             α1      ν1      ν2           fit
                                                     Data
    Ger.   0.373    0.104    0.043    0.138     0.062 0.022 0.082          -0.720      1.160       0.235   0.144         na
     It.   0.230    0.146    0.069    0.192     0.069 0.016 0.100          -1.510      0.890       0.132   0.071         na
    Jap.   0.597    0.078    0.034    0.106     0.108 0.052 0.149           0.230      0.860       0.184   0.111         na
     US    0.455    0.055    0.022    0.076     0.045 0.007 0.065          -0.360      1.510       0.279   0.149         na
                                                   Baseline
    Ger.   0.346    0.101    0.030    0.144     0.084 0.034 0.113          -0.714      1.166       0.218   0.136        0.003
     It.   0.209    0.142    0.057    0.188     0.082 0.034 0.112          -1.510      0.894       0.126   0.070        0.001
    Jap.   0.548    0.082    0.022    0.119     0.122 0.054 0.160           0.240      0.861       0.188   0.103        0.003
     US    0.414    0.066    0.013    0.101     0.074 0.030 0.100          -0.352      1.515       0.254   0.145        0.006
                                                No Noise σ = 0
    Ger.   0.346    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.000 0.000 0.000           4.789      49.804      0.298   0.215    2396.643
     It.   0.209    0.049    0.002    0.088     0.000 0.000 0.000          -1.870      5.748       0.230   0.174     23.791
    Jap.   0.548    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.000 0.000 0.000          30.666      82.957      0.292   0.195    7666.281
     US    0.414    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.000 0.000 0.000          20.952     111.364      0.320   0.211    12522.175

            This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models using different measures of under-
            and over-match.




7     Alternative Structures
The analysis and estimation is based upon a particular structural model. The inferences are conditional on that
structure. In particular, the model assumes: (i) agents decide on education knowing their ability and (ii) educational
attainment has no influence on the test score. This section relaxes those parts of the structure and re-estimates the
model. Our findings about the irrelevance of borrowing constraints and the role of taste shocks remain.



                                                                 30
7.1    Decisions under Imperfect Information                                                    7        ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURES


7.1       Decisions under Imperfect Information

                                      Table 21: Imperfect Information: Parameter Estimates


                                                    φ      ε̄    σt     σd    h(ē)                 b̄
                                                  Baseline: Imperfect Information
                                          Ger.    2.532 1.370 1.194 0.188 0.798                     na
                                           It.    2.832 1.171 1.583 0.167 0.728                     na
                                          Jap.    4.189 0.544 0.508 0.175 1.196                     na
                                           US     3.095 0.503 0.590 0.230 1.037                     na
                                                      No Noise in Test: σt == 0
                                          Ger.    3.906 6.225    0     0.628 0.836                  na
                                           It.    6.195 2.075    0     0.553 1.007                  na
                                          Jap.    6.452 2.230    0     0.494 1.204                  na
                                           US     4.353 0.558    0     1.264 1.069                  na
                        This table reports parameter estimates for models allowing a noisy signal of ability to influ-
                        ence the education choice.


      As an alternative to the maintained assumption that agents make education decisions knowing their true ability,
suppose the choice of education itself reflects imperfect information on ability. This might, for example, be more
likely in education systems like Germany and Italy with early tracking, a point we return to below.
      A risk neutral household makes an education choice by comparing expected lifetime income with and without
higher education. At the time of the education decision, the household receives a signal about true ability. Thus
there are two sources of noise in the model: the signal at the time of the education decision, parameterized by σd , and
the noisy test result, parameterized by σt . As in the baseline model, the noisy test score does not directly influence
the education decision.
      Given these two sources of noise, the same estimation procedure as in the baseline model is followed. The
parameter estimates are given in Table 21 and the moments in Table 22.
      The parameter estimates are remarkably close to the baseline, reported in Table 3, including the noise in the test
score, now denoted σt . For Germany and Italy, the estimated noise in the decision is about 10% of the noise in the
test. For, Japan and the US, the noise in the decision plays a larger role relative to the test score. From Table 22,
the treatment that eliminates the taste shocks entirely does not influence the results.47
      To isolate the role of uncertainty in the test score, there is another treatment in which the test score noise is set
to zero and the noise in the decision is estimated, “Estimated No Test Shock: σt = 0”. The estimates of the noise in
the signal for the education decision is much larger, as is the taste shock. The fit is not quite as good as the baseline,
indicating that the noise in the test score does contribute to the fit of the model. Once again, though Germany and
Italy are viewed as having systems with early tracking, the estimated noise in the decision alone is not obviously
larger for those countries relative to, say, the US. This estimated model does produce asymmetry in mismatch, with
the under-match rate higher in Italy and (modestly) in Germany compared to the over-match rate.
      A model of education decisions under uncertainty is likely to fit better those institutional settings, such as
Germany, in which the education decision is made at a relatively early age and is an administrative choice, rather
than one made by an individual.48 Along these lines, Brunello and Checchi (2007) provides an index of tracking,
 47 As    households are risk neutral, studying the borrowing constraint is not of interest.
 48 See    Döbert (2015) for a recent discussion of tracking in Germany.


                                                                      31
7.2    Reverse Causality: Allowing the Test Score to Depend on Education                 7   ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURES


                                           Table 22: Imperfect Information: Moments


                            college    under-match over-match     α0     α1    ν1                  ν2       fit
                                                Baseline: Imperfect Information
                   Ger.     0.345         0.104        0.087    -0.715 1.162 0.226               0.145    0.002
                    It.     0.209         0.143        0.079    -1.507 0.891 0.135               0.065    0.001
                   Jap.     0.548         0.081        0.123    0.240 0.859 0.189                0.108    0.003
                    US      0.413         0.069        0.076    -0.353 1.512 0.262               0.157    0.003
                                                     No Taste Shock: ε̄ = 0
                   Ger.     0.343         0.104        0.086    -0.725 1.177 0.226               0.144    0.002
                    It.     0.209         0.143        0.079    -1.511 0.894 0.136               0.065    0.001
                   Jap.     0.547         0.081        0.123    0.239 0.862 0.189                0.108    0.003
                    US      0.413         0.069        0.076    -0.355 1.514 0.262               0.157    0.003
                                               Estimated No Noise in Test: σt = 0
                   Ger.     0.329         0.110        0.106    -0.710 1.162 0.190               0.175    0.007
                    It.     0.201         0.139        0.088    -1.505 0.891 0.115               0.084    0.002
                   Jap.     0.541         0.093        0.151    0.242 0.861 0.170                0.127    0.006
                    US      0.392         0.077        0.101    -0.351 1.516 0.229               0.176    0.011

                      This table reports data and simulated moments for the estimated models allowing a noisy
                      signal of ability to influence the education choice.


indicating the extent to which countries make an early assignment of students to a college path or not. So, in
Germany the index is relatively large, it is smaller in Italy and zero in the US. The correlation of that index with
our measure of mismatch is 0.128, the correlation with the under-match rate is 0.581 and the correlation with the
over-match rate is −0.413. So in countries where tracking is more extensive there is more mismatch, due to more
under-matching. Interestingly, the effect is not symmetric as over-matching is negatively correlated with the measure
of tracking. This is consistent with the over-match rate exceeding the under-match rate for both Germany and Italy.
      Thus for these countries one might have conjectured that σd would be larger, at least relative to the noise in
the test score. This is not the case. Apparently early tracking does not generate excessive noise in the educational
choice.
      These findings are consistent with those reported in Dustmann, Puhani, and Schönberg (2014), who also find,
using a very different methodology, no significant long-term effects of tracking in Germany on labor market outcomes.
They attribute this to ex post flexibility in the German system. In our model, these finding would imply that early
tracking would not necessarily generate mismatch.


7.2       Reverse Causality: Allowing the Test Score to Depend on Education
The logistic regression used to estimate the response of the education decision to ability, (5), provides two moments
that are central to the estimation. As noted earlier, this regression per se does not impose any causality. The
structural model that frames the estimation gives an interpretation to that relationship: it reflects the influence of
ability on the education decision and the dependence of the test score on ability.
      The model imposes a restriction: education does not have a direct affect on the test score. In this sub-section we
relax that restriction and allow the test score to reflect both education and ability.49 We maintain the assumption
 49 Thanks   to Marc Henry for discussions on this issue.



                                                                32
                                                                                                         8   OTHER IMPLICATIONS


that the education choice of the individual also depends on a noisy measure of ability, thus building on sub-section
7.1.
    Specifically, consider an extension of (18) in which the test score depends jointly on ability and education, edi ,
where αed parameterizes this dependence:


                                                        tsi = θi + αed edi + σζi .                                                       (23)

Recall that this relationship is part of the structure of the model. As the model includes imperfect information on
ability in the education decision, the education and ability measures in (23) are not perfectly correlated.
    There are two approaches to estimate αed along with the other structural parameters. The first approach is
simply to add αed to the set of parameters. The parameter estimates for this exercise are reported in the top block
of Table 23. The associated moments are shown in Table 24.
    A second approach enlarges the set of moments to include a coefficient, denoted ξed , from a separate regression of
the test score on education in the PIACC data, by country at the individual level. As ability is not observed, it is not
possible to estimate (23). Thus, relative to (23), the regression run on the PIACC data suffers from omitted variable
bias. Nonetheless, the inclusion of ξed as an additional moment is informative about αed as the same regression is run
on both the simulated and PIACC data sets. The resulting parameter estimates are reported in the bottom block
of Table 23. The moments for this case are shown in Table 25, including the estimated dependence of the PIACC
score on education.
    The estimates and moments are quite close to those reported for the case of a noisy education decision, sub-section
7.1. Note too that our main findings of the irrelevance of both taste shocks and borrowing constraints remain. This
is true whether ξed is included as another moment or not.
    As reported in Table 25, the estimates of ξed are positive for all of the countries, indicating a positive correlation
between test scores and education. The estimates of αed reported in Table 23 are less than the estimates of ξed
reflecting omitted variable bias: i.e. the relation between the test score and education in (23) includes both ability
and education as covariates. The estimated value of αed is positive for all the countries in both treatments, except
for Italy.50 The effect of education on the test score is largest in Germany and the US.
    The moments reported in the two tables under the “BC” and “No Taste Shock” sub-sections show the role of
the borrowing constraints and taste shocks. As in our baseline case, neither the borrowing constraint nor the taste
shocks are relevant for matching the moments. Relative to the baseline estimates reported in Table 3, the ordering of
the returns to human capital accumulation is about the same, though the return in Italy is lower when ξed is added
as a moment.



8      Other Implications
This section explores other implications of the baseline model. We decompose the college premium into a selection
effect and the return to higher education, quantify the loss in output due to mismatch and study the role of education
mismatch for job mismatch.
  50 The estimate of α
                       ed in the bottom block of Table 23 for Italy is negative despite the estimate of ξed = 0.553. This reflects the omitted
variable bias in estimating of ξed in the simulated data to match the estimate in the PIACC data.


                                                                     33
8.1    Return to Schooling                                                                            8   OTHER IMPLICATIONS


                                       Table 23: Reverse Causality: Parameter Estimates


                                             φ         ε̄     σt     σd  h(ē)              αed      b̄
                                                               Baseline
                                  Ger.     2.570     0.965 1.263 0.005 0.809               0.103     na
                                  Italy    2.834     1.123 1.588 0.001 0.728               0.001     na
                                  Jap.     4.126     0.692 0.574 0.001 1.222               0.033     na
                                   US      3.167     1.730 0.706 0.019 1.061               0.179     na
                                                       ξed added as a moment
                                  Ger.     2.445     1.325 1.389 0.000 0.791               0.096     na
                                  Italy    2.455     2.275 1.814 0.002 0.661              -0.262     na
                                  Jap.     3.824     0.879 0.758 0.003 1.208               0.129     na
                                   US      3.302     0.697 0.674 0.001 1.075               0.184     na

                       This table reports parameter estimates for models allowing education to affect test scores.


8.1       Return to Schooling
Table 26 provides an exact decomposition of the college wage premium during the late working phase.51 The
compensation of an agent of ability θ who went to college is ω2 h(ē)θ while an agent not going to college receives
only ω2 . The average college wage premium is h(ē)E(θ|e = ē). The first term is the return to higher education. The
second reflects the process of selection into higher education.
      Table 26 shows the overall premium and its components by country. These are all calculated from the simulated
data. The college premium is highest in the US and lowest in Japan.52 Interestingly, these relatively small differences
in the premia mask larger differences in the returns to education and the selection by ability.
      In Italy, at one extreme, the estimated return to education is less than one. But the selection process implies
that the average ability of those going to college is much larger than those not attending. Though the return to
education is higher, the same pattern emerges in Germany. At the other extreme, the wage premium is very high in
the US but the selection on ability going to college is not as strong as in other countries.
      It is interesting that the selection effect is strongest in Germany and Italy. Again, these are the countries with
early tracking and one might have conjectured that the selection would be weaker.
      Looking across the OECD countries, Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015) report coefficient
estimates on years of schooling in a wage regression that also controls for experience and numeracy score. This does
not replicate the decomposition in Table 26. Still the estimated effects of schooling on wages in that study also finds
a relatively low return for Italy and Germany and a high return for the US. The estimated return to education in
Japan is, in the Hanushek, Schwerdt, Wiederhold, and Woessmann (2015) results, not as high as the US in contrast
to the ordering in Table 26.


8.2       Output Maximizing Allocations
In this section, we study the output cost stemming from all sources of mismatch. While some of the apparent
mismatch may be an efficient response to differences in tastes across agents, i.e. a high ability person has a strong
 51 The   premium is the same as that during the early working phase.
 52 See   Daiji and Yuko (2014) for a comparison of the college premium in the US and Japan.



                                                                   34
8.2    Output Maximizing Allocations                                                             8    OTHER IMPLICATIONS


                                           Table 24: Reverse Causality: Moments


                          college   under-match       over-match    α0     α1              ν1        ν2      fit
                                                         Baseline: Reverse
                  Ger.    0.347         0.101            0.082    -0.714 1.162           0.222    0.137    0.001
                  Italy   0.209         0.143            0.079    -1.507 0.891           0.135    0.065    0.001
                  Jap.    0.548         0.082            0.120     0.240 0.860           0.189    0.102    0.003
                   US     0.418         0.064            0.066    -0.353 1.514           0.257    0.141    0.002
                                                                 BC
                  Ger.    0.347         0.101            0.082    -0.714 1.162           0.222    0.137    0.001
                  Italy   0.209         0.143            0.079    -1.507 0.891           0.135    0.065    0.001
                  Jap.    0.548         0.082            0.120     0.240 0.860           0.189    0.102    0.003
                   US     0.418         0.064            0.066    -0.353 1.514           0.257    0.141    0.002
                                                      No Taste Shocks: ε̄ = 0
                  Ger.    0.347         0.102            0.082    -0.714 1.164           0.222    0.136    0.001
                  Italy   0.209         0.143            0.079    -1.507 0.891           0.135    0.064    0.001
                  Jap.    0.548         0.082            0.120     0.241 0.860           0.189    0.101    0.003
                   US     0.422         0.065            0.061    -0.353 1.509           0.275    0.147    0.002

                    This table reports simulated moments for the estimated models allowing education to affect
                    test scores.


dislike for college and so works after high school, this exercise provides an upper bound on the output cost of
mismatch.
      The data and estimated models produce mismatch. The estimation finds that the mismatch is largely due to
mismeasurement of ability through a noisy test score. Still taste shocks are present in some specifications and do
influence education choice. Further, as in sub-section 7.1, education decisions may be made without knowing ability.
      This section calculates the equivalent of the planner’s solution in Section 2.1 for the three phase model and
compares that outcome, measured in output net of education cost, to the outcome of two models where mismatch
is inefficient. Note that calculating the output loss relative to the baseline is not of interest since the mismatch with
those estimates is efficient.
      The first comparison is with the model of normal taste shocks and no noise in the test score presented in sub-
section 6.3. In this specification, there are taste shocks and thus measured mismatch which is taken, for the sake of
this analysis, to be all associated with inefficient schooling choices. This means that the planner bases the education
allocation ignoring taste shocks. Thus this is an upper bound on the output loss from mismatch.
      These results are in reported the block labeled “Noise in Tastes” in Table 27. For all countries, the efficient
solution produces an output gain in the first period indicating that the education rate is excessive in these countries.
This reflects the taste shock. There are also output gains in the two working periods. In Japan, for example, output
is about 3.3% higher in the second working period from the elimination of the mismatch.
      The second comparison is with the specification of noisy education decisions presented in sub-section 7.1. Here
mismatch is inefficient relative to a benchmark in which education decisions are made once ability is observed. Thus
this exercise, labeled “Imperfect Information” estimates the output loss due to the information friction. For this
case, the model has no noise in the test score, just imperfect information at the time of the education decision. In
the alternative of perfect information, the noise at the time of the education decision is removed as is the taste shock.



                                                                35
8.2    Output Maximizing Allocations                                                                8   OTHER IMPLICATIONS


                                     Table 25: Reverse Causality: Moments including ξed


                       college    under-match       over-match     α0    α1              ν1       ν2       ξed       fit
                                                              Data
              Ger.     0.373          0.104            0.062     -0.720 1.160          0.235    0.144     0.484      na
              Italy    0.230          0.146            0.069     -1.510 0.890          0.132    0.071     0.553      na
              Jap.     0.597          0.078            0.108     0.230 0.860           0.184    0.111     0.314      na
               US      0.455          0.055            0.045     -0.360 1.510          0.279    0.149     0.568      na
                                                             Baseline
              Ger.     0.346          0.104            0.085     -0.714 1.162          0.228    0.144     0.487     0.001
              Italy    0.205          0.147            0.091     -1.505 0.877          0.157    0.089     0.583     0.003
              Jap.     0.549          0.083            0.117     0.240 0.860           0.191    0.099     0.311     0.003
               US      0.419          0.062            0.063     -0.358 1.517          0.250    0.132     0.544     0.003
                                                               BC
              Ger.     0.346          0.104            0.085     -0.714 1.162          0.228    0.144     0.487     0.001
              Italy    0.205          0.147            0.091     -1.505 0.877          0.157    0.089     0.583     0.003
              Jap.     0.549          0.083            0.117     0.240 0.860           0.191    0.099     0.311     0.003
               US      0.419          0.062            0.063     -0.358 1.517          0.250    0.132     0.544     0.003
                                                    No Taste Shocks: ε̄ = 0
              Ger.     0.346          0.104            0.085     -0.714 1.161          0.229    0.143     0.486     0.001
              Italy    0.206          0.147            0.089     -1.503 0.880          0.160    0.089     0.579     0.003
              Jap.     0.549          0.084            0.115     0.240 0.860           0.193    0.098     0.313     0.003
               US      0.425          0.062            0.055     -0.355 1.514          0.270    0.132     0.554     0.002

                      This table reports simulated moments for the estimated models allowing education to affect
                      test scores, including the coefficient from a regression of test score on education.

                                                   Table 26: Return to College

                                              college prem.     h(ē)    E(θ|ed = 1)      E(θ|ed = 0)
                                 Germany           2.015        0.803       2.509            1.197
                                   Italy           1.961        0.728       2.693            1.243
                                  Japan            1.852        1.227       1.509            1.067
                                    US             2.057        1.056       1.949            1.131
                      The college premium is the ratio of earnings in the late work phase for agents with college
                      and without and h(ē) is the estimated return to college independent of ability.


      These results are in reported the block labeled “Imperfect Information” in Table 27. Here the differences with the
efficient solution are surprisingly small. First period output is higher in most countries, noticeably Japan. The second
period output gains are negligible for the two countries in which tracking and thus the noisy education decision is
most prominent, Germany and Italy.
      This result of a small output effect is consistent with the parameter estimates for σd reported in Table 21 for
Germany and Italy. This reinforces the earlier findings that tracking is not a key source of mismatch. The inefficiencies
from these noisier education decisions are not large.




                                                                  36
8.3    Jobs and Skill MisMatch                                                                        8   OTHER IMPLICATIONS


                                            Table 27: Output Net of Education Cost

                                     Estimated Model                                Efficient Allocation
                            Ed Phase    Early Work Late Work                  Ed Phase Early Work Late Work
                                Noise in Tastes
               Germany        0.754        1.071     1.126                       0.881           1.109           1.166
                 Italy        0.815        1.015     1.115                       0.946           1.032           1.135
                Japan         0.257        1.345     1.377                       0.303            1.39           1.423
                  US          0.442        1.209     1.388                       0.636           1.212           1.392
                            Imperfect Information
               Germany        0.741        1.349     1.419                       0.744           1.349           1.419
                 Italy        0.807        1.201     1.320                       0.806           1.202           1.321
                Japan         0.225        1.478     1.483                       0.319           1.426           1.460
                  US          0.413        1.429     1.641                       0.434           1.425           1.636
                             This table shows output loss in the two periods: baseline vs the efficient
                             solution without taste shocks and perfect information about ability.


8.3        Jobs and Skill MisMatch
A recent study by McGowan and Andrews (2015) provides evidence on job mismatch across OECD countries.53
It builds upon the self-assessment of workers and focuses on the numeracy score of those who are termed “well-
matched”.54 From this group of so-called “well-matched”, minimum and maximum test scores are determined at
the 10% and 90% levels by occupation. Those with scores below the cut-off are deemed as over-matched and those
above the cut-off are under-matched.
      Our model lacks a job match component. Conditional on education, there are no additional labor market frictions
that would create job mismatch independently of education mismatch. So, our framework is unable to independently
characterize education and job related mismatch. It can shed some light on a related question: How much of the job
mismatch is due to education mismatch?
      The education and job mismatch rates for our four countries are presented in Table 28. Some interesting patterns
emerge. The job under-match rate is quite high in Italy, both relative to other countries and as a fraction of its
overall job mismatch rate. Of the four countries, Italy also has the highest level of education mismatch, again
relative to other countries and as fraction of overall education mismatch. It seems that many individuals in Italy are
under-matched in education and then in the workplace.
      The US has the lowest mismatch rates in both education and in the workplace. In the US there is a slightly higher
over-match rate in education and almost two-thirds of the job mismatch in the US is in the form of over-match. It
seems that US individuals are under-placed in their jobs and to a lesser degree in the college outcome.
      Overall, with the exception of Italy, the total job and education rates of mismatch are quite close. But, for the
21 countries common to both studies, the correlation of the education and skill mismatch measures is only 0.047.
However, this masks a relationship between under- and over-matching and skill mismatch. The correlation of the
over-match rate in education and skill mismatch is −0.34. And the correlation of the under-match rate in education
and skill mismatch is 0.403. Finally, the correlation between the education rate and the skill mismatch rate is −0.444.

  53 The measurement of job mismatch is discussed in detail in their paper.
  54 McGowan  and Andrews (2015) presents results for the literacy score in their text. Our analysis is of the numeracy score. The authors
kindly provided the data for our calculations.


                                                                   37
                                                                                                            10   APPENDIX


                                        Table 28: Education and Job Mismatch

                                                   Education                     Job
                                           Total     Under Over       Total     Under    Over
                             Germany       0.185     0.094 0.091      0.186     0.016    0.179
                               Italy       0.222     0.079 0.143      0.198     0.068     0.13
                              Japan        0.199     0.079 0.120      0.119     0.039     0.08
                                US         0.135     0.060 0.075      0.133     0.025    0.102
                   This table shows mismatch in education and jobs. The education mismatch is reported in
                   Table 2. The job mismatch is calculated from the data used in McGowan and Andrews
                   (2015).


9      Conclusion
This paper studies mismatch in education and ability across 21 OECD countries. The education choice highlighted
in the analysis is the college decision. Mismatch, in the form of both under- and over-matching occurs across a broad
range of countries.
    The structural estimation allows for multiple explanations of mismatch: (i) taste heterogeneity, (ii) borrowing
restrictions and (iii) noise in the test score. A main finding is that imperfect capital markets are not a source of
mismatch. Further the contribution of differences in tastes for higher education is minimal. Instead, noise in the test
score seems sufficient to explain not only the measured mismatch across countries but other moments that link the
education decision to the test score and compensation to the same score. By matching these additional moments,
the noise in the test score is “over-identified”. This finding is robust across a number of alternative specifications
and moments.
    The estimated model is used to study a number of additional issues. The college wage premium is decomposed
into the return to higher education and the selection, by ability, into college. Though countries have essentially the
same premium, such as the US and Germany, they may differ substantially in the return to college and the selection
into higher education. The mismatch in the college choice, as it is due largely to noisy test scores, does not reflect
any inefficiency. This is also the case for education systems where college choice is made early in life. Finally, across
the 21 OECD countries examined here, we do not find that education mismatch is the source of skill (job) mismatch
though these measures are closely linked for three of our four key countries.



10      Appendix
These tables present results for all countries, for the baseline and many of the robustness exercises. These tables are
intended as an online Appendix.


10.1     All Countries

                                    Table A1: All Countries: Parameter Estimates

                                              abil      ε̄        σ     h(ē)     b̄



                                                             38
10.1   All Countries                                                    10   APPENDIX



                              abil     ε̄          σ    h(ē)     b̄
                       Aus.   2.557   0.900    1.490    0.700    na
                       Bel    5.971   1.614    0.202    1.073    na
                       Can.   3.855   0.368    0.577    1.185    na
                       CzR.   4.786   0.049    0.388    0.966    na
                       Den.   4.581   0.681    0.516    1.032    na
                       Est.   3.358   0.693    0.861    1.016    na
                       Fin.   4.701   0.698    0.491    1.044    na
                       Fra.   5.583   1.372    0.218    1.063    na
                       Ger.   2.545   1.354    1.186    0.803    na
                       Ire.   3.389   0.605    0.626    1.138    na
                       It.    2.835   0.893    1.586    0.728    na
                       Jap.   4.243   0.464    0.511    1.227    na
                       Kor.   4.292   0.164    0.469    1.280    na
                       Net.   4.169   0.292    0.432    1.020    na
                       Nor.   5.445   0.716    0.374    1.059    na
                       Pol.   4.090   0.151    0.507    1.047    na
                       Slo.   2.833   1.288    1.196    0.824    na
                       Sp.    3.369   0.440    0.629    0.934    na
                       Swe.   5.466   1.014    0.338    1.034    na
                       UK     2.715   0.732    1.240    1.039    na
                       US     3.137   0.498    0.583    1.056    na
                                                   BC
                       Aus.   2.555   1.047    1.492    0.699   3.369
                       Bel    6.000   1.614    0.200    1.074   3.085
                       Can.   3.855   0.368    0.577    1.185   2.743
                       CzR.   4.786   0.049    0.388    0.966   2.622
                       Den.   4.584   0.681    0.515    1.032   3.403
                       Est.   3.358   0.693    0.861    1.016   1.038
                       Fin.   4.701   0.698    0.491    1.044   2.622
                       Fra.   5.482   1.189    0.225    1.060   1.733
                       Ger.   2.545   1.354    1.186    0.803   2.634
                       Ire.   3.389   0.605    0.626    1.138   2.616
                       It.    2.836   0.893    1.586    0.729   1.638
                       Jap.   4.243   0.464    0.511    1.227   2.622
                       Kor.   4.290   0.164    0.469    1.280   2.391
                       Net.   4.168   0.292    0.432    1.020   2.610
                       Nor.   5.444   0.716    0.375    1.059   2.685



                                              39
10.1   All Countries                                                                                    10   APPENDIX



                                              abil    ε̄           σ    h(ē)     b̄
                                    Pol.     4.088   0.152    0.507    1.047    3.306
                                    Slo.     2.833   1.291    1.196    0.824    1.722
                                    Sp.      3.369   0.440    0.629    0.934    2.657
                                    Swe.     5.466   1.014    0.338    1.034    2.633
                                    UK       2.715   0.732    1.240    1.039    2.637
                                    US       3.137   0.498    0.583    1.056    2.622




                                      Table A2: All Countries: Data Moments

                          college    under-match      over-match        α0       α1      ν1      ν2
                   Aus.   0.280            0.121           0.065       -1.440   1.120   0.179   0.114
                   Bel    0.421            0.067           0.048       -0.290   1.570   0.149   0.085
                   Can.   0.548            0.083           0.098       0.300    0.860   0.193   0.127
                   CzR.   0.304            0.111           0.040       -1.420   1.460   0.124   0.088
                   Den.   0.523            0.093           0.105       -0.140   0.840   0.137   0.084
                   Est.   0.445            0.105           0.087       -0.260   0.820   0.179   0.118
                   Fin.   0.523            0.102           0.093       -0.040   0.830   0.142   0.075
                   Fra.   0.456            0.047           0.051       -0.490   1.710   0.174   0.094
                   Ger.   0.373            0.104           0.062       -0.720   1.160   0.235   0.144
                   Ire.   0.474            0.079           0.068       -0.270   1.150   0.241   0.134
                   It.    0.230            0.146           0.069       -1.510   0.890   0.132   0.071
                   Jap.   0.597            0.078           0.108       0.230    0.860   0.184   0.111
                   Kor.   0.648            0.083           0.109       0.460    0.880   0.217   0.092
                   Net.   0.412            0.084           0.046       -0.480   1.290   0.183   0.105
                   Nor.   0.494            0.081           0.098       -0.150   0.920   0.127   0.073
                   Pol.   0.429            0.101           0.078       -0.430   1.100   0.191   0.083
                   Slo.   0.250            0.139           0.039       -1.300   1.090   0.179   0.101
                   Sp.    0.399            0.079           0.048       -0.660   1.290   0.228   0.098
                   Swe.   0.491            0.085           0.091       -0.480   1.100   0.121   0.086
                   UK     0.462            0.088           0.076       -0.110   0.790   0.225   0.158
                   US     0.455            0.055           0.045       -0.360   1.510   0.279   0.149




                                                             40
10.1   All Countries                                                                                  10   APPENDIX



                                   Table A3: All Countries: Simulated Moments

                       college   under-match   over-match      α0       α1      ν1      ν2      fit
                                               Baseline
               Aus.    0.227        0.129        0.070        -1.431   1.123   0.178   0.097   0.003
               Bel     0.428        0.052        0.065        -0.291   1.570   0.157   0.087   0.001
               Can.    0.560        0.081        0.125        0.297    0.860   0.200   0.119   0.001
               CzR.    0.250        0.100        0.042        -1.413   1.461   0.141   0.059   0.004
               Den.    0.468        0.094        0.111        -0.128   0.840   0.140   0.078   0.003
               Est.    0.439        0.103        0.112        -0.259   0.822   0.185   0.106   0.001
               Fin.    0.489        0.092        0.114        -0.034   0.830   0.139   0.079   0.002
               Fra.    0.395        0.053        0.054        -0.480   1.710   0.166   0.089   0.004
               Ger.    0.345        0.104        0.087        -0.715   1.161   0.225   0.143   0.002
               Ire.    0.436        0.080        0.093        -0.263   1.151   0.239   0.129   0.002
               It.     0.209        0.143        0.079        -1.507   0.891   0.135   0.065   0.001
               Jap.    0.548        0.082        0.122        0.240    0.860   0.189   0.103   0.003
               Kor.    0.596        0.073        0.129        0.470    0.879   0.197   0.113   0.004
               Net.    0.395        0.077        0.074        -0.479   1.291   0.184   0.100   0.001
               Nor.    0.465        0.087        0.104        -0.143   0.920   0.129   0.068   0.001
               Pol.    0.405        0.086        0.087        -0.427   1.100   0.180   0.094   0.001
               Slo.    0.247        0.124        0.071        -1.300   1.092   0.183   0.091   0.001
               Sp.     0.361        0.086        0.073        -0.654   1.292   0.204   0.117   0.003
               Swe.    0.400        0.085        0.082        -0.462   1.100   0.134   0.067   0.009
               UK      0.470        0.105        0.123        -0.112   0.796   0.230   0.141   0.003
               US      0.414        0.068        0.075        -0.353   1.512   0.261   0.153   0.003
                                                  BC
               Aus.    0.227        0.129        0.070        -1.431   1.124   0.178   0.098   0.003
               Bel     0.428        0.052        0.065        -0.292   1.570   0.156   0.086   0.001
               Can.    0.560        0.081        0.125        0.296    0.861   0.200   0.118   0.001
               CzR.    0.250        0.100        0.042        -1.413   1.461   0.141   0.059   0.004
               Den.    0.468        0.094        0.111        -0.128   0.840   0.140   0.078   0.003
               Est.    0.439        0.103        0.112        -0.259   0.822   0.185   0.106   0.001
               Fin.    0.489        0.092        0.114        -0.034   0.830   0.139   0.079   0.002
               Fra.    0.395        0.053        0.053        -0.479   1.710   0.168   0.090   0.004
               Ger.    0.345        0.104        0.087        -0.715   1.161   0.225   0.143   0.002
               Ire.    0.436        0.080        0.093        -0.263   1.151   0.239   0.129   0.002
               It.     0.209        0.143        0.079        -1.507   0.891   0.135   0.065   0.001
               Jap.    0.548        0.082        0.122        0.240    0.860   0.189   0.103   0.003
               Kor.    0.596        0.073        0.129        0.470    0.879   0.197   0.113   0.004


                                                         41
10.1   All Countries                                                                                            10    APPENDIX



                          college    under-match       over-match          α0     α1      ν1      ν2      fit
                Net.       0.395         0.077           0.074        -0.479     1.291   0.184   0.100   0.001
                Nor.       0.465         0.087           0.104        -0.144     0.920   0.129   0.068   0.001
                Pol.       0.405         0.086           0.087        -0.427     1.100   0.180   0.094   0.001
                Slo.       0.247         0.124           0.071        -1.300     1.092   0.183   0.091   0.001
                Sp.        0.361         0.086           0.073        -0.654     1.292   0.204   0.117   0.003
                Swe.       0.400         0.085           0.082        -0.462     1.100   0.134   0.067   0.009
                UK         0.470         0.105           0.123        -0.112     0.796   0.230   0.141   0.003
                US         0.414         0.068           0.075        -0.353     1.512   0.261   0.153   0.003




                                              Table A4: All Countries: Perturbations

                       college     under-match     over-match         α0         α1       ν1      ν2            fit
                                                  No Borrowing
         Aus.          0.062          0.162           0.009       -3.933        2.042    0.154   0.046     7.122
         Bel           0.027          0.178           0.000       -7.458        3.016    0.077   0.009     53.655
         Can.          0.253          0.107           0.052       -1.346        1.340    0.211   0.073     3.033
         CzR.          0.010          0.192           0.000       -9.512        2.979    0.049   0.004     67.898
         Den.          0.088          0.151           0.011       -3.324        1.754    0.116   0.023     11.181
         Est.          0.049          0.167           0.003       -4.595        2.162    0.135   0.024     20.776
         Fin.          0.087          0.151           0.011       -3.365        1.777    0.115   0.022     12.155
         Fra.          0.020          0.184           0.000       -8.533        3.091    0.071   0.007     66.818
         Ger.          0.139          0.133           0.025       -2.451        1.852    0.217   0.089     3.534
         Ire.          0.436          0.080           0.093       -0.263        1.151    0.239   0.129     0.002
         It.           0.030          0.180           0.005       -5.101        1.998    0.094   0.018     14.176
         Jap.          0.370          0.094           0.082       -0.612        1.082    0.200   0.081     0.812
         Kor.          0.520          0.076           0.111         0.122       0.959    0.205   0.104     0.137
         Net.          0.001          0.199           0.000       -22.114       3.214    0.017   0.001    471.957
         Nor.          0.064          0.158           0.004       -4.142        2.055    0.094   0.014     17.431
         Pol.          0.029          0.177           0.000       -6.483        2.745    0.101   0.013     39.532
         Slo.          0.061          0.163           0.008       -4.040        2.036    0.151   0.038     8.444
         Sp.           0.052          0.161           0.001       -5.174        2.772    0.153   0.033     22.715
         Swe.          0.057          0.160           0.002       -4.617        2.289    0.093   0.014     18.733
         UK            0.283          0.119           0.081       -1.063        1.062    0.235   0.107     1.017
         US            0.328          0.077           0.053       -0.856        1.717    0.264   0.136     0.306
                                                 No Taste Shocks
         Aus.          0.226          0.129           0.070       -1.439        1.127    0.178   0.097     0.003
         Bel***        0.417          0.049           0.055       -0.356        1.706    0.158   0.083     0.023

                                                                 42
10.1   All Countries                                                                                 10     APPENDIX



                   college     under-match     over-match        α0      α1       ν1      ν2         fit
         Can.          0.560      0.081          0.125       0.296      0.862    0.200   0.118     0.001
         CzR.          0.250      0.100          0.042       -1.415     1.462    0.141   0.058     0.004
         Den.          0.466      0.094          0.110       -0.138     0.845    0.141   0.078     0.003
         Est.          0.438      0.103          0.111       -0.263     0.825    0.185   0.105     0.001
         Fin.          0.487      0.091          0.113       -0.043     0.839    0.140   0.078     0.002
         Fra. **       0.388      0.051          0.049       -0.521     1.788    0.167   0.087     0.012
         Ger.          0.343      0.103          0.086       -0.724     1.175    0.226   0.142     0.002
         Ire.          0.435      0.080          0.092       -0.264     1.155    0.239   0.129     0.002
         It.           0.209      0.143          0.079       -1.509     0.892    0.135   0.064     0.001
         Jap.          0.547      0.082          0.122       0.237      0.859    0.189   0.103     0.003
         Kor.          0.596      0.073          0.129       0.469      0.879    0.197   0.113     0.004
         Net.          0.395      0.076          0.074       -0.481     1.294    0.184   0.100     0.001
         Nor.          0.462      0.087          0.102       -0.157     0.931    0.130   0.068     0.001
         Pol.          0.405      0.086          0.087       -0.426     1.098    0.180   0.094     0.001
         Slo.          0.246      0.124          0.070       -1.309     1.096    0.183   0.091     0.001
         Sp.           0.361      0.086          0.073       -0.656     1.291    0.204   0.117     0.003
         Swe.          0.396      0.084          0.080       -0.482     1.123    0.134   0.066     0.010
         UK            0.469      0.106          0.122       -0.117     0.796    0.230   0.141     0.003
         US            0.413      0.068          0.075       -0.354     1.516    0.262   0.153     0.003
                                             No Noise in Test
         Aus.          0.227      0.000          0.000       -6.558    58.917    0.270   0.184    3366.697
         Bel           0.428      0.000          0.000       1.699      9.864    0.201   0.139     72.761
         Can.          0.560      0.000          0.000       36.903    98.572    0.301   0.211   10887.436
         CzR.          0.250      0.000          0.000       -81.945   403.622   0.211   0.137   168218.746
         Den.          0.468      0.000          0.000       8.890     33.488    0.238   0.177    1147.477
         Est.          0.439      0.000          0.000       12.455    56.368    0.301   0.214    3247.328
         Fin.          0.489      0.000          0.000       9.442     31.928    0.235   0.175    1057.016
         Fra.          0.395      0.000          0.000       1.533     12.631    0.211   0.144    123.372
         Ger.          0.345      0.000          0.000       4.466     46.215    0.302   0.217    2056.900
         Ire.          0.436      0.000          0.000       15.520    71.438    0.329   0.212    5189.735
         It.           0.209      0.002          0.000       -9.074    46.242    0.255   0.174    2114.073
         Jap.          0.548      0.000          0.000       24.699    66.936    0.293   0.195    4964.765
         Kor.          0.596      0.000          0.000       76.987    181.517   0.295   0.198   38486.079
         Net.          0.395      0.000          0.000       13.915    91.273    0.257   0.180    8304.258
         Nor.          0.465      0.000          0.000       6.424     24.871    0.213   0.154    616.910
         Pol.          0.405      0.000          0.000       32.767    192.817   0.269   0.184   37857.426
         Slo.          0.247      0.000          0.000       -3.438    36.258    0.287   0.186    1241.404



                                                            43
10.2   Young Cohort                                                                                         10     APPENDIX



                  college   under-match    over-match               α0       α1           ν1      ν2       fit
         Sp.      0.361        0.000             0.000           8.908    83.644         0.281   0.200   6873.699
         Swe.     0.400        0.000             0.000           2.371    17.004         0.207   0.147   261.088
         UK       0.470        0.000             0.000          22.434    92.955         0.344   0.240   9002.707
         US       0.414        0.000             0.000          18.079    96.689         0.326   0.217   9398.981




10.2    Young Cohort

                                Table A5: Young Cohort: Parameter Estimates

                                          abil           ε̄         σ    h(ē)      b̄
                                                     Young Baseline
                                 Aus.     2.690     0.805       1.103    0.667
                                 Bel      5.991     1.770       0.200    1.083
                                 Can.     3.596     0.115       0.706    1.150
                                 CzR.     5.357     0.609       0.311    1.015
                                 Den.     3.230     1.163       1.369    0.956
                                 Est.     3.421     0.694       0.768    1.002
                                 Fin.     3.600     0.744       0.936    0.935
                                 Fra.     5.581     1.057       0.204    1.071
                                 Ger.     2.085     0.019       2.536    0.703
                                 Ire.     3.456     0.636       0.552    1.118
                                 It.      2.844     1.195       1.646    0.761
                                 Jap.     4.296     0.678       0.484    1.244
                                 Kor.     3.052     0.173       1.251    1.233
                                 Net.     4.272     0.237       0.438    1.015
                                 Nor.     5.252     0.431       0.455    1.037
                                 Pol.     3.928     0.240       0.594    1.065
                                 Slo.     3.264     2.095       0.824    0.914
                                 Sp.      3.115     0.417       0.772    0.895
                                 Swe.     5.284     0.951       0.365    1.015
                                 UK       2.824     0.639       1.130    1.029
                                 US       3.157     0.556       0.603    1.068
                                                              Young, BC
                                 Aus.     2.684     0.999       1.108    0.666    2.577
                                 Bel      5.999     1.747       0.200    1.083    3.622
                                 Can.     3.596     0.115       0.706    1.150    2.661
                                 CzR.     5.362     0.581       0.311    1.015    2.763


                                                               44
10.2   Young Cohort                                                                                 10   APPENDIX



                                            abil        ε̄         σ   h(ē)     b̄
                                    Den.    3.230    1.157     1.369   0.956   2.874
                                    Est.    3.422    0.654     0.767   1.002   5.121
                                    Fin.    3.600    0.742     0.936   0.935   2.727
                                    Fra.    5.654    0.965     0.201   1.074   7.842
                                    Ger.    2.085    0.020     2.536   0.703   6.788
                                    Ire.    3.456    0.636     0.552   1.118   2.685
                                    It.     2.850    1.284     1.638   0.762   2.978
                                    Jap.    4.301    0.563     0.484   1.244   3.074
                                    Kor.    3.051    0.171     1.251   1.233   2.857
                                    Net.    4.064    0.002     0.470   1.003   7.931
                                    Nor.    4.767    1.907     0.507   1.015   6.875
                                    Pol.    3.936    0.297     0.592   1.066   3.008
                                    Slo.    3.264    2.096     0.824   0.914   3.558
                                    Sp.     3.114    0.216     0.773   0.895   5.262
                                    Swe.    5.307    1.032     0.363   1.015   2.847
                                    UK      2.757    0.373     1.179   1.023   3.758
                                    US      3.139    0.252     0.611   1.066   6.196




                            Table A6: Young Cohort Moments: Data and Simulated

               college   under-match       over-match         α0        α1            ν1    ν2     fit
                                               Data
        Aus.    0.248       0.120            0.034           -1.890    1.540     0.179     0.114   na
        Bel     0.441       0.086            0.034           -0.150    1.510     0.149     0.085   na
        Can.    0.486       0.084            0.080           0.130     0.810     0.193     0.127   na
        CzR.    0.360       0.110            0.035           -1.240    1.490     0.124     0.088   na
        Den.    0.507       0.135            0.129           -0.180    0.530     0.137     0.084   na
        Est.    0.417       0.115            0.077           -0.380    0.930     0.179     0.118   na
        Fin.    0.418       0.122            0.107           -0.490    0.720     0.142     0.075   na
        Fra.    0.479       0.043            0.046           -0.390    1.830     0.174     0.094   na
        Ger.    0.332       0.146            0.072           -0.840    0.880     0.235     0.144   na
        Ire.    0.429       0.070            0.064           -0.430    1.340     0.241     0.134   na
        It.     0.241       0.147            0.096           -1.310    0.800     0.132     0.071   na
        Jap.    0.621       0.104            0.115           0.370     0.860     0.184     0.111   na
        Kor.    0.685       0.144            0.142           0.500     0.530     0.217     0.092   na
        Net.    0.397       0.100            0.033           -0.580    1.250     0.183     0.105   na
        Nor.    0.448       0.099            0.108           -0.330    0.820     0.127     0.073   na

                                                              45
10.2   Young Cohort                                                                    10    APPENDIX



               college   under-match   over-match    α0       α1      ν1      ν2      fit
        Pol.    0.452       0.106        0.085      -0.210   0.930   0.191   0.083    na
        Slo.    0.299       0.125        0.038      -1.090   1.130   0.179   0.101    na
        Sp.     0.364       0.104        0.051      -0.760   1.230   0.228   0.098    na
        Swe.    0.454       0.093        0.096      -0.620   1.100   0.121   0.086    na
        UK      0.420       0.094        0.065      -0.220   0.830   0.225   0.158    na
        US      0.474       0.070        0.044      -0.300   1.400   0.279   0.149    na
                                         Baseline
        Aus.    0.184       0.124        0.040      -1.883   1.544   0.176   0.094   0.005
        Bel     0.453       0.050        0.072      -0.155   1.510   0.157   0.090   0.003
        Can.    0.522       0.090        0.123      0.120    0.815   0.199   0.115   0.004
        CzR.    0.278       0.091        0.044      -1.229   1.492   0.141   0.058   0.009
        Den.    0.459       0.129        0.139      -0.169   0.530   0.138   0.082   0.002
        Est.    0.413       0.099        0.101      -0.380   0.929   0.190   0.106   0.001
        Fin.    0.390       0.120        0.113      -0.484   0.720   0.140   0.077   0.001
        Fra.    0.410       0.045        0.052      -0.379   1.829   0.172   0.094   0.005
        Ger.    0.316       0.131        0.108      -0.836   0.884   0.213   0.137   0.002
        Ire.    0.403       0.075        0.077      -0.425   1.340   0.243   0.128   0.001
        It.     0.236       0.143        0.091      -1.309   0.800   0.136   0.067   0.000
        Jap.    0.578       0.077        0.127      0.379    0.857   0.190   0.108   0.003
        Kor.    0.618       0.113        0.156      0.513    0.525   0.191   0.123   0.008
        Net.    0.378       0.082        0.073      -0.576   1.252   0.175   0.091   0.003
        Nor.    0.426       0.102        0.105      -0.326   0.830   0.119   0.059   0.001
        Pol.    0.449       0.091        0.105      -0.210   0.930   0.179   0.098   0.001
        Slo.    0.283       0.112        0.073      -1.089   1.132   0.184   0.091   0.002
        Sp.     0.341       0.095        0.075      -0.757   1.231   0.206   0.118   0.002
        Swe.    0.373       0.090        0.079      -0.602   1.101   0.132   0.065   0.008
        UK      0.445       0.104        0.116      -0.224   0.835   0.224   0.133   0.004
        US      0.427       0.070        0.082      -0.289   1.403   0.258   0.151   0.004
                                            BC
        Aus.    0.184       0.124        0.040      -1.882   1.543   0.176   0.094   0.005
        Bel     0.453       0.050        0.072      -0.157   1.510   0.157   0.089   0.003
        Can.    0.522       0.090        0.123      0.120    0.815   0.199   0.115   0.004
        CzR.    0.278       0.091        0.044      -1.228   1.492   0.141   0.058   0.009
        Den.    0.459       0.129        0.139      -0.169   0.531   0.138   0.082   0.002
        Est.    0.413       0.099        0.101      -0.380   0.930   0.190   0.106   0.001
        Fin.    0.390       0.120        0.113      -0.484   0.720   0.140   0.077   0.001
        Fra.    0.410       0.045        0.051      -0.379   1.830   0.171   0.092   0.005



                                                     46
10.2   Young Cohort                                                                       10    APPENDIX



               college   under-match   over-match     α0       α1       ν1      ν2       fit
        Ger.    0.316       0.131        0.108      -0.836    0.884    0.213   0.137    0.002
        Ire.    0.403       0.075        0.077      -0.425    1.341    0.243   0.128    0.001
        It.     0.236       0.143        0.091      -1.309    0.800    0.136   0.067    0.000
        Jap.    0.577       0.077        0.127       0.377    0.859    0.190   0.108    0.003
        Kor.    0.618       0.113        0.156       0.513    0.525    0.191   0.123    0.008
        Net.    0.377       0.082        0.074      -0.575    1.253    0.181   0.097    0.003
        Nor.    0.426       0.103        0.108      -0.325    0.820    0.129   0.070    0.001
        Pol.    0.449       0.091        0.104      -0.211    0.931    0.178   0.097    0.001
        Slo.    0.283       0.112        0.073      -1.089    1.132    0.184   0.091    0.002
        Sp.     0.341       0.095        0.075      -0.756    1.231    0.206   0.118    0.002
        Swe.    0.373       0.090        0.079      -0.604    1.100    0.131   0.064    0.008
        UK      0.446       0.105        0.117      -0.223    0.837    0.228   0.137    0.004
        US      0.426       0.070        0.082      -0.291    1.402    0.258   0.151    0.004
                                       No Taste; ε̄ = 0
        Aus.    0.184       0.124        0.040      -1.888    1.553    0.176   0.094    0.005
        Bel     0.438       0.046        0.060      -0.234    1.665    0.160   0.086    0.033
        Can.    0.523       0.090        0.123       0.124    0.816    0.199   0.115    0.004
        CzR.    0.276       0.091        0.042      -1.246    1.508    0.141   0.058    0.009
        Den.    0.457       0.129        0.138      -0.179    0.535    0.138   0.081    0.003
        Est.    0.412       0.099        0.101      -0.384    0.935    0.190   0.106    0.001
        Fin.    0.389       0.119        0.112      -0.492    0.725    0.140   0.076    0.001
        Fra.    0.407       0.044        0.049      -0.399    1.880    0.173   0.093    0.008
        Ger.    0.316       0.131        0.108      -0.836    0.885    0.213   0.137    0.002
        Ire.    0.402       0.075        0.077      -0.428    1.343    0.243   0.128    0.001
        It.     0.235       0.143        0.091      -1.313    0.801    0.136   0.067    0.000
        Jap.    0.576       0.077        0.126       0.372    0.865    0.190   0.108    0.003
        Kor.    0.618       0.113        0.156       0.513    0.525    0.191   0.123    0.008
        Net.    0.377       0.082        0.073      -0.577    1.250    0.175   0.091    0.003
        Nor.    0.426       0.101        0.104      -0.328    0.840    0.119   0.059    0.001
        Pol.    0.450       0.091        0.104      -0.210    0.931    0.179   0.098    0.001
        Slo.    0.279       0.111        0.068      -1.123    1.167    0.185   0.089    0.004
        Sp.     0.341       0.095        0.075      -0.757    1.234    0.206   0.118    0.002
        Swe.    0.369       0.090        0.077      -0.623    1.120    0.132   0.064    0.009
        UK      0.445       0.104        0.116      -0.226    0.838    0.224   0.133    0.004
        US      0.427       0.070        0.081      -0.288    1.412    0.258   0.151    0.004
                                       No Noise; σ = 0
        Aus.    0.184       0.019        0.000      -13.651   54.143   0.246   0.167   2905.440



                                                     47
10.3   Parent’s Education                                                                                     10    APPENDIX



                college     under-match       over-match          α0         α1            ν1    ν2          fit
         Bel     0.453         0.000            0.000            1.904      8.988     0.202     0.141      60.155
         Can.    0.522         0.000            0.000           110.729    338.883    0.312     0.217    126525.574
         CzR.    0.278         0.000            0.000           -3.941      28.095    0.205     0.131     715.124
         Den.    0.459         0.000            0.000            8.625      35.449    0.293     0.222     1296.931
         Est.    0.413         0.000            0.000            9.939      53.469    0.295     0.207     2866.903
         Fin.    0.390         0.000            0.000            6.411      42.867    0.265     0.198     1824.067
         Fra.    0.410         0.000            0.000            2.598      16.505    0.214     0.146     224.288
         Ger.    0.316         0.000            0.000           421.804    5947.227   0.295     0.206   35537671.469
         Ire.    0.403         0.000            0.000           10.960      64.077    0.323     0.204     4065.666
         It.     0.236         0.000            0.000           -4.642      37.289    0.266     0.182     1342.616
         Jap.    0.578         0.000            0.000           18.108      44.933    0.290     0.196     2257.142
         Kor.    0.618         0.000            0.000           130.867    337.293    0.346     0.251    130404.853
         Net.    0.378         0.000            0.000           13.070     108.837    0.251     0.174    11761.282
         Nor.    0.426         0.000            0.000            8.399      42.727    0.215     0.155     1832.390
         Pol.    0.449         0.000            0.000           29.870     125.080    0.280     0.195    16318.186
         Slo.    0.283         0.000            0.000           -0.914      18.142    0.282     0.186     289.463
         Sp.     0.341         0.000            0.000            7.496      94.731    0.287     0.203     8810.699
         Swe.    0.373         0.000            0.000            1.642      18.404    0.208     0.148     304.579
         UK      0.445         0.000            0.000           21.195      96.201    0.338     0.233     9554.334
         US      0.427         0.000            0.000           17.674      86.497    0.327     0.219     7564.661




10.3     Parent’s Education

                                Table A7: Parental Education: Parameter Estimates

                                               abil        ε̄          σ    h(ē)     b̄
                                                                 Baseline
                                       Aus.    2.645    5.449      1.368    0.736
                                       Bel     6.094    1.672      0.213    1.091
                                       Can.    3.701    2.055      0.660    1.179
                                       CzR.    5.535    3.740      0.285    1.038
                                       Den.    4.309    2.554      0.621    1.023
                                       Est.    3.178    2.505      1.022    1.006
                                       Fin.    4.739    1.173      0.498    1.057
                                       Fra.    5.657    2.434      0.213    1.097
                                       Ger.    2.509    5.588      1.309    0.799
                                       Ire.    3.429    3.591      0.621    1.172


                                                                 48
10.3   Parent’s Education                                                    10   APPENDIX



                                   abil     ε̄          σ    h(ē)     b̄
                            It.    4.163   6.442    0.635    0.942
                            Jap.   4.091   3.146    0.572    1.225
                            Kor.   4.261   1.721    0.483    1.302
                            Net.   4.240   2.658    0.420    1.037
                            Nor.   5.218   1.494    0.422    1.055
                            Pol.   4.433   3.371    0.443    1.106
                            Slo.   3.408   6.870    0.771    0.952
                            Sp.    3.619   2.734    0.542    0.990
                            Swe.   5.242   1.916    0.381    1.027
                            UK     2.852   5.272    1.248    1.080
                            US     3.114   3.439    0.619    1.055
                                                        BC
                            Aus.   2.645   5.449    1.368    0.736   2.622
                            Bel    6.109   1.667    0.212    1.091   2.017
                            Can.   3.701   2.055    0.660    1.179   2.642
                            CzR.   5.535   3.740    0.285    1.038   5.708
                            Den.   4.304   2.557    0.623    1.023   1.064
                            Est.   3.178   2.505    1.022    1.006   2.800
                            Fin.   4.739   1.173    0.498    1.057   2.646
                            Fra.   5.657   2.434    0.213    1.097   2.988
                            Ger.   2.504   5.617    1.316    0.798   2.946
                            Ire.   3.429   3.591    0.621    1.172   2.637
                            It.    4.163   6.442    0.635    0.942   3.062
                            Jap.   4.091   3.146    0.572    1.225   2.622
                            Kor.   4.261   1.721    0.483    1.302   2.620
                            Net.   4.240   2.658    0.420    1.037   2.622
                            Nor.   5.218   1.494    0.422    1.055   1.609
                            Pol.   4.433   3.371    0.443    1.106   3.435
                            Slo.   3.408   6.870    0.771    0.952   2.651
                            Sp.    3.619   2.734    0.542    0.990   2.584
                            Swe.   5.242   1.916    0.381    1.027   0.996
                            UK     2.570   6.050    1.558    1.058   5.576
                            US     3.114   3.439    0.619    1.055   4.520




                                                   49
10.3   Parent’s Education                                                                           10     APPENDIX



                                       Table A8: PE Moments: Data and Simulated

                college     under-match     over-match      α0       α1      α2      ν1      ν2      fit
                                                             Data
         Aus.    0.280         0.107          0.051      -1.720     1.030   0.970   0.179   0.114    na
         Bel     0.421         0.051          0.043      -0.640     1.440   1.090   0.149   0.085    na
         Can.    0.548         0.080          0.084      -0.040     0.800   0.780   0.193   0.127    na
         CzR.    0.304         0.079          0.035      -1.740     1.360   1.700   0.124   0.088    na
         Den.    0.523         0.073          0.093      -0.570     0.740   1.050   0.137   0.084    na
         Est.    0.445         0.097          0.087      -0.540     0.740   0.680   0.179   0.118    na
         Fin.    0.523         0.088          0.085      -0.190     0.780   0.580   0.142   0.075    na
         Fra.    0.456         0.037          0.047      -0.750     1.560   1.540   0.174   0.094    na
         Ger.    0.373         0.101          0.042      -1.200     1.030   1.120   0.235   0.144    na
         Ire.    0.474         0.074          0.064      -0.520     1.060   1.060   0.241   0.134    na
         It.     0.230         0.131          0.053      -1.730     0.860   1.970   0.132   0.071    na
         Jap.    0.597         0.064          0.086      -0.270     0.800   1.310   0.184   0.111    na
         Kor.    0.648         0.079          0.106      0.300      0.830   0.890   0.217   0.092    na
         Net.    0.412         0.074          0.049      -0.820     1.220   1.030   0.183   0.105    na
         Nor.    0.494         0.063          0.089      -0.470     0.850   0.750   0.127   0.073    na
         Pol.    0.429         0.082          0.067      -0.660     0.990   1.520   0.191   0.083    na
         Slo.    0.250         0.109          0.035      -1.600     0.990   1.670   0.179   0.101    na
         Sp.     0.399         0.078          0.042      -0.780     1.210   0.910   0.228   0.098    na
         Swe.    0.491         0.077          0.090      -0.890     1.020   0.890   0.121   0.086    na
         UK      0.462         0.069          0.063      -0.480     0.650   1.430   0.225   0.158    na
         US      0.455         0.049          0.026      -0.760     1.390   0.890   0.279   0.149    na
                                                 Baseline
         Aus.    0.262         0.121          0.056      -1.717     1.032   0.973   0.179   0.108   0.001
         Bel     0.467         0.050          0.061      -0.649     1.442   1.086   0.151   0.085   0.002
         Can.    0.570         0.081          0.115      -0.045     0.803   0.778   0.197   0.121   0.002
         CzR.    0.340         0.076          0.029      -1.745     1.359   1.697   0.140   0.073   0.002
         Den.    0.490         0.093          0.093      -0.562     0.741   1.054   0.137   0.083   0.002
         Est.    0.453         0.105          0.105      -0.541     0.742   0.680   0.184   0.110   0.001
         Fin.    0.519         0.089          0.113      -0.191     0.782   0.581   0.137   0.080   0.001
         Fra.    0.486         0.041          0.050      -0.756     1.561   1.537   0.167   0.101   0.001
         Ger.    0.366         0.101          0.065      -1.198     1.033   1.121   0.219   0.150   0.001
         Ire.    0.493         0.072          0.084      -0.524     1.061   1.058   0.235   0.139   0.001
         It.     0.358         0.097          0.033      -1.753     0.856   1.955   0.129   0.081   0.019
         Jap.    0.577         0.072          0.096      -0.266     0.800   1.313   0.184   0.110   0.001
         Kor.    0.650         0.065          0.124      0.298      0.830   0.890   0.192   0.119   0.002


                                                            50
10.3   Parent’s Education                                                                         10     APPENDIX



                college     under-match   over-match      α0       α1      α2      ν1      ν2      fit
         Net.    0.430         0.071        0.066        -0.825   1.220   1.028   0.182   0.107   0.001
         Nor.    0.478         0.087        0.098        -0.466   0.853   0.753   0.128   0.070   0.001
         Pol.    0.510         0.068        0.070        -0.677   0.991   1.512   0.173   0.106   0.008
         Slo.    0.350         0.097        0.040        -1.618   0.989   1.659   0.178   0.107   0.011
         Sp.     0.425         0.075        0.072        -0.786   1.212   0.906   0.202   0.124   0.003
         Swe.    0.410         0.086        0.073        -0.874   1.020   0.899   0.132   0.069   0.008
         UK      0.535         0.089        0.093        -0.506   0.677   1.363   0.209   0.140   0.013
         US      0.426         0.069        0.069        -0.754   1.394   0.893   0.257   0.155   0.004
                                                    BC
         Aus.    0.262         0.121        0.056        -1.717   1.032   0.973   0.179   0.108   0.001
         Bel     0.467         0.050        0.061        -0.649   1.441   1.086   0.151   0.084   0.002
         Can.    0.570         0.081        0.115        -0.045   0.803   0.778   0.197   0.121   0.002
         CzR.    0.340         0.076        0.029        -1.745   1.359   1.697   0.140   0.073   0.002
         Den.    0.490         0.093        0.093        -0.562   0.742   1.054   0.137   0.083   0.002
         Est.    0.453         0.105        0.105        -0.541   0.742   0.680   0.184   0.110   0.001
         Fin.    0.519         0.089        0.113        -0.191   0.782   0.581   0.137   0.080   0.001
         Fra.    0.486         0.041        0.050        -0.755   1.561   1.537   0.167   0.101   0.001
         Ger.    0.366         0.101        0.065        -1.199   1.032   1.122   0.220   0.150   0.001
         Ire.    0.493         0.072        0.084        -0.524   1.061   1.058   0.235   0.139   0.001
         It.     0.358         0.097        0.033        -1.753   0.856   1.955   0.129   0.081   0.019
         Jap.    0.577         0.072        0.096        -0.266   0.800   1.313   0.184   0.110   0.001
         Kor.    0.650         0.065        0.124        0.298    0.830   0.890   0.192   0.119   0.002
         Net.    0.430         0.071        0.066        -0.825   1.220   1.028   0.182   0.107   0.001
         Nor.    0.478         0.087        0.098        -0.466   0.853   0.753   0.128   0.070   0.001
         Pol.    0.510         0.068        0.070        -0.677   0.991   1.512   0.173   0.106   0.008
         Slo.    0.350         0.097        0.040        -1.618   0.989   1.659   0.178   0.107   0.011
         Sp.     0.425         0.075        0.072        -0.786   1.212   0.906   0.202   0.124   0.003
         Swe.    0.410         0.086        0.073        -0.874   1.020   0.899   0.132   0.069   0.008
         UK      0.543         0.090        0.094        -0.497   0.655   1.423   0.223   0.156   0.008
         US      0.426         0.069        0.069        -0.754   1.394   0.893   0.257   0.155   0.004
                                           No Taste; ε̄ = 0
         Aus.    0.245         0.126        0.073        -1.305   1.099   0.000   0.180   0.099   1.120
         Bel     0.452         0.052        0.070        -0.172   1.485   0.000   0.153   0.081   1.410
         Can.    0.562         0.087        0.130        0.297    0.794   0.000   0.197   0.118   0.724
         CzR.    0.301         0.083        0.046        -1.077   1.516   0.000   0.145   0.061   3.355
         Den.    0.470         0.103        0.117        -0.121   0.758   0.000   0.138   0.077   1.309
         Est.    0.444         0.110        0.119        -0.235   0.750   0.000   0.184   0.107   0.557



                                                          51
10.3   Parent’s Education                                                                         10     APPENDIX



                college     under-match   over-match    α0       α1       α2      ν1      ν2       fit
         Fin.    0.513         0.092        0.120      0.073    0.790    0.000   0.137   0.079    0.407
         Fra.    0.458         0.043        0.065      -0.115   1.652    0.000   0.171   0.094    2.784
         Ger.    0.344         0.109        0.091      -0.717   1.084    0.000   0.221   0.139    1.494
         Ire.    0.476         0.078        0.102      -0.071   1.082    0.000   0.238   0.132    1.327
         It.     0.291         0.115        0.076      -1.038   1.008    0.000   0.135   0.060    4.386
         Jap.    0.556         0.086        0.128      0.269    0.798    0.000   0.187   0.104    2.011
         Kor.    0.643         0.072        0.139      0.682    0.821    0.000   0.193   0.117    0.941
         Net.    0.416         0.074        0.079      -0.369   1.261    0.000   0.184   0.101    1.267
         Nor.    0.467         0.092        0.108      -0.135   0.866    0.000   0.129   0.068    0.677
         Pol.    0.477         0.078        0.100      -0.077   1.028    0.000   0.177   0.096    2.656
         Slo.    0.303         0.108        0.074      -0.971   1.109    0.000   0.183   0.089    3.203
         Sp.     0.413         0.077        0.083      -0.376   1.245    0.000   0.203   0.119    0.996
         Swe.    0.397         0.090        0.086      -0.472   1.045    0.000   0.133   0.066    0.977
         UK      0.505         0.109        0.133      0.036    0.684    0.000   0.211   0.130    2.322
         US      0.416         0.071        0.079      -0.346   1.428    0.000   0.258   0.150    0.970
                                           No Noise; σ = 0
         Aus.    0.262         0.001        0.000      -5.084   19.948   6.640   0.273   0.199   401.397
         Bel     0.467         0.000        0.000      1.262    18.767   6.337   0.201   0.140   331.380
         Can.    0.570         0.000        0.000      10.721   37.617   6.389   0.306   0.219   1502.780
         CzR.    0.340         0.000        0.000      -4.136   9.363    6.519   0.200   0.138    93.033
         Den.    0.490         0.000        0.000      2.141    19.936   6.355   0.245   0.189   404.028
         Est.    0.453         0.000        0.000      4.679    34.839   6.277   0.309   0.224   1221.335
         Fin.    0.519         0.000        0.000      9.453    38.303   6.460   0.235   0.177   1535.551
         Fra.    0.486         0.000        0.000      0.354    14.256   6.301   0.212   0.151   185.092
         Ger.    0.366         0.000        0.000      -1.140   24.397   6.585   0.302   0.230   575.896
         Ire.    0.493         0.000        0.000      3.423    24.976   6.391   0.327   0.222   615.974
         It.     0.358         0.001        0.000      -3.930   7.774    6.404   0.226   0.179    72.360
         Jap.    0.577         0.000        0.000      4.481    20.753   6.325   0.293   0.206   445.884
         Kor.    0.650         0.000        0.000      14.301   37.237   6.269   0.290   0.204   1550.485
         Net.    0.430         0.000        0.000      0.436    20.171   6.405   0.255   0.184   389.631
         Nor.    0.478         0.000        0.000      3.566    25.220   6.260   0.218   0.161   640.594
         Pol.    0.510         0.000        0.000      0.906    14.800   6.264   0.258   0.189   215.705
         Slo.    0.350         0.000        0.000      -3.599   11.056   6.593   0.277   0.204   129.610
         Sp.     0.425         0.000        0.000      1.257    24.630   6.376   0.277   0.204   582.554
         Swe.    0.410         0.000        0.000      -0.484   19.282   6.393   0.211   0.154   363.976
         UK      0.535         0.000        0.000      3.339    23.757   6.329   0.339   0.254   572.541
         US      0.426         0.000        0.000      2.174    29.026   6.356   0.326   0.223   802.258



                                                        52
10.3   Parent’s Education                                                       10     APPENDIX



                college     under-match   over-match   α0   α1   α2   ν1   ν2    fit




                                                       53
REFERENCES                                                                                        REFERENCES


References
Adda, J., and R. Cooper (2003): Dynamic economics: quantitative methods and applications. The MIT Press.

Arum, R., and J. Roksa (2011): “Limited Learning on College Campuses,” Society, pp. 203–207.

Brunello, G., and D. Checchi (2007): “Does school tracking affect equality of opportunity? New international
  evidence,” Economic Policy, 22(52), 782–861.

Daiji, K., and M. Yuko (2014): “Winning the Race against Technology,” Discussion paper, Bank of Japan,
  Working Paper #14.E.5.

Dillon, E. W., and J. A. Smith (2013): “The determinants of mismatch between students and colleges,” Discussion
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Döbert, H. (2015): “Germany,” The education systems of Europe, pp. 305–333.

Dustmann, C. (2004): “Parental background, secondary school track choice, and wages,” Oxford Economic Papers,
  56(2), 209–230.

Dustmann, C., P. A. Puhani, and U. Schönberg (2014): “The long-term effects of school quality on labor market
  outcomes and educational attainment,” Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration (CReAM), Department of
  Economics, University College London CReAM Discussion Paper Series, forthcoming Economic Journal.

Hanushek, E. A., G. Schwerdt, S. Wiederhold, and L. Woessmann (2015): “Returns to Skills around the
  World: Evidence from PIAAC,” European Economic Review, 73, 103–130.

Jones, C. I. (2015): “Pareto and Piketty: The macroeconomics of top income and wealth inequality,” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 29, 29–46.

Keane, M. P., and K. I. Wolpin (2001): “The effect of parental transfers and borrowing constraints on educational
  attainment,” International Economic Review, 42(4), 1051–1103.

Kim, M. (2013): “Relaxing Occupational Misallocation: Are Education Subsidies Effective?,” Penn. State University,
  Thesis Chapter.

Lochner, L. J., and A. Monge-Naranjo (2011): “The Nature of Credit Constraints and Human Capital,”
  American Economic Review, 101(6), 2487–2529.

McGowan, M., and D. Andrews (2015): “Skill mismatch and Public Policy in OECD Countries,” Discussion
  paper, OECD, ECO/WKP(2015)28.

Smith, J., M. Pender, and J. Howell (2013): “The full extent of student-college academic undermatch,” Eco-
  nomics of Education Review, 32, 247–261.

Spence, M. (1973): “Job market signaling,” The quarterly journal of Economics, pp. 355–374.

Weiss, A. (1983): “A sorting-cum-learning model of education,” The Journal of Political Economy, pp. 420–442.



                                                       54
