NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPERFECT INFORMATION AND
STAGGERED PRICE SETTINGS

Laurence Ball

Stephen G. Cecchetti

Working Paper No. 2201

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1987

We are grateful for many helpful suggestions from Olivier Blanchard,
Larry Jones, David Romer, Julio Rotemberg, Matthew Shapiro, Michael
Whinston, and seminar participants at Columbia, North Carolina State,
Ohio State, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets
and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2201
April 1987

Imperfect Information and Staggered Price Setting

ABSTRACT

Many Keynesian macroeconomic models are based on the assumption that firms

change prices at different times. This paper presents an explanation for this

"staggered" price setting. We develop a model in which firms have imperfect

knowledge of the current state of the economy and gain information by
observing the prices set by others. This gives each firm an incentive to set

its price shortly after as many firms as possible.

Staggering can be the

equilibrium outcome. In addition, the information gains can make staggering
socially optimal even thougi it increases aggregate fluctuations.

Laurence Ball
Graduate School of Business
New York University
New York, New York 10006

Stephen G. Ceochetti
Graduate School of Business
New York University
New York, New York 10006

(212) 285—6168

(212) 285—6293

I. INTRODUCTION

In many Keynesian

different

times.

models of the business cycle, firms change prices at

Even if individual prices change frequently, this

"staggered" price setting leads to inertia in the aggregate price level, which

causes nominal disturbances to have

large and long lasting real effects (see

Blanchard[ 1983, 1986] and Taylor[1980]).

A frequent criticism of this

research is that the timing of price changes is treated as exogenous.

The

models show that staggering has important macroeconomic effects, but they do

not explain why staggering occurs. In fact, if the firms in these models are

allowed to choose when to change prices,

all firms change them

simultaneously. 1

This paper

attempts

to strengthen the foundations of Keynesian models by

presenting an explanation for staggered price setting. We develop a model in
which firms have imperfect knowledge of the current state of the economy and
gain information by observing the prices set by others. This gives each firm

an incentive to set its price shortly after as many firms as possible.
Staggering can be the equilibrium outcome.2

The result that synchronization is the equilibrium timing is apparently a
longstanding folk theorem.
It is demonstrated formally for the Blanchard
model in this paper and in Ball and Romer (1986).

2Other explanations for staggering are presented by Fethke and Policano
(19811, 1986), Maskin and Tirole (1985), Parkin (1986), and Ball and Romer
(1986).
One prominent informal explanation is that firms change prices at
different times simply because they face different shocks and different costs
of price adjustment.
If this were the entire explanation, however, a large
enough nominal shock would cause all prices to adjust immediately.
Only
moderate shocks would have real effects.

2

The argument that imperfect information can lead to staggered price
setting is an old one. Okun(1981), for example, argues that firms' concern
for relative wages combined with their ignorance of each others' plans leads

to staggering. Okun describes a hypothetical economy in which all firms set
wages on January 1 of each year. He then speculates:

"[T)he inability of firms to assess relative wage prospects would
destabilize the synchronized situation. Every employer would like to
make a decision in full light of decisions that others had made, but
So an employer would want to
would also like to respond promptly.
move a bit behind the schedule followed by the others. As a result,

some employer would decide to shift the wage adjustment date to
February 1, in order to observe what all the other employers had done.

Others would also want to make such a move, but obviously everyone
cannot exercise the preference to bat last. The likely result of this
'time-location' problem is analogous to that of some spatial location
problems. It generates a tendency to spread the distribution of wageadjustment dates around the calendar." (p. 95)

While Okun discusses wages, his point applies equally well to price setting in
general. Similar discussions of imperfect information and staggering appear
in recent macroeconomics textbooks (for example, Hall and Taylor[1986], Ch.
lit).

Despite their popularity, these explanations for staggering have never
been formalized.

This paper shows that adding imperfect information to

Blanchard's(1986) model of monopolistically competitive price setters can
create endogenous staggering. In our model, each firm's profit—maximizing
price depends separately on a local and an aggregate demand shock, but the

firm observes only the sum. If all firms change prices at the same times,
each faces Lucas's(1973) signal extraction problem. But when price decisions

are staggered, a price setter observes prices set recently by other firms.
These reveal the previous price setters' estimates of aggregate demand, which

3

can be used to improve the current firm's estimate.
We use the model to address two questions. First, when does imperfect
information lead to staggering? We characterize the conditions under which

and synchronization are stable Nash equilibria. Second, can

staggering

staggering be

socially optimal? When information considerations are absent,

staggering is Pareto inferior to synchronization because it leads to price
level inertia, which exacerbates business cycles. But in the presence of both
local and

aggregate

closer to profit

shocks, staggered price setting helps firms set prices

maximizing levels and may lead

to

a

net improvement in

welfare.
The remainder of the paper
describes

a simple version of

uncorrelated

across firms. The

consists

of four sections.

the model in which local demand shocks are
following section shows that staggering

socially optimal in this model, but that
equilibrium. Section

Section II

it

may be

is never a stable Nash
the model in which the

IV presents a modification of

economy is composed of a large number of "neighborhoods," each containing a
small

number of

firms.3 A neighborhood can be interpreted as an industry or

geographic area.

Local shocks are

neighborhood, so firms learn more by

correlated

across firms within a

observing prices set by their neighbors

than by observing prices set by others.

staggering can be a stable equilibrium.

In this version of the model,
Finally, Section V discusses

generalizations of our results and offers conclusions.

3This is in contrast to Fethke and Policano, who show how staggering may
arise In an economy with a small number of large sectors.

Our results illustrate the complenientarity of new classical and new
Keynesian macroeconomic models.

Lucas's framework of imperfect information

provides a foundation for Blanchard's model of staggered price-setting.

At

the same time, the possibility of staggering makes more plausible the Idea

that information imperfections are an important source of aggregate
fluctuations.

In actual economies, these Imperfections appear short-lived.

For example, data on the U.S. price level Is available with approximately a

one month lag. Short information lags can lead to staggering, however, and
staggering causes nominal shocks to have long-lasting real effects.

II. THE SIMPLE MODEL

Our model is an extension of Blanchard's (see the version in Blanchard and

Fischer, 1985). The economy contains a large number of firms that produce and

sell differentiated products.

Each firm fixes its nominal price for two

periods. Departing from previous work, we assume that each firm chooses the
timing of its price changes; that is, it chooses whether to set its price in

even or odd numbered periods.

In addition, a firm faces two shocks, a

monetary shock and an idiosyncratic real shock.

Thus the model can be

Interpreted as a generalization of Lucas(1973) to the case of' Imperfect
competition.4

Omitting constants and writing all variables in logs, the demand for firm

4The assumption that prices are fixed for two periods captures the Idea that
In the concluding
shocks arrive more frequently than prices are changed.
section, we discuss the implications of assuming that prices are fixed for
more than two periods, or of setting the model in continuous time.

5

i's product at time t is given by
(2.1)

it (mt—pt) — c(pjt—Pt)

+ uit ,

c>1

where Yi is firm l's output, in is the money stock, p is the aggregate price
level, Pj is firm i's price, e is the elasticity of demand, and u1 is a firm-

specific demand shock. According to (2.1), a firm's demand depends on three
variables: real money, which determines aggregate demand; the firm's relative
price; and the local shock. The aggregate price level is defined by
Pit

where N is the number of firms. Finally, firm l's cost function is
(2.2)

cit Yit ,

•Y>1

where c1 is the log of firm l's costs and y measures the returns to scale.5
Both the money stock and local demand are stochastic. nit follows a random

•'

walk and ult is white noise:
—
-

(2.1$) ult -

+ t

Jt

2
/

.

N(O,a2)

The local and aggregate shocks are uncorrelated. In addition, the local shock

is uncorrelated across firms. (This will be changed In the "neighborhood"

5Equations (2.1) and (2.2) can be derived from assumptions about tastes and
technology in a model of yeoman farmers who use their own labor to produce
differentiated goods, and who consume each others' products (see Ball and
In the yeoman farmer model,
Romer[1987] and Blanchard and Kiyotakit 1985]).

(2.2) is the log of farmer l's utility loss from supplying the labor to

produce output i' and y measures the degree of increasing marginal
disutility of labor. A farmer's total utility is given by the formula for a
firm's profits in this paper. The local demand shocks, Ui, can be generated
by adding taste shocks to farmers' utility functions, Finally, the formula
for the aggregate price level in this paper is a first order approximation of
the formula in the yeoman farmer model.

6

model of Section

If

IV.)6

firm I set its price every period with full knowledge of the shocks, It

would choose the price that maximizes profits. In logs, this price is
(2.5)

v(mt+ ult) +

where v

(1-V)pt

We assume, however, that the firm fixes its price for two periods. Let xjt be

the log of the price that firm I sets for t and t+1.

In choosing xit, the

firm uses all information available at the end of t-1. Ignoring discounting,
the firm minimizes the loss function
(2.6)

where

*2

*
2
1
Et_i{(Xit— Pjt + (xit— Pit+i) 1,

Li

is the expectation conditional on information available to firm I

at the end of t-1.

According to (2.6), the firm minimizes the expected

squared deviations of its price from the profit-maximizing level.

Because

demand is log—linear, (xi—p7)2 is proportional to (yj—y)2, the squared
deviation of output from the profit-maximizing level.7 Minimization of (2.6)
implies the simple price setting rule

(2.7)

I
i
(1/2) {Etipjt
+ Et_ipit+i}
*

xit =

*

The crucial departure of our model from previous work is the information
structure. Firms observe each others' prices when they are set, but the local

demand shocks and the money stock -- which should be interpreted as nominal

6o

qualitative

results would not change if we introduced additional

disturbances, such as cost shocks, or if we assumed that in and u follow more
complicated stochastic processes.

TMinlmizing (2.6) is equivalent to maximizing a second order approximation
to expected profits (see Parkin).

7

aggregate demand --

are observed with a lag. It is easier to collect other

firms' prices than to infer demand, which requires knowledge of others' sales.

Specifically, the government collects information on output and the money

stock and publishes it with a two period lag. Firms set xjt after observing

announcements at t-1, so they have full information about conditions two
periods earlier, at t-3. Assuming that

the

money stock is announced with a

two period lag, rather than a longer one, simplifies the analysis but is not
crucial. As will be clear below, a shorter lag would eliminate the information
gains from staggering, which are the focus of the paper.8

It

is useful to describe in detail the information available to a firm

when it sets xjt. While shocks are observed only through t-3, the firm sees

all prices through t-1, and therefore observes the aggregate price level
through t-1. The demand equatIon, (2.1), shows that the firm can Infer the
sum of the aggregate shock and its local shock, (m+u1), from

sales and the aggregate price level.

its

own price and

Since the firm always knows its own

price and sales, the composite signal (m+ui) is observed through t-1.

If price setting is synchronized, this completely describes the
Information that firm i uses to set xjt. But if price setting is staggered,

prices set at t-1 reveal further information. As shown below, prices set at
t-1 depend on (mt_2+uit_2); thus the average of a large number of them reveals

mt..2. This is the information gain from staggering. (Under synchronization,

81n the United States, the money stock is announced with a very short lag.
But If we interpret mt as nominal aggregate demand (money times velocity), It
is realistic to assume a significant lag.

8

firms observe the prices in effect at t-1, but these were set at t-2 based on

information about t-3.

Since mt...3 is announced, the prices reveal nothing

new.)

III. ANALYSIS OF THE SIMPLE MODEL

A. Overview

This section studies the economy described in Section II. We focus on two
price setting regimes: synchronization, in which all firms set prices in even
periods; and uniform staggering, in which half set prices in even periods and

half in odd periods. First, we describe the price setting problem facing a
firm in each regime to make clear the information gain from staggering. Then
the model is solved for the path of an individual firm's price, xjt, and the
aggregate price level,

As in previous work, staggered price setting leads

to price level inertia. We use the solutions for xjt and t to compute firms'
expected losses in the two regimes. This allows a welfare comparison.

The welfare analysis does not resolve whether firms in a decentralized
economy synchronize or stagger their price setting. Therefore, we go on to
determine when each regime is a stable Nash equilibrium by asking whether an
individual firm has an incentive to change its timing.

The algebra required to derive our results is complicated and generally
uninteresting. Therefore, the details of most calculations are relegated to
an Appendix that is available from the authors.

9

B. The Information Gain from Staggering

The Synchronized Regime: If all firms change prices at t, (t+2) and so on,

the aggregate price level does not change in alternate periods. This means

that pt:pt+i and 4_ipt:4_ipt+i. Since the money stock is a random walk,
Combining these results with firm l's price setting
rule, (2.7), and the formula for the profit-maximizing price, (2.5), leads to

(3.1) xt VE_imt_i +

(i—v)4_pt

where xt Is firm l's price in the synchronized regime.

Equation (3.1) shows that xt depends on firm i's estimates of 'ti and
Since mt_3 Is announced, estimation of ti reduces to estimation of the
last two Innovations In the money stock, (mt_i—nit_3)

(&t_1+t_2). As noted

in the previous section, firm i infers two relevant pieces of information,
(mt..2+ult_2) and (rnt_l+ujt_i), from Its sales at t-2 and t-i.

Along with

the two signals reveal (&t_2+uit.2) and (6t_1+t_2+ujt..1). When price

changes are synchronized, the firm has no additional Information.

In

particular, the most recent prices of other firms were set at the beginning of

t—2; thus they reveal only information about t-3, which has been announced by
the government.

The expectation of (ot_i+ist_2) conditional on (ISt_1+St_2+uit_1) and
(6t_2+ult_2) is given by the simple projection equation

(3.2) 4_1[6t_i+6t_2) al(ót_1+6t_2+ult_i)+a2(ôt_2÷uIt2)
where

a+2c
a1

2 , 2
22, 2
'm JJUrU/

10

and
2

a:
'.

22(2\2/2
aul am

The expectation of mt_ follows immediately:

(3.3) 4_1m_l = mt_3 + a1(sSt_1+St_2+uit_1) + a2(ISt..2÷ujt_2)
According to (3.3), expected money depends on the last announced money stock,

and the noisy information about recent changes in money. Part C of this

section uses (3.3) to solve for the aggregate price level.

But first, we

compute the expectation of the money stock when price setting is staggered.

The Uniformly Staggered Regime: When half of the firms change prices in

each period, t does not equal Pt+i•

Instead of (3.3), the price setting

equation implied by (2.5) and (2.7) is

(3.14) x vE_imt_i +

(ii!

) (4_ipt +

4_ipt+i)

where xt is firm l's price in the uniformly staggered regime.

Once again, a firm's price depends on Its estimate of mt_i.

Crucially,

this estimate is better under staggering than under synchronization. We show
that firms In the staggered regime Infer mt_2 from prices set at t-1.

Thus

the only unknown part of mt_i is t_i• In the synchronized regime, t2
unknown

because

no prices are set at t-1.

Formally, we assume that staggered firms observe mt_2 and then verify this

after solving for the price level. It turns out that each price set at t-1 Is

a linear combination of prices set at t-2 and shocks at t-2 and t-3. Since
the local shocks are uncorrelated across firms, they average to zero. Thus

ii

the average of prices set at t-i depends only on prices at t-2 and the money

stock at t—2 and t-3. When firm i sets

it knows prices at t—2 and the

money stock at t-3 (which has been announced).

Therefore, the average of

prices set at t-1 reveals the money stock at t-2.

Since firms know at_2 estimation of mt_i reduces to estimation of

The only relevant information is (6t_1+uit_l), which a firm infers from its

onto

sales at t-1. Projection of

(3.5) 4_1m_1 mt.2 +

b(St_i+uit_i)

this signal yields

,

where

Not surprisingly, (3.3) and (3.5) imply that

b a/(o+a)

the

error in estimating ti has

a smaller variance under staggering than under synchronization. This is the
information gain from staggering.

C. The Aggregate Price Level

Synchronization: Let x be the average across firms
prices are set at t (even), x

of xt.

When all

is the aggregate price level at t and t+1. To

solve for x, substitute the estimate of mt_i, (3.3), into the expression for

xjt,

(3.1). Applying

the method of undetermined coefficients and aggregating

(which eliminates the local shocks) leads to
(3.6)

p x

mt_3 + it—i

+ w2St_2

(t even),

where
va1Ei—(1-v)a1]÷va2(1—v)(a1+a2)

[1—(1—v)a1][1(i—v)(a1—a2)] —

and

[a2(i—v)]2

12

v(a1+a2)+(1—v)a2ir1

1t'

1—(1—v)a1

Uniform Staggering: In the staggered regime, half the prices in effect at
t are set at t and half are set at t-1. Thus the aggregate price level is

(3.7) p (1/2) (x +
where

is the average of prices set at t. Substituting (3.7) and (3.5) into

(3.4) and applying the method of undetermined coefficients yields9

(3.8) x x04_1 + Ximt_i

+ (1—Xø—Xi)mt_2

where
1— /v

A0

1+ iv

and

['v+(1—v)(1—X0)]b

X1>O, Xo41

4—b(1—v)(2+A0)

Combining (3.7) and (3.8) yields the solution for the aggregate price level:

(3.9) P X0p1 + (1/2){Aimt_i +

(1—Aø)mt_2 + (1—A0—Ai)mt_3}.

Equation (3.9) shows that staggering leads to price level inertia --

that

is, to slow adjustment of the price level to shocks. The degree of inertia
depends on A0. Perhaps surprisingly, it is independent of the variances of

local and aggregate shocks. Inertia is greatest (A0 is largest) when v is
small. In turn, v is small when demand is elastic so c is large, or when y,
the returns to scale parameter, is close to 1.

9mere are two solutions for 4. We choose the stable one, O<Aa<1. Note
that 4 depends on 4_2' 't2' and mt_3. Since a firm setting xtobserves
and mt_3, this verifies our claim that the firm can infer mt_2 from

13

D. The Optimal Timing of Price Changes
This section compares a firm's loss under synchronization, LS, to its loss

under staggering, LU, to determine which regime is socially optimal.

To

calculate each loss, substitute the solutions for a firm's price, xit, the
aggregate price level, t' and the profit-maximizing price, p7, into the loss
function, (2.6).10

Synchronization is socially optimal when LS<LU. One can show that the
relative sizes of LS and LU depend on two parameters: p:au/cym, the ratio of

the standard deviations of the two shocks; and v.

Numerical calculations

determine the locus of (v,p) pairs for which LS:LU. This is plotted as the
lower line In Figure 1. Below the line, LS<LU, so synchronization is optimal.
Above the line, staggering is optimal.

To understand this result, recall that staggering has both benefits and
costs. The benefit Is Improved information. There are two costs: price level

inertia, which exacerbates fluctuations in real aggregate demand; and the
unintended movements in relative prices that occur when some prices adjust
while others are fixed. Since there are both advantages and disadvantages, it
is not surprising that staggering Is optimal for some parameter values but not
for others.

Figure 1 shows that synchronization is optimal when either v or p Is
small.

v Is smal. when product demand is highly elastic (c Is large).

0The Appendix contains the expressions for the two losses along with
derivations.

1:4

'I

.4'

0
N)

$-J7J

uJ
CN

0
c\J

0
I
0

0

rJ

> 0 C 00

tf)

-

0

r'

-0000000
r—

(C

C

'—

0

C) 0 0

15

Elastic product demand implies that the fluctuations in relative prices caused

by staggering are very costly.

In addition, firms reduce these costly

fluctuations by setting prices close to those set In the previous period; thus

staggering leads to a high degree of inertia and
aggregate demand.
despite

the

large

fluctuations in

These large costs imply that staggering is

undesirable

information gains.1

to the role of p, note that if p:O, so there are no local shocks,
then synchronization is optimal. This special case is essentially the
Turning

Blanchard model. Information is perfect, and so there is no information gain
from staggering. On the other hand, as long as p Is greater than
one, its
value is unimportant.12
E. Equilibrium

While it Is interesting to compare welfare under synchronization and
staggering,

It is also important to ask when each will arise In a

decentralized economy.

Therefore, we now assume that each firm chooses

whether to change Its price in even or odd periods.
determine when synchronization and staggering are

stable

This allows us to
Nash equilibria.

a single
gain by moving to odd periods? If not, then synchronization Is a Nash

Synchronization: If all firms set prices in even periods, can
"rebel"

equilibrium.

is

is

avis also small when y is close to one -- that Is, when the cost function
almost linear.
to Figure 1, the effect of p on the relative sizes
not monotonic. We have no explanation for this result.

2According

of LS and LU

16

The rebel sets its price at t and t+2 (odd), while all other firms set

prices at t-1 and t+1 (even).

Since the economy is large, the rebel's

behavior does not affect the aggregate price level. Only the rebel changes

price at t, so p:p_1. Using (3.6),

(3.10) p Pi t'4 +

TTltSt_2 +

Tr2t_3

(t odd).

All firms but the rebel change prices at t+1, so

(3.11) P+i mt_2 +

+ W2&t.1

(t odd)

Like a firm in the staggered regime, the rebel infers mt_2 from prices set

at t-1. To see this, note from (3.10) that pLi is a combination of
nit..3, and mt_2.

When the rebel sets its price, mt_a and mt_3 have been

announced, so Pi reveals mt_2. The rebel estimates the monetary shock at
t—1 from the noisy signal (St_i+uit_i).

Thus the expectation of mt—i is

again given by (3.5).

These results lead to solutions for the rebel's price, $, and its loss,
LR. Synchronization is an equilibrium if LR>LS --

that

is, if the rebel loses

by breaking from synchronization.13 The upper line in Figure 1 shows the
(v,p) combinations for which LR=LS. Below this line, synchronization is an
equilibrium; above the line, it is not.

The explanation for this result is that there are both costs and benefits
to rebelling. The rebel gains information by observing prices set recently by

all other firms. On the other hand, breaking from synchronization leads to
large fluctuations in the rebel's relative price. If either v or p is small

'3More precisely, synchronization is an equilibrium if LR.LS, but it is a
stable equilibrium only if LR>LS.

17

(so either relative price fluctuations have large costs or the information

gains from staggering are small),

no one chooses to break from

synchronization.

Figure 1 shows that for parameter values between the two lines,
synchronization is socially optimal but not a Nash equilibrium.

In this

region, the cost to a rebel of changing its price alone is greater than the

cost to a firm in the staggered regime of changing its price with half the
other firms. As a result, firms in the staggered regime are better off than
firms in the synchronized regime, but no firm is willing to pay the large cost
of breaking from synchronization.

Uniform Staggering: Clearly, uniform staggering is a Nash equilibrium for
all parameter values. The losses of even and odd period price setters are the

same and do not change if a single firm switches cohorts. Therefore, no firm
can gain by switching.

In this simple model, however, the staggered equilibrium is never stable.

Stability of staggering is defined as follows: after a small perturbation in
the cohort sizes away from half and half, firms in the larger group can gain
by moving to the smaller one, restoring the equal sizes. To see whether this
condition is met, we study the behavior of the economy when the cohorts have
arbitrary sizes. We compute a firm's loss as a function of the proportion of

firms in Its cohort, k. The derivative of this function at k:1/2 is always
negative. Thus, following a perturbation away from uniform staggering, firms
in the larger cohort are better off than firms in the smaller one. All firms

18

want to join the larger group, and so uniform staggering is

unstable)

This result arises because each firm wants to minimize fluctuations in its

relative price, and therefore wants to synchronize its price-setting with as

many firms as possible. Crucially, this incentive to join the larger cohort
is not offset by any information loss. When a firm in the large cohort sets
its price, it observes prices set in the previous period by 504 of the firms;

a firm in the small cohort observes prices set by 50+% of the firms. Because

the economy is large, the two sets of prices reveal the same information.

Specifically, when either set is averaged, the local shocks that affect
individual prices average to zero, and the same aggregate information (mt_2)
is revealed.

The earlier parts of this section show that staggering may be socially
optimal. The stability result implies, however, that we have not explained
why staggering occurs in a decentralized economy. Fortunately, this result is

not robust. The next section presents a plausible modification of the model
that provides an incentive for firms to join the smaller of two cohorts. This
leads to stable equilibria with uniform staggering.

0ne can show that no regime other than synchronization or uniform
staggering (that is, no value of k besides 1/2 and 1) is ever an equilibrium.
Thus the model possesses no stable equilibrium for parameter values above the
upper line in Figure 1.

19

IV. THE NEIGHBORHOOD

MODEL

A. Motivation
In the previous section, uniform staggering is unstable because each firm
wants to join the larger of two price—setting cohorts. There are several ways
to

reverse this result. One

is

costly.

approach is

to assume that

gathering price data

Suppose that the cost of observing enough prices set at t—1 to

obtain a good estimate of mt_2 increases as the (t-1) cohort shrinks. (For
example,

firms might need to travel farther to reach a given number of t-1

price setters.)

This is an incentive for each firm to set its price after the

larger cohort --

that

is, to join the smaller cohort.15

Another approach, and the one adopted here, is to note that a firm cares
more about prices in its industry or geographic area than about prices in the

rest of the economy. It is easy to see why a firm learns more from prices in

its "neighborhood."

If neighboring firms are direct competitors, then a

firm's demand depends heavily on its neighbors' prices.

In addition, if

demand shocks are correlated within a locality or industry, neighbors' prices
provide information about neighborhood demand.

If neighborhoods are small, then firms have an incentive to join the
smaller of two price-setting cohorts. In the model without neighborhoods, the

5Alternatively, one could assume that a firm observes only a small subset

of

of

other firms' prices. In this case, the firm obtains an imperfect estimate

xt_1. When the prices observed by the firm include many set at t—1, the
of xtl is more precise, and therefore provides more information
about mt.2. This is an incentive for the firm to join the smaller cohort.

estimate

20

cohorts have the same information as long as both are large in absolute terms.

But in a neighborhood of ten firms (for example), six prices reveal more than

Thus each firm has an incentive to change its price after as many

four.

neigXthors as possible.

We

formalize these ideas by assuming that local demand shocks are

correlated across neighboring firms. Part B of this section describes this
modification

of the simple

same questions

model. The remainder of the section addresses the

as Section III: When are synchronization and staggering

socially optimal, and when is each a stable equilibrium?
B. Revision of the Model

Assume that each firm belongs to a neigiborhood of n firms, where n is a

small number. The economy contains a large number of
the

neighborhoods. Part of

local demand shook, uit, Is common to firms within a neighborhood.

Therefore,
Formally,

a firm learns about its

If firm i Is a member of neighborhood I, then

(4.1) uit

is

shock by observing neighbors' prices.

+ e1_1 +

Tilt

common to firms within a neighborhood but uncorrelated across

neighborhoods, while i

is

uncorrelated across all firms. e and ii are both

white noise with mean zero and variances 4 and

a.

Persistence of the neighborhood shock Is crucial. We show that neighbors'

prices set at t-1 contain Information about e1_2. According to (4.1), 01t2
is part of uit_1; thus neighbors' prices help a firm disentangle ujt_1 and
mt_i.

If u were not serially correlated, the information about e1_2 In

neighbors' prices would not be useful for estimating t-1 shocks.

21

Aside from the composition of ujt, the model is the same

and III.

as

in Sections II

In particular, we retain the simplifying assumption that complete

information is available with a two period lag. Thus firms setting xjt at the
end of t-1 observe m, G1, and r1 for t-3 and earlier.16
C. Optimality and the Stability of synchronization

This section studies the optimal timing of price

changes and the

conditions under which synchronization is a Nash equilibrium. In other words,

the two lines in Figure 1 are recomputed for the neighborhood model.

In

comparing regimes, we define uniform staggering as an equal split of each
neighborhood into odd and even period price setters.17 The results and their

derivations are similar to the ones for the simple model.

Therefore, we

sketch the analysis here (the Appendix contains details).

The information gain from staggering is greater in the current model than

in the simple model.

Once again, mt2 is revealed by the average of all

prices set at t-1. The additional information comes from neighborhood prices.

Each price set by a neighbor of firm i at t—1,

xjt_l, reveals (OIt_2+rijt_2),

the sum at t—2 of the neighborhood shock and the neighbor's idiosyncratic
shock.

Firm i also infers (e1_2+n1..2), the t-2 sum of the neighborhood

6When t-3 shocks are known, xjt depends on information about t-1, t-2, and
t—3.
In contrast, if some shocks were never revealed, firms would estimate
current-shocks using information from all previous periods.
As a result,
prices would depend on shocks from t—1 back to t-o'.

17Th1s is not the only reasonable definition. We could also study regimes
in which half of all firms belong to each cohort but not every neighborhood is
divided equally. However, one can show that no type of staggering besides an
equal split of each neighborhood can be a stable equilibrium.

22

shock and its own idiosyncratic shock, from its t-2 sales.

When firm I

averages this information over the t-1 price setters and itself (a total of
(n/2)+1 observations), it obtains (ei_2+iii_2 ), where r1 is the average of
the flj'S and

In the simple model, firm i estimates

from (t_i+uit_O.

In the

current model, firm I uses both (t_1+uIt_1) and (eI_2+I_2), and this
leads to better estimates.

Intuitively, (OIt_2+it_2) is a noisy signal of

which Is part of ujt_1.
disentangle ujt_1 and

Thus observing (8It_2+it_2) helps firm I

Since the information gains from staggering are

greater in this model than in the simple one, the ranges of parameter values

over which staggering Is socially optimal and over which synchronization is
not an equilibrium are somewhat larger. That is, both lines In Figure 1 move
down.

Presentation of the results is complicated by the addition of two
parameters:

n, the size of the neighborhood; and cx=4ici, the relative

importance of neighborhood and firm-specific shocks. For comparability with
Figure 1, we fix n and

and graph the results In (v,p) space.

Figure 2 presents results for ct:1 and n:1O.

Below the lowest line,

synchronization Is Pareto superior to uniform staggering. Below the middle
line, synchronization is an equilibrium. Figure 3 shows the consequences of
varying

and n These parameters do not affect the qualitative results.

D. The Stability of Uniform Staggering
The Important departure of the neighborhood model from the simple model of

Section III is that uniform staggering is a stable Nash equilibrium for some

1

0.0

0.

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

o.g

1.0

V

0
5

ALPHA

10

RHO

15

20

25

1, NEIGHBORHOOD SIZE

2.

30

10

L?:

L

L-°

0

C.

06

0.8
0.7

0.9

1.0

0.

0.

0.2

0.3

0.'

0.6
0.5

0.8
0.7

0.9

RHO

IS

20
25

30

4

5

10

RII0

15

20

25

30

ALPHA = .. 1, NEIGHBORHOOD SIZE = 10

10

ALPHA = 1, NEIGHBORHOOD SIZE

00

0.

0.2

0.3

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.7

0.9
0.8

1.0

VI

v

3

0

ALPHA

5

5

IS
RHO

20

25

30

= 25

10

HO

IS

20

25

30

10, NEIGHBORHOOD SIZE = 10

10

ALPHA =. 1, NEIGHBORHOOD SIZE

25

parameter values.

As in the simple model, staggering is always an

equilibrium, and so we focus on the question of stability.18 Stability is
defined as follows. Suppose that one firm in each neighborhood is moved from

the odd to the even cohort, so that (+1) firms in each neighborhood set
prices in even periods and (-1) set them In odd periods. Uniform staggering
is stable if firms in the larger cohort have greater losses than firms in the
smaller cohort. 19

Let LE and L° be the losses of firms in the even (larger) and odd
(smaller) cohorts.

In Figures 2 and 3, the top line shows the parameter

values for which LE:LO. Above this line, uniform staggering Is stable; below
the line, It is not.

Staggering can be stable because firms In the smaller of two cohorts have

The equilibrium question Is more subtle than In the simple model. Uniform
staggering Is a Nash equilibrium if no firm has an Incentive to move from one
of its neighborhood's cohorts to the other, given that all other neighborhoods
remain equally divided.
One can show that a firm that switches loses

Information because It synchronizes Its price setting with more of its
neighbors. There is no offsetting gain, because the firm still changes prices
with 50% of the economy, and therefore experiences the same fluctuations In
its relative price.
No firm wants to switch, and so staggering Is an
equilibrium.

'9There are other reasonable definitions of stability based on different
perturbations. For example, we could move one firm In a single neighborhood

from the odd to the even cohort while leaving the other neighborhoods
unchanged and compare the losses of the two cohorts in the perturbed
neighborhood. By this weak definition, the condition for stability Is the
same as the condition for staggering to be a Nash equilibrium, and it always
holds (see the previous footnote). Alternatively, we could perturb a small
but non-negligible proportion of the neighborhoods while leaving the others
unchanged. With this definition, we conjecture that staggering is stable for
a wider range of parameter values than in the text.

26

better

information.

A firm setting its price at t observes prices set at t—1.

These reveal (eI_2+l_2), where again r is the average of r over firm I
and all neighbors setting prices at t—1.

A firm in the smaller cohort

observes more prices set at t-1, and therefore it-2 has a smaller variance.

(e1_2+r1_2) is a better estimate of eit_2, and so it is more useful in
disentangling local and aggregate shocks.

For some parameter values, this

information advantage outweighs the disadvantage of changing prices at the
same

time

as less than half the firms.

It is crucial that the neighborhoods are small. A firm that observes six
neighboring prices set at t-1 obtains a better estimate of 81t-2 than a firm
that observes four.

In contrast, If the neighborhoods were large, a firm

observing prices set by 50%+ of its neighborhood would learn no more than a
firm observing 50-%. The fljt-2' would average to zero for both cohorts, and
so all firms would observe e1_2 exactly.
Figure 2 shows that staggering Is stable for large values of v. Again, if
v is small, then product demand is highly elastic and relative price variation

is very costly.

In this situation, firms want to synchronize price—setting

with as much of the economy as possible by joining the large cohort.

Staggering Is also stable when p Is large --

that

is, when local shocks

are large relative to monetary shocks. As p approaches infinity, the lines
in Figures 2 and 3 approach the horizontal axis, which means that staggering

Is stable (and socially optimal) for all v.

As Lucas (1977) emphasizes,

aggregate shocks are responsible for only a small part of the uncertainty
facing firms in actual economies. Thus it seems realistic to assume that p

27

is

large, and hence that staggering is stable for a wide range of v.

A
stable

large p

leads to staggering

aggregate

price level.

because small monetary

shocks imply a

When the price level is stable, a firm's

relative price does not fluctuate much even if many other prices adjust while

the firm's price is fixed. Thus there is little cost to joining the smaller

of two cohorts. But the benefit does not disappear. Even if monetary shocks

are unimportant, firms want to distinguish neighborhood shocks from firmspecific shocks, and so they value the greater information of the small group.
All firms want to join the small cohort, and so staggering is stable.2°
E. Comparison of Equilibrium and Optimum

As in the simple model, the conditions under which synchronization and
staggering are stable equilibria differ from the conditions under which they
are socially optimal.

For parameter values between the two lower lines in

Figures 2 and 3, synchronIzation is an equilibrium even though staggering is
optimal. In addition, between the top and bottom lines, staggering is optimal

but not a stable equilibrium. According to these results, the incentives for
an individual firm to break from synchronization or to join the smaller of two

cohorts are weaker than the Incentives for a social planner to choose
staggering.

Furthermore, for parameter values between the two upper lines,

there is no stable equilibrium.

20Figure 3 shows that changes In n and
have little effect on the
There Is one exception: for z.1, staggering Is
stable only for a narrow range of v. When
Is small, neighborhood shocks
stability of staggering.

are small compared to firm—specific shocks; thus the model is close to the
model without neighborhoods, in which staggering Is never stable.

28

The relative positions of the three lines in Figures 2 and 3 do not appear

robust. To take an example discussed above, suppose that gathering price data

is costly. Let c(k) be the cost of inferring •t-2 from prices set at t—1,
where k is the proportion of the economy in a firm's cohort.

Assume' that

c'(k)>O: the cost of gathering price data rises as a firm's cohort grows and
the t-1 cohort shrinks.

To see the implications for the positions of the

lines, recall that the bottom line is determined by comparing LS to LU, and
the middle line by comparing LS to LR. This means that the relation between
the two lower lines depends on LU and LR. The cost of gathering prices under
uniform staggering is c(.5), while the cost to the rebel is c(O), because no

other firm belongs to the rebel's cohort. Since c(.5) is greater than c(O),
introducing the cost raises LU more than it raises LR. One can show that this

raises the bottom line relative to the middle line, and that the two may
switch positions.
others.

By a similar argument, the top line may move below the

(The position of the top line depends on c'(.5), which affects the

benefit from belonging to the small cohort after a perturbation away from
uniform staggering. )21

V. CONCLUSION

Imperfect information can lead to staggered price setting.

While

fluctuations in relative prices are minimized when firms make decisions at the

same times, a firm gains valuable information about aggregate demand if it

21We also suspect that changing assumptions about the timing of
announcements or the stochastic processes followed by shocks could change the
relative positions of the lines.

29

waits

to see other prices. This information gain can lead firms to break from

synchronization and can make staggering a stable equilibrium. Thus staggered
price adjustment, a crucial foundation of new Keynesian macroeconomic models,
can

arise

from rational economic behavior.

Imperfect information can also make

staggering

socially optimal.

Staggering leads to price level inertia, which exacerbates

aggregate

fluctuations. However, by helping firms set prices closer to full information

levels, staggering creates efficiency gains that may outweigh the costs.
Policy

proposals to reduce staggering -— for example, by requiring labor

unions to sign contracts at the same times -lessening

could

reduce welfare despite

inertia.

The model predicts that staggering is least likely when firms are nearly
perfectly competitive and when idiosyncratic shocks are small.

If the model

is applied to an industry rather than the entire economy, these predictions
are borne out by casual observation. In the automobile industry, products are

fairly close substitutes and shocks are likely to affect all firms equally.

The result Is the synchronized pricing that we see. On the other hand, the
drug store on the corner and the diner next door produce goods that are poor

substitutes, and they are likely to face different shocks. Thus It Is not
surprising that they change prices at different times.

This paper has studied a very specific model. Some results, notably the

relation between the equilibrium and optimal regimes, are not likely to be
robust. We doubt, however, that reasonable changes in the model would reverse
the conclusion that staggering can be both optimal and a stable equilibrium if

30

firms possess strong market power or idiosyncratic shocks are large.

A natural extension of our analysis is to relax the assumption that prices

are fixed for two periods. If prices are fixed for longer, one can show that
the incentive for a rebel to break from synchronization is greater. Thus the

region of parameter values for which synchronization is an equilibrium is
smaller.

Intuitively, if prices are set for many periods, then a rebel

setting its price one period after other firms is only slightly out of step.
The cost in relative price fluctuations is small, while the rebel still gains

the information in others' prices.

Unfortunately, it is very difficult to

determine how changing the frequency of price adjustment affects the socially
optimal regime and the stability of uniform staggering

Our intuition about the costs and benefits of staggering carries over to

continuous time, but the model must be modified. In this paper, firms have

perfect information about prices set in the most recent period.

In a

continuous time model, it would be unrealistic to assume that firms observe
and respond to others' prices the instant they are set.22 Instead, one might
assume that firms learn about prices slowly, gaining full information after a

discrete amount of time (e.g., the time it takes to visit all neighboring
stores).

This modification of the model would complicate the analysis

considerably.

22For example, given the length of labor contract negotiations, one union's
wage can influence another's only if the first union signs its contract
significantly earlier.

31

REFERENCES

Ball,

Laurence and David Homer, The Equilibrium and Optimal Timing
of Price Changes, mimeo, NYU 1986.

Ball, Laurence and David Homer, Are Prices Too Sticky?, N.B.E.R. Working
Paper No. 2171, January 1987.
Blanchard, Olivier J., Price Asynchronization and Price Level
Inertia, in R. Dornbush and M. Simonsen, eds. Inflation, Debt and
Indexation (Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1983) pg. 3—2k.

Blanchard, Olivier J., The Wage-Price Spiral, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 101 (August 1986): 5113_565.
Blanchard, Olivier J.
•imeo, M.I.T. 1985.

and

Stanley Fischer, Macroeconomics, Chapter 9,

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Monopolistic
Competition, Aggregate Demand Externalities and Real Effects of
Nominal Money, N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 1770, December 1985.
Fethke, Gary and Andrew Policano, Wage Contingencies, the Pattern of
Negotiation and Aggregate Implications of Alternative Contract
Structures, Journal of Monetary Economics 111 (September 198k): 151-170.
Fethice, Gary and Andrew Policano, Will Wage Setters Ever Stagger

Decision?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (November 1986): 867-877.
Hall, Robert E. and John B. Taylor. Macroeconomics. (New York, N.Y.:
W.W. Norton and Co.) 1986.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., Some International Evidence on Output Inflation
Tradeoffs, American Economic Review 63 (June 1973): 326-33k.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., Understanding Business Cycles, Carnegie-Rochester
Series on Public Policy 5 (1977): 7-29.
Maskin, Eric S. and Jean Tirole, Models of Dynamic Oligopoly II: Competition
through Prices, M.I.T. Department of Economics Working Paper No. 373, 1985.
Okun, Arthur H., Prices and Quantities, (Washington D. C.: The
Brookings Institution) 1981.

Parkin, Michael, The Output-Inflation Trade-off When Prices are Costly
to Change, Journal of Political Economy 9k (February 1986): 200-22k.

32

Taylor, John B., Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts, Journal
of Political Economy 88 (February 1980): 1-23.

