                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SOCIAL NORMS, LABOR MARKET OPPORTUNITIES, AND THE MARRIAGE
                        GAP FOR SKILLED WOMEN

                                         Marianne Bertrand
                                          Patricia Cortés
                                          Claudia Olivetti
                                            Jessica Pan

                                        Working Paper 22015
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22015


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016




Research support from the Global Asia Institute JY Pillay Comparative Asia Research Centre Grant
is gratefully acknowledged. We thank seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, 2015 SOLE/EALE
Meetings, Hitotsubashi Summer Institute in Labor Economics, Hunter College, and the 2016 ASSA
Meetings for numerous helpful comments. Maria Dolores Palacios provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marianne Bertrand, Patricia Cortés, Claudia Olivetti, and Jessica Pan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Norms, Labor Market Opportunities, and the Marriage Gap for Skilled Women
Marianne Bertrand, Patricia Cortés, Claudia Olivetti, and Jessica Pan
NBER Working Paper No. 22015
February 2016
JEL No. J0,J01,J11,J12,J16

                                             ABSTRACT

In most of the developed world, skilled women marry at a lower rate than unskilled women. We document
heterogeneity across countries in how the marriage gap for skilled women has evolved over time. As
labor market opportunities for women have improved, the marriage gap has been growing in some
countries but shrinking in others. We discuss a theoretical model in which the (negative) social attitudes
towards working women might contribute towards the lower marriage rate of skilled women, and might
also induce a non-linear relationship between their labor market prospects and their marriage outcomes.
The model is suited to understand the dynamics of the marriage gap for skilled women over time within
a country with set social attitudes towards working women. The model also delivers predictions about
how the marriage gap for skilled women should react to changes in their labor market opportunities
across countries with more or less conservative attitudes towards working women. We test the key
predictions of this model in a panel of 23 developed countries, as well as in a panel of US states.


Marianne Bertrand                                   Claudia Olivetti
Booth School of Business                            Boston College
University of Chicago                               Department of Economics
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                          Maloney Hall
Chicago, IL 60637                                   Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER                                            and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu                  claudia.olivetti@bc.edu

Patricia Cortés                                     Jessica Pan
Boston University                                   Department of Economics
pcortes@bu.edu                                      National University of Singapore
                                                    1 Arts Link
                                                    Singapore 117570
                                                    jesspan@nus.edu.sg
1       Introduction

Marriage rates have been declining throughout most of the industrialized world. In 2010, one in five
adults aged 35 to 44 in the US had never married, compared to about 7% in 1970 (Pew Research
Center, 2014). The marriage rate in the EU-28 has declined by close to 50 percent between 1965
and 2011, from 7.8 per 1 000 persons to 4.2 (Eurostat, 2015).1 Similarly, the proportion of single
women aged 35 to 39 has increased in East Asia (Jones and Gubhaju, 2009), reaching about one in
five in Hong Kong and Japan by the mid to late 2000s compared to one in twenty, at most, in 1970.
These declines in marriage rates have been accompanied by a steady rise in age at first marriage
in many of these countries. These overall trends in the marriage rate have received widespread
attention, and influential work has discussed the marriage market and fertility implications of
women’s advancement in education and labor markets (Becker, 1973, Goldin, 2006, Stevenson and
Wolfers, 2007 and Greenwood et al., 2012).

A somewhat overlooked aspect of the discussion surrounding the overall decline in marriage has been
how it has di↵erentially a↵ected skilled and unskilled women. In the US, research has documented
a reversal over time of the skilled-unskilled marriage gap, with college-educated women today being
as likely, if not more likely, to get married relative to those without a college education (Isen and
Stevenson, 2010, Pew Research Center, 2010). In contrast, a number of countries in East Asia have
been grappling with the reverse phenomenon, with highly educated women today marrying at a
particularly low rate relative to their less educated counterparts (Economist, 2011, Hwang, 2015).
For example, 35% and 20% of college-educated women between the ages 35 and 39 in Hong Kong
and Korea, respectively, remained single in 2011. Many of these women will likely remain childless
given how rare out-of-wedlock births remain in most of Asia (OECD Family Database, 2012).2

In this paper, we start by systematically documenting the marriage gap between skilled and un-
skilled women and its evolution over time for a group of 23 developed countries covering the period
from 1995 to 2010. While skilled women overall marry at a lower rate than unskilled women, we
show that this gap has been decreasing, in some cases even reversing, in North America, most
Nordic countries, and some parts of Western Europe. On the other hand, the gap has remained
constant or widened in East Asian countries as well as parts of Southern Europe. This divergence
in relative marriage market outcomes for skilled women across developed countries has occurred
despite consistent patterns of increased labor market opportunities for skilled women (and men) in
all of these countries.

To explain these patterns, we propose a theoretical model in which (negative) social attitudes
    1
    http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Marriage_and_divorce_statistics
    2
    In 2012, the share of births outside of marriage was just over 2% in Korea and Japan, compared to the OECD
average of 39%. The share of out-of-wedlock births in the US is about 40% (OECD Family Database, 2012)



                                                      2
towards working women might contribute towards the lower marriage rate of skilled women, and
might also induce a non-linear relationship between their labor market prospects and their marriage
outcomes. Borrowing from Fernandez, Fogli and Olivetti (FFO, 2004), the key ingredient of the
model is that the gender norm generates spousal disagreement over the provision of the household
public good. Since skilled women have higher wages and hence are more likely to participate in the
labor market, they provide less of the public good relative to unskilled women, which contributes
to making them less attractive potential partners in the marriage market.

While FFO (2004) study how this marriage/work trade-o↵ endogenously evolves from one genera-
tion to the next, in this paper, we abstract from such intergenerational considerations and explore
instead, using a static model, the implications of the model for the interaction between economic op-
portunities, gender norms and marriage rates across skill groups. In particular, the model predicts a
U-shaped relationship between the skilled-unskilled marriage gap for women and their market wage.
Intuitively, at low wage levels, the loss in public good consumption due to the wife working, which
is increasing in her market wage, is too large relative to the husband’s gains from any externality
from his wife’s own private consumption. However, when the market wage is high enough, working
women become increasingly more attractive relative to non-working women as husbands value the
externality of their wife’s higher income. Thus, assuming fixed or slow-changing social norms, the
model predicts that as women’s labor market opportunities increase, the marriage “penalty” for
skilled women first increases, reaches a peak and then declines, eventually switching sign.

Comparing two societies that only di↵er in the conservativeness of their gender identity norms, the
model predicts that the relative marriage deficit for skilled women will be higher in more traditional
societies and that a given increase in skilled women’s wages will be more likely to be associated
with an increase in the marriage deficit for skilled women in the more traditional society, but a
decrease in that deficit in the more gender equal society.

In the empirical section of the paper, we take the key predictions of the theory to a panel of 23
developed countries. As predicted by the model, we find a strong positive relationship between the
relative deficit skilled women experience in the marriage market and the degree of gender-related
conservatism. We also show that the relationship between the skilled-unskilled gap in marriage
rates and educated women’s labor market opportunities appear to di↵er markedly across groups of
countries in a way that is consistent with the prediction of a U-shape relationship derived by our
model, with increases in skilled women’s wages decreasing their relative likelihood of marrying in
more traditional countries but increasing this likelihood in countries with more gender equal norms.

We demonstrate the robustness of these results to alternative definitions of a long-term and stable
relationship between men and women, such as definitions that include cohabitation or focus instead
on fertility outcomes. We also show that the results are not driven solely by the East Asian
countries, and are robust to alternative measures of gender norms.


                                                  3
A final implication of the theory that we bring to the data is with respect to women’s educational
choice. Our model predicts that in more conservative countries, a lower fraction of women are willing
to acquire higher education as they anticipate facing greater barriers in the marriage market as
skilled women. This is exactly what we find: the share of females with tertiary education in our
sample of developed countries is negatively related to the strength of the gender norms. Moreover,
consistent with the underlying mechanism in the model, we find that a relatively higher share of
women are educated in countries where the marriage market deficit for skilled women is smaller.

Finally, and importantly, we replicate all of the empirical tests above in a panel of US states covering
the 1970 to 2010 period. One key benefit of this replication exercise is that the variation we exploit
within a single country is less subject to the unobserved heterogeneity concerns that mire most
cross-country analyses. Exploiting di↵erences across 45 states in the strength of gender norms, we
show that the key findings in the country panel carry through in the US state panel.

Our paper is related to a small but growing literature that emphasizes how the interaction of eco-
nomic development (and in particular, women’s growing labor market opportunities) and social
norms could impact marriage and fertility. Hwang (2015) uses a variant of FFO’s (2004) dynamic
model of intergenerational transmission of gender attitudes to rationalize the decreasing marriage
rates experienced by female college graduates in developed Asian economies. In Hwang’s (2015)
model, mothers’ education a↵ects son’s preferences: only men born to college educated moth-
ers acquire non-traditional gender role attitudes.3 Thus, Hwang shows, in a society with very
few college-educated mothers, most men are traditional, and skilled women face a large marriage
penalty. Another related paper is Kawaguchi and Lee (2014) who argue that the high demand
for foreign brides in developed Asian economies is the consequence of improvements in women’s
economic status in countries characterized by very traditional gender roles. While both of these
papers focus almost exclusively on rationalizing the recent East Asian experience, our paper takes
a broader view and proposes a simple model that can reconcile the marriage patterns observed in
a large sample of developed countries.

Finally, our paper is closest in spirit to earlier work by Feyrer et al (2008) who propose that cross-
country fertility patterns could be explained by the interaction between the increasing status of
women in the workforce and their status in the household. Like us, Feyrer et al (2008) suggest the
possibility of a non-monotonic relationship between changes over time in the status of women in
the workforce and an important social outcome (fertility in their case) due to slow changing norms.
At low levels of female wages, women specialize in household production and fertility is high. In an
intermediate phase, women have increasing opportunities in the labor market but still shoulder the
bulk of household production, resulting in much reduced fertility. Finally, as women’s labor market
  3
   This is in contrast with FFO (2004), who assume that a man’s preference for a stay-home wife depends on his
mother’s labor force participation, and not education.



                                                      4
opportunities further improve, men begin to share in the burden of child care at home, and fertility
is higher than in the intermediate phase. Our specific focus is obviously di↵erent (di↵erences in
marriage market outcomes for skilled vs unskilled women and implications for women’s educational
choices) and we propose a formal model to guide our thinking, but at the core, both Feyrer et al
(2008) and our paper share an interest in exploring the implications of slow moving gender norms
in the face of growing labor market opportunities for women.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, and presents some
descriptive facts for the cross-country sample. Section 3 presents a static model of marriage,
household decision making and education decisions. Section 4 lays out the empirical tests of the
model and presents the results using the cross-country panel and the panel of US states. Section 5
concludes.



2     Cross-Country Sample: Data Description and Descriptive Facts

2.1   Data Description

Gender Norms

We use two main sources of data to measure cross-country di↵erences in attitudes toward the role
of women in society. The first dataset is the Integrated Values Survey (IVS) from 2006-2013,
which is a harmonized dataset that covers both the European Value Survey (EVS) and the World
Value Survey (WVS). This dataset provides a range of gender-related questions that were asked
consistently across a broad set of countries. For our main analysis, we use the following question:
“When jobs are scarce, men have more right to a job than women.” The possible responses to the
question are agree, disagree or neither. We interpret agreement to this question as expressing the
view that it is more important for men to be employed in the labor market relative to women. We
chose this question as it provides us with the broadest coverage of countries. For each country,
we focus on the responses of individuals age 18 and older. Appendix Table 1 reports the average
response to this question for each of the 23 countries in our sample as well as the years in which the
survey questions were asked. The table also includes information on the region and sexism group
(high, medium and low) that each country belongs to.

While this variable clearly measures some degree of conservatism toward gender roles, one concern
is that it does not directly contrast the specific gender roles that are central in our model. The
social norm in the model is based on the belief that some individuals may regard a woman’s primary
sphere to be in the home (provision of the household public good) while a man’s primary sphere
is in the labor market. To get at this norm more directly, we turn to a second data source, the



                                                  5
International Social Science Program (ISSP). The ISSP is a cross-country collaboration that seeks
to build on pre-existing social surveys such as the General Social Survey (GSS) to allow for cross-
country comparisons of social trends. Each year, the ISSP rotates a set of topics. Our analysis
draws on the questions in the 2002 and 2012 waves of the Family and Changing Gender Roles
module. To complement our measure from the IVS, we use the following question from the ISSP:
“A man’s job is to earn money; a woman’s job is to look after the home and family.” Respondents
indicate their agreement to this statement on a five-point scale: agree strongly, agree, neither agree
nor disagree, disagree, and disagree strongly. We code the response “agree” and “strongly agree”
as indicating a greater degree of gender conservatism. The downside of using this question is that
our sample is reduced by three countries.4

Table 1 summarizes the average responses to both questions by region, separately by gender, as
well as by educational attainment for men. As expected, there is significant variation in these
gender attitude measures across regions. On average, about a third of East Asians agree with
both statements, but only between 3 to 8 percent of people in the Nordic countries do. Canada
and the United States, as well as parts of Western Europe (UK, France, Belgium and Ireland),
have more liberal gender norms compared to countries in Southern Europe and the Eastern part of
West Europe (Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and Netherlands). Across countries, the correlation
between the average responses to the IVS and ISSP questions is high (0.88).

In most regions, males are more likely to agree with the statements. Interestingly though, the
gender gap within country is rarely larger than 5 percentage points.5 Given that the di↵erences
in responses between males and females are not large (particularly in terms of the cross-country
rankings), for our main analysis, we will focus on the average response to the questions across males
and females. Because of the relatively small sample sizes available for each country in the attitude
surveys, focusing on the average response also allows us to construct a more precise measure of
gender-related attitudes across countries. Nonetheless, the empirical results are largely similar if
we rely only on male responses to the survey questions.

One limitation of the cross-country data on gender attitudes is that the surveys were not conducted
in the same year in each country. The survey dates range from 2006 to 2013 for the IVS, and from
2002 to 2012 for the ISSP. Although both the IVS and ISSP include data on attitudes for earlier
points in time, we choose to focus on these specific years to ensure comparability and the broadest
coverage across countries.6 Specifically, to construct the country-specific aggregate measure of
   4
     See Appendix Table 1 for the average response to this question for each country with ISSP data. Hong Kong,
Greece, and Italy are excluded from the 2002 and 2012 ISSP samples.
   5
     Larger gaps within countries are observed between skilled and unskilled men: educated men tend to be less
conservative.
   6
     The earlier years of the surveys cover a relatively small number of countries, making it difficult to distinguish
actual di↵erences in responses across countries from di↵erences due to the di↵erent survey years. Therefore, rather



                                                          6
gender norms, we first remove the survey year e↵ect by obtaining the residuals from a regression
of the individual responses to each gender-related question on a linear term indicating the survey
year for the IVS, and a dummy for the 2012 survey year for the ISSP.7 Next, we use the residuals
from the previous regression to create a country-specific measure of “average” gender norms, which
is simply the mean across all years of the residual individual-level responses in a given country. For
ease of interpretation, we standardize the resulting aggregate gender norm measure to have mean
zero and standard deviation one in the sample of 23 countries.

One particular issue with our focus on the reported attitudes in these specific years is that the
time period covered does not overlap with the earlier time period for which we are measuring the
marriage market and labor market outcomes. For example, one might be concerned that if there
are di↵erential trends in gender-related attitudes over time across countries, focusing on attitudes
at a single point in time could lead to potentially misleading inferences. Nevertheless, examining
trends over time for each gender-related attitude question, plotted separately by the five regions
(North America, two groups of countries in Western Europe, Southern Europe, Nordic countries,
and East Asia) shows that while all the groups of countries have experienced some decline in the
conservativeness of gender attitudes,8 the relative ranking of countries in terms of average responses
to both gender-related attitude questions has been largely constant over time. The cross-country
rank correlation in the average response to the question “when jobs are scarce, men have more
right to a job than women” across IVS survey waves (1990-1998 and 2007-2013) is approximately
0.89. This suggests that the country-level variation in gender-related attitudes is largely stable over
time. For all our empirical analyses, in addition to the continuous measures of gender norms, we
will also present results comparing outcomes across three groups of countries with high, medium,
and low sexism.

Marriage Rates and Labor Market Outcomes

We use several datasets to construct marriage and labor market outcomes at the country level.
Our main datasets are the European Union Labor Force Survey (EU-LFS), the European Union
Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC), the European Community Household Panel
(ECHP), and the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), supplemented with Census and Labor Force
Surveys for most non-European countries. The exceptions are Japan and Korea, for which we use
smaller surveys. A description of data sources by country and year can be found in Appendix Table
than pooling all available data, we focus on the later time period where there is more consistent coverage of a large
sample of countries.
   7
     We do not control for the full set of year dummies for the IVS as the set of countries available in each year from
2006 to 2013 is quite di↵erent (see Appendix Table 1), hence, including the full set of year fixed e↵ects would imply
that the year e↵ects would be identified o↵ very di↵erent subgroups of countries. For the ISSP, since we only have
two time periods, 2002 and 2012, we use a dummy for 2012 to capture the survey year e↵ects.
   8
     The only exception are countries in the Eastern part of West Europe in the ISSP.



                                                          7
2. For every country, we work with survey years closest to 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2010.

Our marriage outcomes are based on individuals aged 35-44. This age range was chosen as a
compromise between having data for the most recent cohort (individuals aged 35-44 in 2010) and
observing completed first marriage decisions among individuals in each cohort. The coding of the
marital status variable varies by data source and country.9 In most countries,“married” individuals
include either formal unions or registered partnerships.

For each cohort of individuals in a given country and year, we construct measures of the labor
market conditions that they are likely to face based on the labor market outcomes of individuals
aged 25 to 54 in that country and year. These measures include the average annual wages of
high-skill females and males, the skilled-unskilled wage premium for males and females, and the
skilled-unskilled labor force participation di↵erence for males and females.10 The wage sample
is based on full-time employees, defined as those working 35-plus hours per week. For a small
number of countries where workers’ full-time status is not available, we use the average wages for
all employees. To facilitate cross-country comparisons, we convert all the country-specific annual
wage measures to 2000 US$ using the PPP conversion factors from the World Bank. Details on the
construction of the labor market variables can be found in the Data Appendix. Finally, following
the Eurostat education classification, we define skilled individuals as those with completed tertiary
education.11 The data for GDP per capita (PPP) is from the World Bank. The summary statistics
for the cross-country data are reported in Appendix Table 3.


2.2    Descriptive Facts

Figure 1 documents the cross-country variation, as of 2010, in the skilled-unskilled marriage rate
gap for women and men. We define the skilled-unskilled marriage rate gap among women (y-axis)
as the di↵erence between the fraction of women with tertiary education between 35 and 44 years
old that were ever married and the fraction of women with less than tertiary education in the
same age range that were ever married. Reported on the x-axis is the equivalent skilled-unskilled
marriage rate gap among men. It is apparent from Figure 1 that in the majority of the countries
in our sample, more educated women marry at a lower rate than their less educated counterparts.
In contrast, in the majority of countries, the marriage rate of more educated men is larger than the
   9
     Details on the coding for each data source can be found in the Data Appendix.
  10
      Ideally, we would have liked to construct labor market conditions for individuals age 35-44 in year t based on
the labor market outcomes of those age 25-54 in year t 10 as this might be closer to the labor market conditions
that were prevalent when making marital status decisions. However, due to data limitations, this is not feasible as
this would entail a much smaller set of countries for our analysis. We do, however, use these more accurate measures
in our US state panel exercise.
  11
     This is defined as individuals who completed ISCED levels 5 or 6.



                                                         8
marriage rate of less educated men.

There are, however, some exceptions. In particular, in most Nordic countries (Norway, Sweden,
Finland, Iceland), educated women marry at a higher rate than less educated women; this is also
the case in the US, UK, Canada and Ireland. Also, skilled men marry at a lower rate than unskilled
men in Italy, Austria, Spain, Switzerland and Greece. Nonetheless, even in these cases, the skilled-
unskilled marriage gap is always smaller in absolute value for males relative to females.

Figures 2A and 2B show how the skilled-unskilled marriage market gaps among women and men,
respectively, have been evolving over time. In particular, we report the di↵erence in marriage rates
between skilled and unskilled individuals aged between 35 to 44 years at four points in time: 1995,
2000, 2005 and 2010. For these figures, we classify countries into six di↵erent groups based largely
on geography: North America, East Asia, Northern Europe, Southern Europe, and two groups of
Western European countries.

In the US and Canada, while skilled women in the earliest cohort married at a lower rate than
unskilled women in that same cohort, this gap diminished over time and had fully reversed in
sign by the 2005 and 2010 cohorts (Figure 2A). A qualitatively similar picture emerges in the UK,
France, Ireland and the Netherlands, with declining skilled-unskilled gaps in female marriage rates,
even though only two of these four countries (UK and Ireland) had experienced a reversal of the gap
by 2010. Most of the Nordic countries, with the exception of Denmark, have also experienced an
overall decline over time in the probability of unskilled women marrying at higher rates than skilled
women. In fact, as of 2010, all of the Nordic countries, again with the exception of Denmark, are
characterized by a higher marriage rate for skilled women relative to unskilled ones. Interestingly,
two of the Nordic countries (Sweden and Finland) display what appears as a U-shape pattern over
time: while skilled women married at a higher rate than unskilled ones in 1995, this gap declined
between 1995 and 2000, only to rise again after 2000.

The patterns over time for East Asian countries are quite di↵erent. While more educated women
married at a much lower rate than less educated ones in the earliest cohort, this gap has been largely
growing over time. The only exception to this pattern is Hong Kong, where the skilled-unskilled
marriage gap is slightly smaller (in absolute value) in the most recent cohort (35 to 44 years old
women in 2010) than in the first cohort (35-44 year old women in 1995). Southern Europe is
characterized by a fairly large marriage gap between unskilled women and skilled women, and this
is true throughout the sample period. While Italy shows only minimal changes over time, Portugal
and Spain both appear to have experienced an increase in the gap (in absolute value) followed by
a decrease in the last cohort, resulting in weak U-shape patterns.

Figure 2B reports similar trends for the marriage rate of skilled men compared to unskilled men. As
indicated above, in 2010, educated men marry at a higher rate than their less educated counterparts


                                                  9
in most countries in our sample. It is apparent from Figure 2B that this pattern was the norm in
most countries throughout the sample period. There are, however, a few exceptions, especially in
the earlier cohorts in Western and Southern Europe.

A comparison of the trends between men and women across various groups of countries is also
interesting. The contrast between men and women in East Asia over time is particularly striking.
While the probability that educated women are married in those countries has been declining over
time relative to the probability for less educated women (Figure 2A), the overall trend appears
to move in the opposite direction among men, with educated men experiencing a higher relative
marriage rate in the latest cohort than in the earliest cohort.

A central hypothesis motivating our paper is that the lower marriage rate for educated women
relative to less educated women is partly a reflection of men’s dislike for having a working wife.
Because educated women have better labor market opportunities than less educated women, these
women may experience more difficulty in finding a husband; also, these women may tend to be
pickier in the marriage market as they have better outside options if they remain single. Both
forces, as we will argue in the theoretical model below, contribute to educated women marrying
at a lower rate than less educated women, at least until the value of the extra earnings that they
can bring to the household start becoming large enough to undo the disutility that men may have
when their wives work.

Figure 3 provides graphical evidence of a systematic correlation between the conservativeness of
gender norms in a country and the di↵erential marriage rate of skilled women relative to unskilled
women in that country. Specifically, in the left panel of Figure 3, we graph the relationship between
the gap in marriage rates for high-skilled vs. low-skilled women aged 35-44 in a country in 2010
and the IVS-based measure of gender role attitudes in that country. Figure 3 clearly shows that
countries that are more conservative according to this measure are also countries where educated
women marry at an especially low rate compared to less educated women. In contrast, we see a
much weaker relationship for men (right panel of Figure 3).

In summary, the descriptive evidence in this section confirms that educated women marry at lower
rates than their less educated counterparts in the majority of developed countries. There is evidence
that the cross-country variation we observe in the marriage gap between educated and less educated
women is related to the conservativeness of gender norms in these countries. The time series
evidence suggests that there has been heterogeneity across developed countries in how the skilled-
unskilled di↵erence in female marriage rate has evolved over time. As labor market opportunities
for educated women improved in all of these developed countries, the marriage “deficit” for skilled
women has increased in some countries but declined in others, and in a subset of countries, has
actually turned into a “surplus.”



                                                 10
In the next section, we develop a simple theoretical model that can account for these key facts
in the data. Most importantly, the model will be able to explain why the relationship between
improvements in skilled women’s labor market opportunities and their marriage outcomes might
not be linear, either within a country over time, or between countries.



3    Model of Marriage and Household Decision Making

We analyze a static model of education, marriage and household’s time allocation decision that ties
together the fact that in some countries men overwhelmingly disapprove of married women working
with the lower marriage probability faced by skilled women. A marriage gap between skilled and
unskilled women emerges endogenously as a consequence of skilled women’s higher market wages
and the time allocation decisions that these generate.

Borrowing from Fernandez, Fogli and Olivetti (FFO, 2004), the key ingredient in the household
model is that gender norm generates spousal disagreement over the provision of the household
public good. Since skilled women have higher wages, they provide less of it relative to unskilled
women. This makes them less attractive potential partners on the marriage market. Thus a
woman’s education decision involves a trade-o↵ between a higher wage rate and a lower marriage
probability.

In FFO (2004) this trade-o↵ evolves endogenously because the education and marriage decisions
of women in one generation a↵ect the skill gap in marriage probability and, consequently, women’s
education decision, in the next generation. FFO (2004) assume that sons of more educated/working
women have more egalitarian gender norms. If skilled women’s earnings are sufficiently high so that
men raised by educated/working mothers strictly prefer marrying an educated/working wife, an
increase in the share of working mothers in one generation causes an increase in the share of
educated/working women in the next generation because it improves their marriage prospects.
Thus, holding everything else constant, as more women work, gender norms become more liberal
and contribute to further increasing the fraction of women who choose to acquire education in the
next generation.

In contrast to FFO (2004), our model does not endogenize gender norms but instead chooses to
highlight how the presence and strength of the marriage/work trade-o↵ faced by skilled women
is a non-monotonic function of gender norms and economic opportunities. Holding gender norms
constant, the model predicts a U-shaped relationship between the marriage gap faced by skilled
women and their higher market wage. Intuitively, at low wage levels, the loss in public good
consumption due to the wife working - the likelihood of which is increasing in her market wage - is
too large relative to the husband’s gains from the externality from the wife’s consumption. However,


                                                11
when the market wage is high enough, working women become increasingly more attractive relative
to non-working women. Thus, assuming fixed or slow-changing social norms within a country, we
should see that as women’s labor market opportunities increase, the marriage deficit experienced
by skilled women increases, reaches its peak and then declines, eventually switching sign.

The model allows us to perform some comparative statistics with respect to the strength of the
gender norms. Holding wages constant, the model predicts that the relative deficit skilled women
experience in the marriage market is more severe in more traditional countries. Also, the model
shows that the range of wages over which the relative deficit skilled women experience in the
marriage market increases before peaking is wider the more traditional the gender norms.


3.1      Model Set Up

The timing in the model is as follows. First, women choose whether to become skilled. Men and
women then obtain a match at random in the marriage market. Given this match, they decide
whether the match quality is high enough to warrant marriage or stay single. Married agents
decide how to allocate their time between work and the household production of a public good (for
example, children). Single agents do not produce a household public good (they remain childless)
and simply consume their labor income.

To keep things simple we assume that there are two types, skilled S or unskilled U , for each
sex. Women choose whether to become skilled, while men’s type and its distribution in the male
population are given. Skilled and unskilled men only di↵er in terms of market earnings.


3.2      Household Decisions

We model agents’ preferences following FFO (2002). In this model the welfare of individual i who
is married to another agent j, consists of utility from own private consumption ci , some spillover
↵i from the spouse’s consumption cj , utility from consumption of a household public good c, and
utility from the quality of the match with j as perceived by agent i, qij .

One possible interpretation of the utility function is that individuals obtain utility from their
career in a way that is proportional to its status or success as measured by wages. In such an
interpretation, ↵i is the utility agent i derives from her/his spouse’s career. For men, however, the
↵i can be especially low because of traditional societal views about women’s role. This parameter
captures the idea that a working/career wife might challenge the conventional idea of gender roles
in a household (e.g. ‘identity’ as in Akerlof and Kranton, 2000). Note that under this specification
the utility penalty, paid by men, associated with a working wife arises endogenously.12
 12
      The same outcome can be generated under di↵erent assumptions on utility transferability or bargaining as long


                                                         12
Match quality q 2 [ 1, 1] is assumed to be a random draw from a distribution F . Each agent is
endowed with a unit of time which is allocated between producing the household public good (ti )
and working in the market (1 ti ).

We assume that given a total time investment of T = ti + tj , each agent obtains c = T n units of the
public good. One interpretation of this good is children, where n is the (fixed) number of children,
and the total time T invested in them determines their quality.

Each agent’s private consumption is equal to her earnings, which is the product of the time the
agent spends working and her wages, i.e., ck = (1 tk )wk , k = i, j.

Agent i’s utility when married to agent j, Vij , is given by:


                Vij (wi , wj , qi ) = max [(1    ti )wi + ↵i (1   tj )wj +    log(ti + tj )n + qij ]             (1)
                                    0ti 1


where i takes tj as given and        > 0, 0  ↵i < 1.

In order to flesh out the properties of the model that are relevant empirically, we assume throughout
wm > wf so that women have a comparative advantage in home production. We also assume
wm > . This assumption implies that men work full time irrespective of their marital status (or
skill level). The assumption of linear preferences in private consumption and linear home production
technology and the focus on th equilibria where men work full time makes the interpretation of the
results more transparent.13 Under these assumptions the first order condition yields two possible
cases: (i) wm > > wf , then tm = 0 and tf = 1; (ii) wm > wf > , then tm = 0 and tf = /wf .

In the first case, the wife does not work and instead dedicates herself full time to the raising of
children while the husband works full time. In the second case, the husband’s situation is unchanged,
but the wife works part time and raises children with the remainder of her time.

The economic intuition for why the relationship between women’s economic opportunities and
marriage probabilities is non-monotonic can be grasped from the analysis of the solution to the
as, because of disagreement about the allocation over di↵erent consumption goods, a married woman works more
than would be optimal from her husband’s standpoint (see for example, Lundberg and Pollak, 2003, and Mazzocco,
2007). Similarly, the result would be unchanged if we assumed that wives also pay a social penalty from working, as
long as this is smaller than their husbands’ and there is still spousal disagreement about time allocation decisions.
On the other end, a similar outcome could also be generated by a simpler model where the utility penalty is taken
as given (see FFO, 2004). We choose this specification because it allows conducting a rich set of comparative static
exercises while maintaining a parsimonious theoretical representation.
  13
     The gist of the analysis would be unaltered if we were to relax these assumptions. For example, using a CES
representation for total time investment or non-linear preferences for private consumption would lead to interior
solutions for both husband’s and wife’s time allocation. Alternatively, if we assume wm < we could also have an
equilibrium where neither of the spouses work on the market.



                                                         13
household’s optimal time allocation problem. Recall that in our model both partners equally care
about the public good (the share the same ). However, each partner cares more about his/her
own private consumption than about the private consumption enjoyed by his or her partner, where
each agent’s private consumption is equal to her total earnings.

We start from the case wf < , that is women’s earnings (i.e. their market productivity but also
their private consumption) are below the marginal utility from consumption of the public good. It
is then optimal from a woman’s standpoint to stay home once married and dedicate all her time
to the production of the public good. Husband’s preferences are perfectly aligned with his wife’s.
There is no spousal disagreement. The gender norm does not bind.

In the second case, women’s wage is higher than the marginal utility from consumption of the
public good (wf > ). It is now optimal from the wife’s standpoint to split her time between
working at home and working on the market. However, at relatively low levels of wf the positive
externality that a husband’s receives from wife’s increased private consumption is not high enough
to compensate for his utility loss coming from the lower production of the public good. As we show
below the husband’s utility loss is non-monotonic. For low values of wf his utility drops below
the utility that he would obtain from having a nonworking wife. However, as wf increases the
utility loss first peaks and then declines as the externality coming from the increased wife’s private
consumption increases. Eventually, the utility loss will turn into a premium. That is, for relatively
high wf the positive externality from the wife’s private consumption dominates the utility loss in
terms of public good consumption.

To formalize this discussion, we characterize the utility of a married man, Vm , as a function of his
wife’s wage.

First let’s consider how Vm varies for wf 2 [0, ). The wife does not change her time allocation
in response to changes in wf (she is devoted full-time to household production). Consequently,
there is no e↵ect on the husband’s utility. Substituting from the first order conditions we get:
Vm (wf ) = wm + log n ⌘ V m where we denote with V m the utility a married man receives if he
marries a stay at home wife.

Let’s consider the second case when wf > and therefore a wife works tf = wf at home and its
complement to one on the market. Substituting from the first order conditions we get:


                         Vm (wf ) = wm +    log n + ↵m (wf     )+    log        ,                 (2)
                                                                           wf

which we can re-write as the utility di↵erence between marrying a working or a non-working wife:




                                                 14
                               Vm (wf )   V m = ↵m (wf       )+        log                            (3)
                                                                             wf

with:
                                       @(Vm V m )
                                                  = ↵m             .                                  (4)
                                          @wf                 wf

First, let’s note that since wf >       the second term on the right hand side of equation (3) is
negative. Thus, whether a man experiences a utility loss or a premium depends on the sign of
↵m (wf      ) + log wf . One can show that this di↵erence is negative for wf 2 ( , wf⇤ (↵m , )] and
positive for wf > wf⇤ (↵m , ), where wf⇤ (↵m , ) is the the wage rate that makes a husband indi↵erent
between the two (i.e. Vm (wf⇤ ) = Vm ).

We analyze how the penalty varies over wf 2 ( , wf⇤ (↵m , )] by studying equation (4). For wf 2
[ , ↵m ], the husband’s utility is decreasing as a function of wf ; in this interval an increase in wf
leads the wife to decrease the amount of time spent at home thereby decreasing the man’s utility
by (      ↵m wf )dwf /wf . For wf > /↵m , the husband’s utility is strictly increasing in wf despite
the fact that the wife is putting in less time at home.

The utility loss hits its maximum if wf = ↵m . That is, when the loss in production of the public good
due to wife working ( wf ) is equal to the gain from the externality deriving from wife’s consumption
(↵m ). Once wf is past this level the positive externality starts dominating until, eventually, the
penalty becomes a premium.

Figure 4 depicts the utility di↵erential for di↵erent values of ↵m (panel A) and (panel B). Panel
A reveals how the gender norm a↵ects both the sign, size and shape of the husband’s utility loss
from having a working wife as a function of her economic opportunities. The solid line shows the
husband’s utility di↵erential when ↵ = 1, that is, if there is no spousal disagreement about time
allocation decisions. In this case a husband gains from having a working wife and this premium
monotonically increases with the wife’s wage. The three remaining lines plot the utility di↵erential
for alternative values of the gender norm (↵H = 0.6, ↵M = 0.4, ↵L = 0.2), keeping the utility
of public good consumption constant. In the most gender equal society (the dashed dotted line)
husband’s and wife’s preferences are more aligned. The range of wf over which the husband of
a working wife experiences a utility loss (relative to a housewife’s husband) is relatively small. A
husband cares sufficiently about his wife’s career. It takes a modest increase in wf for the positive
externality e↵ect to dominate the utility loss. In the intermediate society (the short dash line) the
utility loss experienced by the husband is always larger than in the more gender equal society and
the utility di↵erential is negative for a wider range of wf . It takes a large increase in wife’s economic
opportunities to compensate a husband’s for the wife’s under-provision of the public good. Finally,
in the most conservative society (the long dash line), men care so little about their wife’s private


                                                   15
consumption that the utility di↵erential from having a working wife is always negative. It will take
a huge increase in wife’s wage for the penalty to turn into a premium.

Panel B shows how the utility di↵erential varies for two societies that di↵er in terms of the value
placed on the household good (e.g. time spent with children, home cooked meals etc.). We denote
this values as L and H . The model’s predictions are similar to those obtained when comparing
societies with di↵erent gender norms. In addition, the threshold wage making a woman indi↵erent
between working and specializing in home production varies across societies. It will be thus impor-
tant as we empirically test the predictions of the model in the following sections to verify that the
heterogeneity we observe across countries and over time with respect to their gender norms is not
masking correlated heterogeneity with respect to the value placed on the household public good.14

It is also useful to characterize the utility of a married woman, Vf , as a function of her husband’s
wage wm and her own wage wf . Since we focus on equilibria where the husband works full time
there is no scope for spousal disagreement about the husband’s time allocation. So, in the interest
of simplifying notation, we set ↵f = 1, that is, women like husband’s career as much as their own.
Note that under this assumption, husband’s and wife have the same utility when the wife stays at
home. Instead, if ↵f < 1 a housewife’s utility is always smaller than that of her husband.

If wf  , she specializes in home production tf = 1, her utility when married will only depend
on her husband’s wage. Substituting from the first order conditions this is given by: Vf (wm ) =
wm + log n.

In the second case, wf >       and tf =   wf   so that:


                           Vf (wf , wm ) = wm +      log n + (wf     )+     log                            (5)
                                                                                  wf

Comparing these two equations it is clear that women’s utility is higher the higher is their husband’s
wage, irrespective of their work status. Men’s earning opportunities have a premium both on the
labor market and on the marriage market. Moreover, for given wm , we can study the wife’s utility
di↵erential between working and staying at home as a function of her own wage. Rewriting equation
(5) we get Vf (wf , wm ) Vf (wm ) = (wf    )+ log wf . This function is always positive (and convex)
for wf > indicating that the utility of a working wife is always higher than that of a now-working
wife. Note that if ↵ = 1, wife’s and husband’s preferences are perfectly aligned.
  14
     We tackle this issue in Section 4.2 for the cross-country analysis, and in Appendix Tables 6 and 7 for the
cross-state analysis.




                                                      16
3.3   Marriage Decision: Random Matching and Threshold Quality

We next turn to the matching part of our model. As discussed above, we consider two, exogenously
given, types of men, skilled and unskilled, with wmS > wmU > . Women choose their type. We
assume that female unskilled wages wf U lie in the interval [0, ] (i.e., unskilled married women do
not work) and skilled wages wf S > (i.e. skilled women work irrespective of their marital status).

The matching process is modeled as a one-period random search in which the probability of a
given individual meeting another individual of type j depends on its proportion in the relevant
population of the opposite sex. Defining ⇡i as the share of skilled individuals in the population of
gender i. The probability of a woman meeting a skilled man equals ⇡m , the probability she meets
an unskilled man is 1 ⇡m .

Matched individuals each obtain a random draw of match quality q 2 [ 1, 1] from a log-concave
distribution F . Individuals then decide whether to stay in a match (marry) and obtain married
utility Vij as in equation (1) or to remain single whereby her/his utility is given by U (wi ) = wi ,
that is, there is no household public good nor any externality from another agent’s consumption.

Hence agent i will be willing to marry agent j if and only if:

                             ↵i (1     tj )wj     w i ti +     log(ti + tj )n + qi   0             (6)

where i indexes the skill type of the man if i is a male or the skill type of the woman if i is female,
and similarly for j.

Thus, we can solve for the reservation qualities, q ⇤ , of males and females. For males, this yields:

                             (
                     ⇤                            log n              if wf <
                    qm   =                                                                         (7)
                                     log n      ↵m (wf         )     log wf  if      wf >

Assuming wf U  and wf S > , the first line of qm       ⇤ is men’s reservation quality if they meet

an unskilled woman, whereas the second is the reservation quality when they are matched with
a skilled woman. Note that male pickiness is invariant to his own wage (since he works full time
whether married or single) and is invariant to female wages if these are below , that is, for
unskilled women. Let’s denote with qmS  ⇤       ⇤
                                           and qmU   men’s pickiness when meeting a skilled woman
or unskilled woman, respectively. The skilled-unskilled di↵erential in male pickiness is given by
 ⇤
qmS     ⇤
       qmU = ↵m (wf         )   log wf . Note that since we have assumed that skilled and unskilled
men do not di↵er by gender role preferences, men’s threshold does not depend on their own type.
The comparative statics results for the e↵ect of an increase in female wages on men’s reservation
quality di↵erential obviously mirrors the analysis of married men’s utility. If < wf S  wf⇤ (↵, )
this di↵erential is positive. Men experience a utility loss from marrying a skilled working woman

                                                          17
and therefore are pickier when they meet one. The skilled-unskilled reservation quality di↵erential
over this interval has an inverted U-shape. However, if wf S > wf⇤ (↵, ) the di↵erential is negative.
Men gain from having a working wife when her wage is high enough to compensate for the loss of
public good production. It follows that they are less picky towards skilled women. As discussed in
the next section, this pattern drives the finding of a U-shaped skilled-unskilled marriage di↵erential
as a function of women’s economic opportunities.

The comparative static exercise also shows that for any wf S >                                  the threshold quality for skilled
women is higher the lower is ↵ and the higher is .15

For women, the same calculation yields:
                           (
                                  log n (wm                         wf )          if wf 
                     qf⇤ =                                                                                                           (8)
                                 log n (wm                          )       log wf if wf >

Since we assume wfU  and wfS > , the first line of qf⇤ is the reservation quality of unskilled
females, whereas the second is that of skilled females. Skilled women will be pickier than unskilled
women since they have a better outside option.16 Female pickiness is always increasing in her own
wage, linearly for wf U < because it only a↵ects her consumption when single, and decreasing in
men’s wages (see comparative statics in Appendix ??). That is, both skilled and unskilled women
will be pickier towards unskilled men because of their lower earnings.


3.4       The Skilled-Unskilled Marriage Gap

Let’s define ⇧f,ij the probability that, for a woman of type i meeting a man of type j, the
random draw of the match quality qij lies above each partner’s threshold. This is given by
         R1 R1                        ⇤       ⇤ ), where F = (1
⇧f,ij = q⇤ q⇤ dF (q)dF (q) = F (qm,ji    )F (qf,ji                    F ) is the complementary cu-
           m,j  f,ij
mulative distribution function. Note that under our maintained assumption of common gender
preferences across men’s type, men’s threshold quality for unskilled and skilled women is the same
irrespective of their own type. That is, qm,ij = qmj . It follows that the skilled-unskilled di↵er-
ential in marriage probability does not depend on the share of skilled men in the population. As
we discussed in section 3.6, this assumption can be easily relaxed leaving the bulk of the analysis
unchanged.

The probability that a match is formed is given by the product of ⇧f,ij times the probability of
meeting a men of type j in the population, j = S, U . Having defined ⇡m as the fraction of skilled
                                                   ⇤            ⇤                  ⇤
  15                                             @qm          @qf                @qm
       The partial derivatives are as follows:   @wm
                                                       = 0,   @wm
                                                                    =    ↵f ;    @wf
                                                                                       =    ↵m +    wf
                                                                                                         if wf >     and it is otherwise
                ⇤                                                  ⇤
              @qf                                                @qm
equal to 0;   @wf
                    =   wf
                             if wf >   and equals 1 otherwise.   @↵m
                                                                        =        wf if wf >        and is equal to 0 otherwise.
  16
    Taking the di↵erence between the two, we obtain qf⇤S              qf⇤U = (         wf U )     log   wf
                                                                                                             which is always positive for
wf U  < wf S .


                                                                 18
men in the population, it follows that the marriage probability of a woman of type i will be given
by:


                                          ⇤
                                              ⇥       ⇤                         ⇤
                                                                                         ⇤
                                ⇧if = F (qmi ) ⇡m F (qf,iS ) + (1       ⇡m )F (qf,iU )                               (9)

The skilled-unskilled di↵erence in marriage probability is then given by ⇧Sf ⇧U    f . We analyze how
this di↵erential varies for given values of wf S , while keeping the unskilled wage fixed, wf U  .17

Figure 5 provides a graphical representation of the marriage penalty for three di↵erent values of ↵,
high, medium and low, having fixed the unskilled and skilled wages in the shaded areas denoted
with U and S (or S 0 ), respectively. For a given value of ↵, the marriage gap mirrors the behavior
of men’s threshold qualities.18 For values of wf,S below (i.e. skilled women are also stay-at-
home wives), the di↵erence in marriage probabilities is negative because skilled women have better
outside options. For values of wf,S lying in the interval ( , wf⇤ (↵, )] all the terms in (9), which
defines a woman’s marriage probability, are lower for skilled women. The skilled-unskilled marriage
gap is U-shaped in this range. It increases as men’s threshold quality for a skilled woman increases,
then declining for ↵ < wf,S  wf⇤ (↵, )). Finally, if wf,S is above wf⇤ (↵, ), both types of men
prefer skilled women. In this range, the marriage penalty can turn into a premium. The marriage
gap is always smallest in the least conservative economy (↵H ) and largest in the most conservative
economy (↵L ). The comparison of the three curves in the figure also reveals that while for the ↵H
and ↵M economy the gap can eventually turn into a premium, it is unlikely that in the ↵L economy
women’s economic opportunities will ever be high enough to compensate husbands for their working
wives’ under-provision of the public good. The figure also shows how an increase in wf,S might have
very di↵erent consequences on the skilled-unskilled marriage di↵erential depending on a country’s
prevailing gender norms. For example, suppose that wf,S increases within the shaded area S. The
skilled-unskilled marriage gap would decline in the more gender equal economy but increase in the
remaining two economies, with the increase being largest in the most conservative one. Suppose
instead that wf,S increases from a value in the shaded area S to a value in S 0 . In this case we would
observe the skilled-unskilled marriage gap turning into a marriage premium in economy H, still
negative but decreasing in economy M and negative and further increasing in economy L. Panel
B depicts the skill di↵erential in marriage probabilities of men. Because of their higher wage, both
types of women have a strict preference for skilled men. It follows that the skill di↵erentials is
always positive and increases as wf,S increases.
  17
      In this case increasing wf S is equivalent to an increase in the skill premium for women. A similar intuition would
apply if we let both wf S and wf U increase, while keeping the skill premium constant. This is true even if wf U >
(i.e. unskilled women work), at least for some parameter combinations.
   18
      Holding constant wf,U , the shape of the skilled-unskilled marriage di↵erential depends on the behavior of the
derivative of ⇧S  f with respect to wf,S . It can be shown that, if F is log-concave and ↵ sufficiently smaller than 1,
there is a region of parameters where the marriage di↵erential is U-shaped.


                                                           19
3.5   Education Decision

The expected utility V i of a woman of type i = S, U given the model parameters ✓ = (wm , wf , ↵, ⇡m )
is given by:                                        0               1
                                     X                   X
                           V i (✓) =    ⇧f,ij Vij + @1        ⇧f,ij A U (wi )                    (10)
                                   j=s,u                   j=s,u


We assume that a woman faces an idiosyncratic (utility) cost of becoming skilled of where the
latter is an iid random draw from a continuous cumulative distribution function G( ) with support
[0, 1].

Let
                                           (✓) ⌘ V S (✓)   V U (✓)                                 (11)

be the relative utility of a skilled female (relative to an unskilled female) given the vector of model
parameters ✓.

Note that since wages are set, the expected utility di↵erential between skilled and unskilled women
is independent of the proportion of women who decide to become skilled. All women with  (✓)
will decide to become skilled. The equilibrium ⇡f at any point in time is at the intersection of (✓)
and = G 1 (⇡f ).


3.6   Discussion

An immediate implication of the search model is that, if we compare two economies that di↵er by
their gender roles, the expected utility of skilled relative to unskilled women would be larger in the
less traditional country. This implies that, holding all the other parameters constant, the country
with more equal gender norms should have a higher proportion of skilled women and a smaller
skilled-unskilled marriage gap.

It is also the case that the expected utility of skilled relative to unskilled women increases in wf S .
Thus a higher skilled wage is generally associated with an increase in the proportion of women who
choose to become skilled. As we discussed above, at low levels of wf S the increase will be relatively
small because of the stronger trade-o↵ between the labor market return and the penalty coming
from the higher rejection rates in the marriage market. However, the proportion of skilled women
grows faster once the marriage penalty associated with the investment decision declines.

The model also implies that comparing three types of societies that di↵er in the conservativeness
of their gender roles views from very liberal to very conservative, an increase in wages might at the
same time increase the marriage penalty faced by skilled women in the more traditional society,


                                                    20
leave the marriage penalty in the middle society mostly unchanged but decreases it in the more
gender equal society.

Finally, while we do not formally solve for this case here, we note that the model’s predictions
are unaltered if we also allow for within country variation in gender norms by education. This
additional assumption would be in keeping with the empirical evidence (see Table 1), showing that
skilled men tend to be less conservative than unskilled men, though the variation in gender norms
across countries tend to be larger than that within a country.

The main di↵erence under such an additional assumption would be that the trade-o↵ faced by skilled
women will also be a function of the share of skilled men in the population (as in FFO, 2004). The
model would then deliver an additional prediction: an increase in the fraction of educated men
reduces the marriage penalty, all else equal. In this case, considering two economies with the same
↵ but di↵erent proportion of skilled men, the skilled-unskilled marriage gap should be larger in the
country were fewer men are skilled.



4        Empirical Tests of the Model

4.1      Cross-Country Evidence

A first prediction of the theoretical model is that, all else equal, the skilled-unskilled marriage gap
should be larger (in absolute value) in countries with more conservative gender attitudes. Suggestive
evidence of such a relationship was presented in Figure 3 for the cohort of women that were between
35 and 44 years of age in 2010.

Table 2 shows that this relationship is robust to a variety of controls. The baseline correlation
corresponding to the left hand panel of Figure 3 is reported in column (1) of Table 2. The gap in
ever-married rates between high and low skilled women in low-sexism countries is 11 percentage
points smaller than in high-sexism countries and 4 percentage points smaller than in mid-sexism
countries.19 Columns (2) and (3) of Table 2 show that the relationship is robust to a variety of
controls, and in particular controls aimed at proxying for women’s labor market opportunities,
such as a quadratic in log skilled women’s wages (column (2)) or a quadratic term in log(GDP
per capita) (column (3)). In addition, columns (2) to (10) include controls for a quadratic in log
skilled men’s wages, the skilled-unskilled wage premium for men and women, the skilled-unskilled
labor force participation premium for men and women, and the fraction of men aged 35 to 44 with
tertiary education. Columns (4) and (5), respectively, replicate columns (2) and (3) but rely on
    19
    See Appendix Table 1 for the classification of countries into the three sexism groups. This classification is based
on the IVS measure of gender attitudes.



                                                          21
the continuous measure of gender attitudes constructed from the IVS instead of the grouping of
countries into three categories. Again, we see that more conservative gender norms are correlated
with a higher marriage deficit among skilled women.

Columns (6) to (8) replicate the specification in column (3) for the three other cohorts of women
that we observe in our data, namely those aged 35 to 44 in 1995, 2000, and 2005. We see that the
negative correlation between sexism and the relative marriage rate of skilled women also exists for
the 2005 and 2000 cohorts (especially when it comes to high sexism levels); however, there is no
statistically significant correlation among women aged 35 to 44 in 1995.

Another prediction of our model is that the relative marriage outcomes of skilled women should be
more likely to be a↵ected by the gender norms in their country relative to skilled men (see Figure 5).
As shown in Figure 3, while there is a strong cross-country relationship between the marriage rate
deficit for skilled women and the conservatism of gender norms, this relationship appears weaker for
men. The remaining columns of Table 2 confirm this fact in a multivariate regression. Columns (9)
and (10) of Table 2 replicate columns (2) and (4), respectively, but use as an alternative dependent
variable the di↵erence in ever married rates between skilled and unskilled men that were between
35 and 44 years old in 2010. As expected based on the visual inspection of data in Figure 3, while
the estimates on the sexism measure (either using the three categorical variables or the continuous
index) are of the same sign as that for women, they are quantitatively and statistically weaker. In
other words, while gender role attitudes in a country appear to be a robust predictor of the relative
marriage rate of skilled and unskilled women in that country, the same does not hold for men.

Next, we turn to empirical tests of some of the more subtle predictions of the model regarding
the heterogeneity across countries in the marriage gap as labor market conditions change. Specif-
ically, our model predicts that increased labor market opportunities for skilled women may, in
fact, negatively impact their marriage rates, especially in countries with more conservative gender
attitudes.

Using the pooled sample of countries from 1995 to 2010, in Table 3, we regress the di↵erence in
ever-married rates for skilled vs. unskilled women on a proxy for skilled women’s opportunities in
the labor market: log(high-skilled female wages) (columns 1-3) or log(GDP per capita) (columns
4-6), and the interaction between the proxy for women’s opportunities and country-level sexism.
We use log(GDP per capita) as an alternative proxy for skilled women’s opportunities in the labor
market for two reasons - first, compared to the GDP measure, cross-country comparisons of wages
are likely to be subject to a higher degree of measurement error. Measurement error is likely to
arise since the wage information is drawn from numerous di↵erent surveys, in some cases cover
di↵erent samples of workers (e.g. full-time vs. all workers), and we had to rely on di↵erent sources
of data to adjust for inflation and purchasing power. Second, wage information is not available in
some years for some countries; hence, using the GDP measure, we are able to include five more


                                                 22
country*year observations in our regressions reported in Table 3 (see column (4)). All regressions
include country and year fixed e↵ects, and standard errors are clustered at the country level.

The baseline coefficients in columns (1) and (4) indicate that higher labor market opportunities for
skilled women are associated with a decrease in the deficit they experience in the marriage market
in low sexism countries, but an increase in that deficit in high sexism countries. For example,
in column (1), we see that a 10 percent increase in the wage of high skilled women reduces the
marriage market “penalty” for high skilled women by 0.6 percentage points in low sexism countries,
but increases it by 0.6 percentage points (.06-.12) in high sexism countries.

Columns (2) and (5), respectively, replicate column (1) and (4) but also account for a vector of
other time-varying controls: share of males with tertiary education, the female and male wage skill
premium, the female and male labor force participation skill premium, and a quadratic in female
and male high skilled wages. The patterns are qualitatively unchanged. Finally, in columns (3) and
(6), we replace the 3 categorical variables for sexism level with the continuous index. Again, the
results are qualitatively unchanged: the relationship between the skilled-unskilled gap in marriage
rate and labor market opportunities becomes more negative as the degree of sexism in a country
increases. The point estimates for the estimated coefficient on the interaction term between high
skilled female wage and sexism is -.057 in column (3) (significant at the 10 percent level), and the
coefficient on the interaction term between log(GDP per capita) and sexism is -.169 in column (6)
(significant at the 1 percent level).

To assess the magnitude of the results, we apply the observed change by sexism group in high skilled
female wages from 1995 to 2010 to our panel model estimates (column (1) of Table 3) and compare
these predictions with the observed change in the marriage gap. We find that our model explains
between 40 to 55 percent of the observed increase in the marriage gap for the most conservative
countries, and 60 to 80 percent of the decline observed in the least sexist countries.2021

Finally, in the last two columns of Table 3, we replicate the analysis of columns (2) and (3) but
now use the skilled-unskilled gap in marriage rate among men as the dependent variable. While the
point estimates on the interaction terms of interest are of the same sign as that in the regressions
using the female sample, their magnitudes are much smaller and none are statistically significant.

A final implication of our model that we can bring to the cross-country data is with respect to
  20
     The two numbers per sexism group come from applying either the mean change (55 and 60 percent) or the median
change (40 and 82 percent). As an example, the observed mean change in high skilled female wages for the high
sexism group was 21 percent. When we multiply 0.21 by -0.057 (-0.12+0.063) we get a predicted change in the gap
of -0.012, which accounts for 55 percent of -0.025 (the observed mean change in the marriage gap for this group of
countries).
  21
     We obtain similar results when we use the GDP model (Table 3, column (4)), though the percentages explained
by our model are larger, between 49 and 150 percent.



                                                       23
educational choice. Our model predicts that in more gender conservative countries, a lower fraction
of women should decide to become skilled as educated women in those countries expect that they
will face greater barriers in the marriage market. This is exactly what we find in the country-level
data. Figure 6 plots the gender gap in higher education between men and women that were between
35 and 44 in 2010 in each country as a function of the conservativeness of gender role attitudes in
that country. We observe a strong negative relationship. The gender gap in education is smaller in
the Nordic countries and larger in the East Asian countries.

Table 4 confirms the negative relationship between female educational attainment and the degree
of conservatism of gender norms in a multivariate regression setting. All the regressions control for
the share of males with a tertiary education in each country. The basic relationship, as reported in
column (1) using the three sexism levels, is robust to controlling for a quadratic in female and male
high skilled wages, female and male skill premium, and the female and male labor force participation
premium (column (2)). The point estimates in column (2) suggest that the share of females with
tertiary education is about 8 percentage points higher in mid sexism countries compared to low
sexism ones, and 15 percentage points higher in high sexism countries compared to low sexism ones.
We obtain qualitatively similar results when we use the continuous sexism index in column (3).

In column (4), we show that there is a strong positive correlation between the share of females
with higher education and the skilled-unskilled marriage gap for females. Similar to column (3), we
estimate the regression including the usual set of state-level controls for high-skill men and women’s
wages and the skill premia. Hence, women’s educational achievement is higher in those countries
where skilled women marry at a rate that is closer to that of unskilled women. While certainly
not definitive, this correlation is consistent with the mechanism that our model predicts linking the
gender gap in education to gender norms: the value for women to acquire education tends to be
lower in more sexist countries because of the potential negative impact of additional education in
the marriage market.


4.2   Robustness

↵ or ? As discussed in the theory section, cross-country di↵erences in the value placed on the
household good could also generate patterns similar to those we have observed in the prior tables.
This is potentially a worry for our analysis if there is a strong positive correlation between such
preferences for the household good and the strength of gender norms, in which case our empirical
findings so far might just be picking up on the value placed on the household good.

To assess this potential threat to our analysis, in Table 5, we investigate whether such a correlation
exists across countries. To proxy for the value placed on the household good ( in our model), we
compute the total household time devoted to the production of the public good. We rely on data


                                                 24
from the 2012 International Social Survey Program (ISSP) and focus on the following questions:
“How many hours spent on household work”; “How many hours spent on family members”; “How
many hours spouse, partner spend on household work”; “How many hours spouse, partner spend
on family members.” We restrict the sample to individuals between 18 and 64 years of age and with
at least one own child living with them.22

Based on these questions, we construct the following variables (all measured in hours per week):
total time spent by parents in (1) total household production (household work + care for family
members) (2) household work and (3) care for family members; total time spent by female parent
in the three activities; and total time spent by male parent in the three activities. From this
micro data, we then estimate, for each variable above, a country dummy based on regressing the
variable on country fixed e↵ects, number of children, a dummy for the presence of children under
5 years of age, household size, education and age of the respondent, and a dummy indicating if
the respondent has a partner living in the household. In the final step, as reported in Table 5, we
regress the estimated country dummies for each of the nine variables above on the continuous index
of sexism in each country. Figure 7 provides a visual inspection of this analysis for time spent on
household production (e.g. household work + care of family members).

As is apparent from Table 5 and Figure 7, there appears to be no systematic correlation between
total (e.g. husband plus wife) time spent on household production and gender norms. Not surpris-
ingly, gender norms correlate strongly with the distribution of time spent in household production
between spouses: women do a greater share of the non-market work in more sexist countries. But
the sum of the household work across both spouses does not correlate with gender norms. Finally,
in columns (1) to (3) of Table 6, we re-estimate the main specifications reported in Table 2 in-
cluding the proxy for (total time spent on household production) as a control. Reassuringly, the
results remain unchanged. In sum, we find little support for the possibility that our results might
be picking up on di↵erential valuation of the public good across countries.


Cohabitation. Another concern with our analysis so far is that marriage might not be a core
outcome of interest, or more precisely, it might be a poor proxy for the prevalence of long-term
partnerships within a country. This could be especially problematic for countries where long-term
cohabitation is common, and couples live in a marriage-like relationship without actually entering
a formal union. To account for this, we complement our analysis in Tables 2 and 3 with alternative
dependent variables that might better capture the existence of such long-term partnerships. We
construct an alternative measure of marriage that also includes cohabitation. We compute the
skilled-unskilled gap in ever married or currently cohabiting rates for women that are between
  22
   The 16 countries for which we have data to conduct this analysis include Austria, Canada, Switzerland, Denmark,
Germany, Spain, Finland, France, Ireland, Iceland, Japan, Korea, Norway, Sweden, Taiwan, and the UK.



                                                       25
35 and 44 years old in 2010.23 Unfortunately, cohabitation is only available in the EU-SILC, and
therefore this analysis must be restricted to the subset of European countries and to a cross-sectional
analysis. As is apparent from Appendix Figure 2, there is a strong positive correlation between the
cohabitation rate for skilled and unskilled women (Panel A) and a strong correlation between our
standard measure of the skilled-unskilled gap in marriage rates and this more inclusive measure
that also captures cohabitation (Panel B).

Columns (4) to (6) of Table 6 replicate columns (1), (2) and (4) of Table 2, respectively, for
this alternative measure of the skilled-unskilled gap in long-term partnerships. We see that more
conservative gender norms reduce the likelihood of marriage or cohabitation for skilled women
relative to unskilled women. In other words, our results in Table 2 do not appear sensitive to the
possible miscoding of some long-term partnerships.24


Fertility. Yet another way to proxy for the existence of a long-term partnership between a man
and woman is to look for the presence of children. While fertility is an important outcome in
itself, it is also measurable for a large number of countries and for a longer period of time than
cohabitation. A weakness of fertility as a measure of partnership is that it also includes children that
may have resulted from short-term and less stable relationships (e.g., teen pregnancy). Moreover,
the likelihood of such fertility outside of a stable relationship might be more relevant in some
countries than others, and more importantly for us, di↵erentially relevant across skill groups. With
these caveats in mind, we construct as a variable for fertility, defined as a dummy variable that
equals to 1 if a woman between 35 and 44 years of age lists an own child within her household.25,26

Appendix Figure 3 shows that a strong positive correlation exists between the skilled-unskilled gap
in marriage rates and the skilled-unskilled gap in fertility, as just defined. Columns (7) to (9) of
Table 6 replicate columns (1), (2) and (4) of Table 2, respectively, using the skilled-unskilled gap
in fertility among women as the outcome. We see that more conservative gender norms reduce the
likelihood that skilled women have children as compared to less skilled women. Columns (1) and
(2) of Table 7, which replicate columns (3) and (4) of Table 3, also establish that our results in
Table 3 continue to hold when we define the dependent variable of interest as the skilled-unskilled
  23
      We cannot measure whether a person was cohabiting at some point in the past but is currently not.
  24
      Unfortunately, we are not able to estimate a version of Table 3 for this outcome as this measure is not available
in the earlier periods.
   25
      In the EU-LFS, we derive this dummy from a variable that links children to their parents. The fertility measure
for many European countries is available for 2005 and 2010 both from the LFS and the SILC. No fertility measures
can be constructed for some EU countries (mostly Nordic countries) using the LFS. Given the much larger samples
of the LFS our preferred specification uses the LFS measures when available and the SILC only when they are not.
   26
      Given our age range of interest (35 to 44) we are likely to have measurement error for the older women in the range
if their children have already left the household. Given education di↵erences in age at first birth, the measurement
error is likely to be larger for low educated women.



                                                           26
gap in fertility: the relationship between the skilled-unskilled gap in fertility and labor market
opportunities for skilled women is more negative in high sexism countries.27


Excluding East Asia. Another concern with our analysis is the extent to which our key results
are solely driven by the East Asian experience. The findings in columns (4) to (6) of Table 6 already
establish that our findings in Table 2 are not driven by the East Asian countries as we do not measure
cohabitation for these countries and hence they are excluded from the robustness analysis in those
columns of Table 6. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 7 also establish that our results in Table 3 are
not entirely driven by East Asia. There, we replicate columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 excluding the
East Asian countries. We find that qualitatively similar patterns hold: the relationship between
the skilled-unskilled gap in marriage rate and women’s labor market opportunities becomes more
negative as the sexism level in a country increases.


Alternative Measure of Gender Norms. As discussed above, we also constructed an alterna-
tive measure of the strength of gender norms within a country based on the answer to the following
question in the ISSP: “A man’s job is to earn money; a woman’s to look after the home.” While
this question might arguably be more directly related to “↵” in our theoretical model, we do not
use this variable in our main analysis as answers to this question are available for a smaller set of
countries.

In columns (10) to (12) of Table 6, and (5) and (6) of Table 7, we confirm that our core findings
hold using this alternative measure. The skilled-unskilled gap in marriage rate is larger in more
sexist countries, and more sexist countries experience a smaller decrease in the skilled-unskilled gap
in marriage rate when labor market opportunities for skilled women increase. We note, however,
that the estimated coefficient in column (6) of Table 7 is not statistically significant.


4.3    Evidence from US States

While the main goal of this paper is to provide a theoretical explanation (and empirical tests)
for the divergent experiences over time across developed countries in the marriage market penalty
for skilled women, the empirical tests that we have presented in the previous section can also be
performed on a panel of US states. The first advantage of focusing on the US context is that there
is considerably less unobserved heterogeneity across US states than across countries. However, this
also comes at cost. Compared to the cross-country analysis, there is less variation across states in
  27
     The variable linking mothers to children is included in the EU-LFS only starting in 1998, thus we do not have
fertility measures for Europe in 1995. We do for other countries, so the panel covers 1995-2010 but has fewer
observations in total than in Table 3.



                                                       27
the US than across developed countries in the key variable that drives our theory, the strength of
gender norms. The second advantage of focusing on the US context is data availability: we can
construct longer panels of all the key state-level variables that are required for our analysis and
provide a cleaner mapping of labor market conditions at the time when individuals are making
their marriage decisions. By combining 1970 to 2000 US Census and American Community Survey
(2008 to 2011) data, our US state panel covers four decades, from 1970 to 2010.

We use the 1973 to 2014 waves of the General Social Survey (GSS) to measure gender norms at
the state level in the US. We rely on the answers to the question “It is better if the man is the
achiever outside the home and the woman takes care of home and family.” Respondents indicate
their agreement to this statement on a four-point scale - agree strongly, agree, disagree and disagree
strongly. We code the response “agree strongly” and “agree” as indicating a greater degree of gender
conservatism. Since the GSS did not include the “jobs scarce” question from the IVS that we used
in the cross-country analysis, we focus on this specific question as it was most comparable to the
ISSP question that was also used in the cross-country analysis. Moreover, this question appears
closest in spirit to proxying for the gender roles that are central in the model, which is based on
the belief that some may regard a woman’s primary role to be in the home.

To combine the individual responses from di↵erent GSS waves into a single state-specific mea-
sure, we first regress the individual-level responses to the question on a full set of year dummies.
Throughout, we use responses for all individuals age 18 and older. Next, we use the residuals from
this regression to create a measure of the average gender conservatism in a particular state, which is
simply the mean across all years of the residual individual-level response in a given state. For ease
of interpretation, for the main analysis, we standardized the state-level sexism measure to have a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of one in the full sample of states. We are able to construct
a state level measure of sexism based on answers to this statement for 45 states, including DC.28

Summary statistics for the key labor, marriage market and educational variables for US states are
presented in Appendix Table 5. As in the cross-country data, we measure outcomes for women
(and men) who are between 35 and 44 years old in a given year. As we already noted (for a shorter
time period) in the cross-country data, the deficit that skilled women used to experience in the
marriage market in the US has been shrinking over time. While men used to complete college at a
much higher rate than women in 1970, this male advantage had disappeared by 2000 and by 2010,
a greater share of women than men between 35 and 44 years of age had completed a college degree.

Figure 8 replicates Figure 1 for the US state-level analysis. We plot the di↵erence in marriage
rates between skilled and unskilled women in 2010 (y-axis) against the di↵erence in marriage rates
between skilled and unskilled men in the same year (x-axis). As of 2010, in all states except Missouri
  28
    The six states that were not included in earlier waves of the GSS are Hawaii, Idaho, Maine, Nebraska, Nevada
and New Mexico. See Appendix Table 4 for the classification of states into three sexism groups.


                                                      28
and Wyoming, skilled men marry at a higher rate than unskilled ones. While we observe no deficit
for skilled women in the marriage market in 2010 in the US at the aggregate level (Appendix Table
5), this statistic hides substantial variation across states, which we propose to explain through the
lens of our theory. We also see that the majority of the data is below the 45-degree line. In other
words, in the majority of states, skilled women experience a greater deficit in the marriage market
compared to skilled men. In the figure, DC stands out as a clear outlier in the size of the marriage
gaps for both women and men. For our subsequent analysis, we present results that include DC;
however, we have also estimated specifications where we omit DC and the results are very similar.29

Figure 9 shows that the variation across states in the “penalty” skilled women experience in the
marriage market correlates with the strength of gender norms at the state-level. As in the cross-
country analysis, we classify states into three groups according to their degree of sexism – high,
medium and low. The skilled-unskilled gap in marriage is more likely to be positive in low-sexism
states and more likely to be negative in high-sexism states. There also appears to be a negative
relationship between the high-skilled marriage rate gap among men and state-level gender norms,
even though, as already discussed above, all but two states are characterized by a higher marriage
rate for skilled men compared to unskilled men.

Table 8 confirms the correlation in Figure 9 in a regression framework which allows us to assess
the sensitivity of the correlation to the inclusion of additional controls. The sample in Table 8
is restricted to the 45 states for which we can construct the sexism measure. The univariate
correlation in column (1) between the skilled-unskilled gap in marriage rates in 2010 and the high-
sexism dummy is, if anything, strengthened when control for a quadratic in high skilled female
and male wages, as well as other state-specific controls such as the share of males with tertiary
education, the female and male skill premium, and the female and male labor force participation
skill premium (column (2)). Note that, unlike the cross-country data, the labor market controls
are measured among individuals age 25 to 54 in the preceding decade. This ensures that the labor
market controls proxy for the relevant labor market conditions that individuals are likely to face
when making their marriage decisions (when they are age 25 to 34).30 Column (3) shows that the
relationship between the marriage gap by education among women and sexism is also robust to
using the continuous measure of sexism.31
  29
     These results are available on request.
  30
     Due to data limitations, we were not able to construct the variables in the preceding time period in the cross-
country analysis.
  31
     Appendix Table 6 replicates the analysis in Table 5. Just like in the cross-country case, we find no systematic
correlation across US states between total (e.g. husband plus wife) time spent on household production (even though
gender norms correlate in the expected direction to the allocation of that time between husband and wife). Appendix
Table 7 replicates the analysis in columns (1) to (3) of Table 6. Controlling for total time spent on household
production (as a proxy for ) does not qualitatively alter the results in columns (1) to (4) of Table 8, even though
the di↵erence between mid-sexism states and low-sexism states is no longer statistically significant.



                                                        29
Columns (4) to (7) replicate column (2) for the following years, respectively: 2000, 1990, 1980 and
1970. What is most remarkable about this analysis of the variation in the relationship over time
is that the relationship appears to be most pronounced in the last 3 decades (1990 to 2010) but is
not present in the earlier decades (1980 and 1970). Recall that one prediction of our model is that
educated women may only start experiencing a decline in their relative marriage rate compared
to less educated ones when: a) they become less appealing to men who dislike having a working
wife and b) they become more picky in the marriage market as their labor market opportunities
and utility if they remain single increases. When labor market opportunities for skilled women are
relatively low, we would not expect to see large di↵erences in their relative marriage rates based
on the sexism of the environment. Hence, the lack of a relationship between our two key variables
in the earlier decades (1970 and 1980) could be rationalized through the lens of our model.

The two remaining columns of Table 8 replicate the analysis in columns (2) and (3) for men. While
the visual inspection of the data in Figure 8 suggested, if anything, a stronger correlation between
gender norms and the skilled-unskilled marriage gap for men, the multivariate evidence in the
last two columns of Table 8 weakly suggest that this correlation is less robust. In particular, the
relationship for men is not statistically significant when we use the continuous measure of sexism
(column (9)).

Table 9 mirrors Table 3. In particular, we test for the finer prediction of our model: increases
in labor market opportunities for skilled women are more likely to be associated with an increase
in their relative marriage rate in less sexist states but a decrease in more sexist states. However,
given the higher quality of the wage data in this context, we do not present results where we use
state GDP per capita as an alternative proxy of labor market opportunities for skilled women. The
analysis is performed on a 1970 to 2010 panel of US states. As indicated above, all the labor market
variables (including high-skilled female wages) are measured in the prior decade to proxy for the
labor market conditions that might have been most relevant at the time marriage market decisions
were made. All regressions in Table 9 include state and year fixed e↵ects and standard errors are
clustered at the state level.

Recall that the main prediction of the model we want to test in this table is whether the relationship
between the marriage market premium for skilled women and their labor market opportunities is
mediated by the level of sexism in their place of residence. The evidence in Table 9 appears
consistent with that in the country-level panel in Table 3. Specifically, we find that increases in
labor market opportunities for skilled women are associated with an increase in the deficit they
experience in the marriage market (compared to less skilled ones) in the more sexist states (.073-
.089). The point estimate on log (female high skilled wage) is positive and statistically significant
for the least sexist states (.073) and also positive but smaller in magnitude (.073-.047) for the mid-
sexism states, as predicted by the theory. Column (2) shows that the patterns in column (1) are


                                                 30
robust to including a battery of time-varying state controls: share of males with tertiary education,
the female and male skill premium, the female and male labor force participation premium, and a
quadratic in female and male high skilled wages. Finally, column (3) shows that the patterns in
column (2) are robust to using the continuous sexism measure: increased labor market opportunities
are associated with relatively fewer marriages for skilled women as the sexism of the state increases.

Columns (4) and (5) replicate columns (3) and (4), respectively, for males. We also observe that
skilled men’s relative marriage rates are relatively more negatively a↵ected by higher labor market
opportunities for women in more sexist states; however, the relationship is not statistically robust
to using the continuous sexism measure.

Tables 10 and 11 test the predictions of our model for women’s educational outcomes. Table 10
replicates in the US states context the analysis of Table 4 where we observed a negative correlation
between sexism and women’s educational attainment. The dependent variable in Table 10 is the
share of women in a state between 35 and 44 years of age that have completed a college degree.
Each regression is a cross-section of states, at di↵erent points in time. All the regressions control for
the share of men with a college degree in each state. Columns (1) to (4) present the results for the
cohort of women aged 35 to 44 in 2010. In column (1), we observe that the share of women having
completed a college degree is highest in low sexism states. Column (2) shows that the coefficient
on the dummy for high sexism states is slightly more negative when we include the same set of
state-level controls as in the previous table (a quadratic in male and female high skill wages, skill
premium, labor force participation skill premium). The negative relationship between sexism and
women’s educational attainment is also robust to using the continuous sexism measure (column
(3)).

As we had observed in the cross-country data, in column (4), we show that there is a positive
relationship between the share of women having completed a college degree in a state and the
di↵erence in marriage rate between high and low skilled women, consistent with the mechanism
articulated in the theory. However, we note here that, unlike in the cross-country analysis, this
relationship is not statistically significant.

The remaining columns of Table 10 replicate column (2) for the other time periods: 2000, 1990,
1980, and 1970. While sometimes imprecise, the estimates suggest a negative correlation between
sexism and female educational attainment from 1980 onwards. Sexism does not appear to relate to
women’s educational outcomes for the 1970 cohort (e.g. women that were between 35 and 44 years
old in 1970). Again, our theory provides a way to rationalize this pattern. The explanation we
propose for why norms may lead to worse female educational outcomes in more sexist states is that
women may actively choose to be less educated in those states because they anticipate having to
pay a cost in the marriage market for the increased labor market opportunities that are available
to skilled individuals. Assuming that in the earlier period, education is less likely to translate into


                                                   31
greater labor market opportunities, then the relative sexism of the place is less likely to matter.
Nonetheless, we can only conjecture as to whether this is indeed the correct explanation.

Table 11 fully leverages on the longer time series nature of the state-level data to ask whether the
ambient level of sexism in a state mediates the sensitivity of women’s education decision to their
improving labor market opportunities. The dependent variable in all regressions is the share of
women that are between 35 and 44 years old in a given year (2010, 2000, 1990, 1980 or 1970) and
have completed a college degree. All regressions in Table 11 control for state and year fixed e↵ects,
as well for the share of males in the same age bracket that have completed a college education.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Also, as in earlier tables, labor market opportunities
for skilled women (log(female high skilled wage)) are measured in the prior decade to reflect as much
as possible on the conditions that were relevant when the 35 to 44 year old women were making
their education decision.

Column (1) shows that a given increase in labor market opportunities for skilled women increase
their schooling achievement more in the least sexist states than in the more sexist states. While
statistically insignificant, the estimated coefficient on the interaction term between labor market
opportunities and mid-level sexism is of the expected sign (negative) and magnitude (e.g. smaller
than the coefficient on the interaction term between labor market opportunities and high level
sexism). When we include controls for a quadratic term in high-skilled female and male wages as
well as the usual set of state-time varying controls (columns (2)), the results become weaker. Only
in the specification where we use the continuous sexism measure (column (3)) do we find statistical
significance at the 10 percent level.

Overall though, the evidence in Table 11 suggests that women’s educational choices in the face
of improving labor market opportunities are a↵ected by the sexism of the environment that they
face. This, combined with the panel evidence in Table 9 regarding marriage market outcomes, is
consistent with the predictions of our theoretical model. Improvement in labor market opportunities
for skilled women may translate into fewer women deciding to skill up via education in more sexist
states as the benefits that women can reap in the labor market due to furthering their education
are counteracted by worse prospects in the marriage market for skilled women in those states.

In summary, the state-level evidence appears largely consistent with the findings from the cross-
country analysis. The fact that similar patterns are observed within a single country context
is reassuring and suggests that the cross-country patterns are unlikely to be driven entirely by
unobserved heterogeneity.




                                                  32
5    Conclusion

We develop a simple theoretical model that helps to rationalize the relatively lower marriage rate
of educated women through the lens of gender identity norms. The model can also provide an
explanation as to why educated women’s relative deficit in the marriage market might react in
opposite directions to improvements in their labor market opportunities in more vs. less gender
conservative societies, and hence why women’s educational choices in the face of growing labor
market opportunities might depend on the strength of these gender norms as they balance labor
and marriage markets considerations. We verify some of the key predictions of our model both in
a panel of developed nations as well as a panel of US states.

The model we propose obviously abstracts from various relevant factors, and could be enriched by
future work. In particular, to emphasize how better labor market opportunities for skilled women
interact with slower moving social norms, we have taken the extreme perspective of fixed and
exogenous gender role attitudes. A richer model would account for the fact that, even if slowly,
gender role attitudes have been converging towards less conservative views, and would endogenize
this process of change. A richer model might also allow for the quality of the household public
good (such as raising a child) to di↵er based on the educational attainment of the wife.

Our analysis has implications for the expected long run trend of what is today a troubling phe-
nomenon in many gender conservative countries, in particular East Asia and Southern Europe: the
increasing singleness rate of college educated women. Given that non-traditional family structures
and out-of-wedlock births continue to be quite rare in these societies (particularly East Asia), this
“flight from marriage” among highly educated women is also likely to translate in a decline in
fertility for this educational group, only reinforcing the already low fertility rate in this part of the
world. The fact that highly skilled women are disproportionately foregoing childbearing could also
result in lower social returns to education in these societies; and may further slow down the dy-
namics of adjustment of gender norms to the new labor market reality if only children of educated
and/or working women develop more liberal gender attitudes (FFO, 2004).

Even if gender role attitudes do not change in East Asia, or change very slowly, our analysis suggests
that further improvements in the labor market opportunities for skilled women should ultimately
result in improving their relative attractiveness in the marriage market. While predicting when
this will happen is beyond the mainly qualitative nature of the exercise we have performed here,
the fact that the marriage rate of educated women has caught up to (and in some cases surpassed)
that of less educated women in more gender-equal societies should give East Asian and Southern
European countries hope about the transitional nature of the phenomenon they are experiencing.




                                                   33
References

 [1] Akerlof, George and Rachel Kranton. 2000. ”Economics and Identity.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics. Vol 115(3): 715-753.

 [2] Becker, Gary S. 1973. “A Theory of Marriage: Part I.” Journal of Political Economy. Vol.
     81(4): 813-46.

 [3] Fernandez, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. “Mothers and Sons: Pref-
     erence Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol.
     119(4): 1249-1299.

 [4] Fernandez, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli and Claudia Olivetti. 2002. “Marrying Your Mom: Pref-
     erence Transmission and Women’s Labor and Education Choices.” NBER Working Paper No.
     9234 (September).

 [5] Feyrer, James, Bruce Sacerdote and Ariel Dora Stern. 2008. “Will the Stork Returns to Japan?
     Understanding Fertility within Developed Nations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol.
     22(3): 3-22.

 [6] Goldin, Claudia. 2006. “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment, Ed-
     ucation, and Family.” American Economic Review. Vol. 96(2): 1-21.

 [7] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2005. “Engines of Liberation.”
     Review of Economic Studies. Vol. 72(1): 109-133.

 [8] Hwang, Jisoo. 2015. “Housewife, “Gold Miss,” and Equal: The Evolution of Educated Women’s
     Role in Asia and the US.” Working Paper.

 [9] Isen, Adam and Betsey Stevenson. 2010. “Women’s Education and Family Behavior: Trends in
     Marriage, Divorce and Fertility,” John Shoven, eds., Demography and the Economy, University
     of Chicago Press.

[10] Jones, Gavin W. and Bina Gubhaju. 2009. “Trends in Marriage in the Low Fertility Countries
     of East and Southeast Asia.” Asian Population Studies. Vol. 5(3): 297-265.

[11] Kawaguchi, Daiji and Soohyung Lee. 2014. “Brides for Sale: Cross-Border Marriages and
     Female Immigration.” Working Paper.

[12] Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak. 2003. “Efficiency in Marriage.” Review of Economics
     of the Household. Vol 1(3): 153-67.

[13] Mazzocco, Maurizio. 2007. “Household Intertemporal Behavior: A Collective Characterization
     and a Test of Commitment.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 74 (3): 857-895.

                                               34
[14] OECD Family Database. 2012. http://www.oecd.org/social/family/SF_2_4_Share_
     births_outside_marriage.pdf

[15] Pew Research Center. 2010. “The Reversal of the College Marriage Gap.” Available online at:
     http://www.pewresearch.org/2010/10/07/the-reversal-of-the-college-marriage-gap/

[16] Pew Research Center. 2014. “Record Share of Americans Have Never Married.” Available on-
     line at: http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/09/24/record-share-of-americans-have-never-
     married/

[17] Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2007. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving
     Forces.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol. 21(2): 27-52.

[18] The Economist. 2011. “The Flight               from   Marriage.”   Available    online   at:
     http://www.economist.com/node/21526329




                                               35
             Figure 1. Cross-country Variation in the Marriage Gap in 2010 by Gender




Note: The skilled-unskilled marriage rate gap among women (y-axis) is defined as the difference between
the fraction of women with a tertiary education between 35 and 44 years old that were ever married and the
fraction of women with less than a tertiary education in the same age range that were evermarried. Reported
on the x-axis is the equivalent skilled-unskilled marriage rate gap among men. Refer to Appendix Table 2 for
the data sources used to construct the marriage gaps for each country.




                                                      36
                Figure 2A. Difference in Ever Married Rates (High Skilled - Low Skilled) from 1995 to 2010 by Country
                                                          Females, 35-44




Note: See Appendix Table 2 for a description of the data sources. The figure shows the trends in the skilled-unskilled difference in evermarried
rates for females aged 35-44 from 1995 to 2010 for each of the 23 countries in our sample.
                                                                           37
          Figure 2B. Difference in Ever Married Rates (High Skilled - Low Skilled) from 1995 to 2010 by Country
                                                      Males, 35-44




Note: See Appendix Table 2 for a description of the data sources. The figure shows the trends in the skilled-unskilled difference in
evermarried rates for males aged 35-44 from 1995 to 2010 for each of the 23 countries in our sample.
                                                                      38
                                       Figure 3. Correlation between Marriage Gaps and Social Norms by Gender in 2010


                                                       Females, 35-44                                                                                    Males, 35-44
                           .15




                                                                                                                          .15
                                                                                                                                               FI
                                                                                                                                              SE
                           .1




                                                                                                                          .1
                                                                                                                                                                              KR
                                                                                                                                              DK              IE
                                                                                                                                              IS US       CA
                                               SE                                                                                                        UK                         TW




                                                                                                    Diff in Male Evermarried Rates
                                                                                                                                                NO
                                                FIUS                                                                                                     FR DE
                                .05




                                                                                                                              .05
         Diff in Evermarried Rates




                                                          CA
                                               IS             IE
              Skilled-Unskilled




                                                                                                            Skilled-Unskilled
                                                         UK                                                                                                              HK
                                                                                                                                                                  PT          JP
                                                 NO                                                                                                              BE
                      0




                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                    NL
                                                         FR                                                                                                                   GR
                                                                                                                                                                   CH
                                               DK                                                                                                        ES
                                                                    PT
                                                                   BE                                                                                               IT
       -.05




                                                                                                     -.05
                                                                                                                                                                   AT
                                                                               KR
                                                         ES                    JP
                                                    NL        DE               GR
                           -.1




                                                                                                                          -.1
                                                                     IT
                                                                   CH
                                                                    AT    HK         TW
                           -.15




                                                                                                                          -.15
                                      -2         -1        0         1            2        3                                         -2         -1        0         1            2        3
                                       Attitude 1: Men have more right to a job than women                                            Attitude 1: Men have more right to a job than women



                                             High Sexism                  Mid sexism           Low Sexism                                                     Fitted values


Notes: See Appendix Table 2 for a description of the data sources. The figure shows the cross-country relationship between
the skilled-unskilled difference in evermarried rates for females (left panel) and males (right panel) aged 35 to 44 and the
IVS-based measure of gender attitudes.




                                                                                               39
Figure 4: Husband’s Utility Differential from Marrying a Working Woman as a Function of
                                        Wife’s Wage

                                A. Different values of α




                                B. Different values of β




                                                40
Figure 5: Marriage Gaps as a Function of Wife’s Wage and Gender Norms

                       A. Female Marriage Gap




                        B. Male Marriage Gap




                                      41
                                                           Figure 6. Gender Gap (Female-Male) in Education and Gender Norms, 2010
                                                .2




                                                                          FI
                                                                     IS
Female - Male Gap in % Tertiary Educated




                                                                           NO
                                                                    SE
                                                .1




                                                                                                      BE PT
                                                                    DK         US          ES
                                                                                           FR CA IE         IT
                                                                                                                          GR
                                                                                           UK
                                                0




                                                                                                                                           TW
                                                                                    NL                                    JP
                                                                                                        AT
                                                                                                DE                   HK
                                                -.1




                                                                                                                          KR

                                                                                                       CH
                                                -.2




                                                      -2                  -1                   0                  1                 2              3
                                                                                Attitude 1: Men have more right to a job than women

                                                                High Sexism              Mid sexism     Low Sexism                 Fitted values



                                           Note: See Appendix Table 2 for a description of the data sources. The figure shows the cross-country
                                           relationship between the gender gap in tertiary education (defined as the female-male difference in the share
                                           with a tertiary education among those aged 35 to 44) and the IVS-based measure of gender attitudes.




                                                                                                            42
                                                                    Figure 7. Time Spent on Household Production and Gender Norms

    Hrs a week relative to the US | Demographics




                                                                                                                       Hrs a week relative to the US | Demographics
                                                   5                                   Mother                                                                                                       Father




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                  IE                                                                                                           IE
                                                                            ES
                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                                                                                                                                                                         ESCA
                                                                                                                                                                                         UK
                                                                                                    JP                                                                          SE
                                                   -20 -15 -10 -5



                                                                                                                                                                                 IS
                                                                              CA




                                                                                                                                                                      -10
                                                                                   AT
                                                                                  CH                                                                                               FI
                                                                                                                                                                                    NO
                                                                            UK                      KR                                                                          DK
                                                                               DE                                                                                                             DE CH
                                                                                                                                                                                         FR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  AT




                                                                                                                                                                      -20 -15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TW
                                                                    ISFI                                                                                                                                         KR
                                                                                                             TW
                                                                    SE
                                                                    DKNO    FR                                                                                                                                   JP

                                                                      -1      0              1           2        3                                                              -1        0            1             2        3
                                                                                   Job Scarce Men                                                                                               Job Scarce Men
    Hrs a week relative to the US | Demographics




                                                                                 Mother + Father
                                                                                  IE
                                                   0




                                                                            ES
                                                   -10




                                                                              CA
                                                                            UK
                                                                                       CH
                                                                                 DE     AT
                                                   -20




                                                                     ISFI                           JP
                                                                                                    KR
                                                                    SE

                                                                      NO
                                                   -30




                                                                    DK      FR                               TW

                                                                      -1      0              1           2        3
                                                                                   Job Scarce Men




Note: The y axis is the country dummy coefficient of a regression of hours per week spent in total
household production (family care plus household work) on country fixed effects, number of children,
dummy for children under 5 years of age, household size, education and age of the respondent, and if
she has a partner living in the household. Reference country is the US. Data comes from the 2012
ISSP, with the sample restricted to individuals aged 18-64 with at least one own child living in the
household.




                                                                                                                      43
            Figure 8. Cross-State Variation in the Marriage Gap in 2010 by Gender




Note: The data is from the 1970 to 2000 US Census and the 2008 to 2011 ACS. The skilled-unskilled
marrate rate gap among women (y-axis) is defined as the difference between the fraction of women
with a college degree between 35 and 44 years that were ever married adn the fraction of women with
less than a college degree in the same age range that were ever married. Reported on the x-axis is the
equivalent skilled-unskilled marriage gap among men.




                                                   44
Figure 9. Correlation between Marriage Gaps and Social Norms by Gender in 2010
                                   (US State Level Data)




Note: The data is from the 1970 to 2000 US Census, the 2008 to 2011 ACS and the 1973-2014 GSS.
The figure shows the cross-state relationship between the skilled-unskilled difference in ever married
rates for females (left panel) and males (right panel) aged 35 to 44 and the state-level measure of gender
attitudes.




                                                     45
                                                Table 1. Gender-Related Attitudes Across Countries
                                                                                   ISSP: Man's job to earn money, woman's job to look after family
                      IVS: Men have more right to a job than women (% Agree)                         (% Strongly Agree / Agree)
                                                                  Males                                                           Males
                                                                     Post-sec or                                                      Post-sec or
                       All        Males     Females       < Post-sec    more           All         Males      Females     < Post-sec     more
Full Sample           0.171       0.180       0.162         0.205       0.112         0.201        0.227       0.178        0.282        0.133
                     (0.109)     (0.116)     (0.105)       (0.128)     (0.095)       (0.105)      (0.108)     (0.104)      (0.132)      (0.071)
No. of countries        23          23          23            23          23            20           20          20           20           20

East Asia            0.330        0.348        0.313       0.392        0.274          0.352         0.381     0.326        0.483        0.241

South Europe         0.225        0.249        0.201       0.276        0.118          0.291         0.307     0.277        0.347        0.068

West Europe I        0.161        0.158        0.163       0.183        0.096          0.183         0.217     0.150        0.276        0.112

West Europe II       0.171        0.174        0.167       0.197        0.095          0.220         0.242     0.199        0.304        0.170

North America        0.102        0.108        0.097       0.130        0.064          0.175         0.208     0.146        0.261        0.161

Nordic Countries     0.037        0.042        0.032       0.052        0.025          0.085         0.107     0.066        0.129        0.071

Correlation between average responses to IVS and ISSP questions: 0.88

Note: The first row reports the sample mean of the average male and female response (standard deviation) across countries for each of the two
statements from IVS (2006 to 2013) and ISSP (2002 and 2012). The sample mean of the average male response across countries is also reported
separately by education level. In the remaining rows, we report the mean of the average response across five broad country groupings. East Asia
includes Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan; South Europe includes Italy, Portugal, Greece, and Spain; West Europe I includes UK, France,
Belgium, and Ireland; West Europe II includes Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and Netherlands; North America includes Canada and the US; Nordic
countries include Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Norway, and Iceland.




                                                                         46
                              Table 2. Correlation between the Marriage Gap and Social Norms among Individuals age 35-44
                                                              Dep Var. Difference in Ever Married Rates (High Skilled - Low Skilled)
                                                                              A. Females                                                                        B. Males
                                                            Year=2010                                 2005        2000        1995                            Year=2010
                                       (1)            (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)                          (9)        (10)
High Sexism Dummy                  -0.109***      -0.137*** -0.136**                                -0.082*     -0.078*      0.010                        -0.045
                                    [0.023]        [0.036]   [0.048]                                [0.042]     [0.040]     [0.090]                      [0.031]
Mid Sexism Dummy                     -0.043         -0.042    -0.057                                 -0.029      -0.041      -0.013                       -0.034
                                    [0.029]        [0.045]   [0.056]                                [0.041]     [0.032]     [0.066]                      [0.029]
Attitude measure: Men have
more right to a job than
women (mean 0, var 1)                                                         -0.055***     -0.058***                                                                  -0.018
                                                                               [0.015]       [0.017]                                                                  [0.013]
Log(Female high-skill wage)                        -1.706                       -1.493                         -6.247      -10.966       -11.672          0.070        -0.031
                                                   [5.648]                     [5.874]                        [9.818]      [8.552]      [60.129]         [4.228]      [4.096]
Log(Female high-skill wage)2                        0.073                        0.067                         0.304        0.517         0.555           0.003        0.007
                                                   [0.283]                     [0.293]                        [0.485]      [0.420]       [2.927]         [0.209]      [0.201]
Log(GDP per capita)                                              -1.729                       -3.104
                                                                 [3.078]                      [3.808]
Log(GDP per capita)2                                              0.078                        0.143
                                                                 [0.144]                      [0.177]
Other Controls                         No            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
Observations                            23            23            23            23              23             21           20            14              23           23
R-squared                             0.477         0.691         0.672         0.686           0.686          0.567        0.617         0.741           0.615        0.590
Note: The unit of observation is a country. Each column is a separate regression with the difference in evermarried rates between high-skilled and low-skilled for females (Panel
A) and males (Panel B) for each of the years indicated as the dependent variable. The high (mid) sexism dummy refers to the top (middle) tertile of countries in terms of
conservativeness of gender norms as measured using the IVS. The attitude measure is the continuous measure of gender norms from the IVS standardized to have mean 0 and
standard deviation 1 in the sample of 23 countries. Log(Female high-skill wage) is the log average wage of full-time (working 35 or more hours per week) females age 25 to 54
with a tertiary education in each country in 2000 US dollars. Log(GDP per capita) is the GDP per capita based on purchasing power parity for each country. Other controls
include the share of males in each country with tertiary education, the female and male skilled-unskilled wage premium, the female and male skilled-unskilled labor force
participation premium, and a quadratic in female and male high skilled wages. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                           47
                Table 3. Marriage Gap and the Interaction between Social Norms and Women's Labor Market Opportunities

                                                    Dep Var. Difference in Ever Married Rates (High Skilled - Low Skilled)
                                                                                  A. Females                                                      B. Males
                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)                      (7)          (8)
Log(Female high-skill wage)                          0.063       -1.878       -3.065                   -3.254      -1.765                   0.364        -0.127
                                                    [0.039]      [2.952]     [3.459]                  [3.001]     [2.986]                  [1.921]      [1.987]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*High sexism            -0.120** -0.190***                                                                       -0.048
                                                    [0.049]      [0.060]                                                                   [0.057]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Mid sexism               0.015        0.043                                                                     0.020
                                                    [0.054]      [0.067]                                                                   [0.039]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Sexism Index                                     -0.057*                                                                     -0.023
                                                                             [0.030]                                                                    [0.024]
Log(GDP per capita)                                                                        0.152      0.340**     0.120**
                                                                                          [0.106]     [0.123]     [0.053]
Log(GDP per capita)*High sexism                                                          -0.242** -0.455***
                                                                                          [0.092]     [0.093]
Log(GDP per capita)*Mid sexism                                                            -0.014     -0.234**
                                                                                          [0.098]     [0.102]
Log(GDP per capita)*Sexism Index                                                                                 -0.169***
                                                                                                                  [0.025]
Other Controls                                        No            Yes            Yes           No            Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
Year FE                                               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
Country FE                                            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
Observations                                           80            78             78            85            78            78              78           78
R-squared                                            0.885         0.902          0.883         0.868         0.933         0.934           0.908        0.908

Note: The unit of observation is a country by year. The sample includes 23 countries across four time periods (1995, 2000, 2005, 2010). Each column is a separate
regression with the difference in evermarried rates between high-skilled and low-skilled for females (Panel A) and males (Panel B) as the dependent variable. All
regressions include year and country fixed effects. The number of observations in each column is fewer than 92 due to missing information on wages or marraige
gaps for some countries in some years. The high (mid) sexism dummy refers to the top (middle) tertile of countries in terms of conservativeness of gender norms
as measured using the IVS. The Sexism Index is the continuous measure of the conservatism of gender norms from the IVS standardized to have mean 0 and
standard deviation 1 in the sample of 23 countries (higher values indicate countries with more conservative gender norms). Log(Female high-skill wage) is the log
average wage of full-time (working 35 or more hours per week) females age 25 to 54 with a tertiary education in each country in 2000 US dollars. Log(GDP per
capita) is the GDP per capita based on purchasing power parity for each country. Other controls include the share of males in each country with tertiary education,
the female and male skilled-unskilled wage premium, the female and male skilled-unskilled labor force participation premium, and a quadratic in female and male
high skilled wages. Robust standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in brackets.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                                                    48
             Table 4. Correlation between Female Tertiary Attainment and Social Norms Across Countries
                                                            Dep Var. Share of Females with Tertiary Education
                                                             Year=2010                         2005        2000                 1995
                                                 (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)                  (7)
High Sexism Dummy                            -0.116*** -0.152***                            -0.127*** -0.129***               -0.143**
                                               [0.029]  [0.037]                               [0.023]    [0.029]               [0.052]
Mid Sexism Dummy                              -0.082**   -0.082                              -0.074** -0.067**                -0.087**
                                               [0.036]  [0.048]                               [0.031]    [0.028]               [0.036]
Attitude measure: Men have more right
to a job than women (mean 0, var 1)                                    -0.061***
                                                                        [0.016]
Diff. in Ever Married Rates (high-skill -
low-skill) - Females                                                                 0.806***
                                                                                      [0.195]
Share of Males with Tertiary Education       0.627***     0.778***      0.949***     0.893***       0.778***     0.690***      0.383*
                                              [0.097]      [0.150]       [0.166]      [0.179]        [0.086]      [0.139]      [0.210]

Other Controls                                   No           Yes            Yes        Yes            No           No            No


Observations                                     23           23            23           23             21           20           16
R-squared                                      0.690        0.889         0.869        0.870          0.867        0.838        0.873
Note: The unit of observation is a country. Each column is a separate regression with the share of females with tertiary education in each
time period (2010, 2005, 2000, 1995) as the dependent variable. The high (mid) sexism dummy refers to the top (middle) tertile of
countries in terms of conservativeness of gender norms as measured using the IVS. The attitude measure is the continuous measure of
gender norms from the IVS standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the sample of 23 countries. All regressions include a
control for the share of men with tertiary education in each country. Other controls include a quadratic in female and male high-skilled
wages, the female and male skilled-unskilled wage premium, and the female and male skilled-unskilled labor force participation premium.
Robust standard errors are reported in brackets.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                        49
                                             Table 5. Household Production and Gender Norms
                                                    Hours a week spent in activity relative to the US | Demographics
                                  Total Household Production          Care for Family Members                    Household Work
                                   (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)      (8)        (9)
                                 Female     Male       Total        Female        Male          Total      Female     Male      Total

Attitude measure: Men have
more right to a job than          2.756     -2.967***      0.043           0.602      -2.051***     -1.164         2.131     -0.931**       1.174
women (mean 0, var 1)            [2.302]     [0.841]      [1.924]         [1.123]      [0.687]     [1.221]        [1.385]     [0.320]      [1.259]
Mean of Dep. Var                 -10.86       -10.32      -18.50          -12.19        -8.61      -18.19          1.12        -1.70        -0.43
Observations                       16           16          16              16           16          16             16           16          16
R-squared                         0.133       0.383        0.000          0.015        0.319        0.030         0.259        0.350        0.086
Note: The outcome variable is the country dummy coefficient of a regression of hours a week spent in the activity (by the respondent or by her/his
spouse) on country fixed effects, number of children, dummy for children under 5 years of age, household size, education and age of the respondent,
and if she has a partner living in the household. Note that total household production is the sum of care for family members and household work. The
excluded country dummy is for the US. Data comes from the 2012 ISSP, with the sample restricted to individuals aged 18-64 with at least one own child
living in the household. The countries included in the regression are: AT, CA, CH, DK, DE, ES, FI, FR, IS, JP, KR, SE. We also have data for the US,
which we use to construct the outcome variable. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                 50
                                    Table 6. Correlation between the Female Marriage Gap and Social Norms among Females age 35-44: Robustness Tests
                                                                                    Dep Var. Difference in Outcome (High Skilled - Low Skilled) in 2010 - Females
                                   A. Evermarried Rates, includes controls                   B. Ever Married or Currently                                                       D. Evermarried Rates, alternative
                                          for household production                                   Cohabitating                            C. Own Child at Home                    measure of social norms
                                        (1)             (2)        (3)                       (4)          (5)          (6)                 (7)       (8)        (9)                (10)         (11)       (12)
I. IVS attitude measure: Men have more right to a job than women
High Sexism Dummy                         -0.129***       -0.127***                      -0.084***       -0.083***                     -0.098*** -0.099***
                                           [0.022]         [0.022]                        [0.022]         [0.025]                        [0.018]  [0.020]
Mid Sexism Dummy                           -0.075*         -0.062*                         -0.007          -0.001                       -0.057** -0.050**
                                           [0.037]         [0.032]                        [0.030]         [0.030]                        [0.021]  [0.022]
Sexism Index (mean 0, sd 1)                                       -0.046***                                              -0.037*                                 -0.041**
                                                                    [0.008]                                              [0.020]                                  [0.015]
II. ISSP attitude measure: A man's job is to earn money; a woman's to look after the home
High Sexism Dummy                                                                                                                                                               -0.107***      -0.110***
                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.025]        [0.027]
Mid Sexism Dummy                                                                                                                                                                  -0.028         -0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.028]        [0.031]
Sexism Index (mean 0, sd 1)                                                                                                                                                                                -0.056***
                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.013]
Log(Female high-skill wage)                                 2.924         1.183                            2.768          -1.115                    5.351**        2.424                         -0.020      -4.155
                                                           [4.783]       [4.258]                          [6.089]        [6.840]                     [2.208]      [3.504]                       [3.247]     [6.424]
Log(Female high-skill wage)2                                -0.145       -0.060                           -0.135          0.055                     -0.263**       -0.121                        -0.000      0.212
                                                           [0.236]       [0.210]                          [0.295]        [0.331]                     [0.108]      [0.170]          0.015        [0.159]
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.236      [0.323]
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -2.419
Controls for Total Hhld Production
(Mother + Father hrs per week)                Yes            Yes           Yes               No             No             No             No           No           No              No            No           No
Other Controls                                No             No            No                No             No            No              No           Yes         Yes              No            Yes          Yes
Observations                                   16             16            16                16             16            16              22           22          22               20            20           20
R-squared                                    0.539          0.581         0.538             0.361          0.378         0.224           0.470        0.659       0.532            0.497         0.507        0.681
Note: The unit of observation is a country. The dependent variable is the difference in the outcome indicated in each panel for high-skilled and low-skilled females for females in 2010. Panel A examines the
relationship between the high-skill minus low-skill difference in female evermarried rates and gender norms as measured using the IVS, including controls for total household production. Panel B uses evermarried +
currently cohabiting rates as the outcome. The cohabitation data comes from the EU-SILC and is only available for the European countries. Panel C uses fertility, as proxied by the share of females with an own-child
present at home, as the outcome. The fertility measure is not available for Iceland. Panel D examines the relationship bewteen the difference in female evermarried rates and gender norms using an alternative measure
of gender norms based on the ISSP survey. The ISSP survey is not available for Italy, Greece, and Hong Kong. Given the reduced number of observations in Panels A and B, we do not include other controls in those
panels. Other controls in Panels C and D include the share of males with tertiary education, the female and male skill premium, the female and male labor force participation premium, and a quadratic in female and
male high skilled wages. See Table 5 for the construction of Total Hhld production. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                    51
  Table 7. Female Marriage Gap and the Interaction between Social Norms and Women's Labor Market Opportunities:
                                                  Robustness Tests
                                                         Dep Var. Difference in Outcome (High Skilled - Low Skilled) - Females
                                                                                                           C. Evermarried Rates,
                                                     A. Own Child at         B. Evermarried Rates,     Alternative measure of social
                                                           Home               Excludes East Asia                   norms
                                                      (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)             (6)
Log(Female high-skill wage)                          0.288      0.499           -3.851     -4.688         -2.464          -4.508
                                                    [6.637]    [6.877]         [2.847]    [3.457]         [5.011]         [5.553]
I. Attitude measure: Men have more right to a job than women (mean 0, var 1)
Log(Female high-skill wage)*High sexism             -0.147*                      -0.162**
                                                    [0.082]                       [0.067]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Mid sexism               -0.074                        0.018
                                                    [0.068]                       [0.057]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Sexism Index                 -0.094**                     -0.073**
                                                          [0.043]                      [0.029]
II. Attitude measure: A man's job is to earn money; a woman's to look after the home.
Log(Female high-skill wage)*High sexism                                                                          -0.186*
                                                                                                                 [0.105]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Mid sexism                                                                            0.077
                                                                                                                 [0.080]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Sexism Index                                                                                            -0.060
                                                                                                                                    [0.047]

Other Controls                                        Yes          Yes              Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes
Year FE                                               Yes          Yes              Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes
Country FE                                            Yes          Yes              Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes

Observations                                           62           62               65            65               66                 66
R-squared                                            0.930        0.932            0.931         0.924            0.891              0.876
Note: The unit of observation is a country by year (1995, 2000, 2005, 2010). The dependent variable is the difference in the outcome indicated
in each panel for high-skilled and low-skilled females for females age 35 to 44. The regressions follow the same structure as those in Table 3.
Panel A uses fertility, as proxied by the share of women with an own child at home, as the outcome. The number of observations in Panel A. is
smaller than in Table 3 as the fertility variable is not available for European countries in the earlier years. Sexism groups in Panel B are
redefined dropping East Asia. Panel C reports similar results to that in Table 3, using an alternative measure of social norms from the ISSP. The
ISSP question is not available for Italy, Greece, and Hong Kong. Other controls include the share of males with tertiary education, the female
and male skill premium, the female and male labor force participation premium, and a quadratic in female and male high skilled wages. Robust
standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in brackets.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                          52
       Table 8. Correlation between the Marriage Penalty and Social Norms among Individuals age 35-44 across US States
                                                   Dep Var. Difference in Ever Married Rates (High Skilled - Low Skilled)
                                                                    A. Females                                               B. Males
                                             Year=2010                   2000       1990       1980        1970             Year=2010
                                       (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)        (9)
High Sexism Dummy                   -0.031** -0.041***                  -0.007   -0.015**      0.012      0.006         -0.011
                                     [0.012]   [0.012]                 [0.007]    [0.006]     [0.007]    [0.018]       [0.013]
Mid Sexism Dummy                    -0.029** -0.023*                   -0.011*     -0.007      0.001      0.006       -0.024**
                                     [0.012]   [0.012]                 [0.006]    [0.005]     [0.007]    [0.015]       [0.010]
Attitude measure: Better if
man is achiever outside home
and women take care of home
and family (mean 0, var 1)                                -0.012***                                                                             0.000
                                                            [0.004]                                                                            [0.007]
Log(Female high-skill wage)                     -13.623** -9.903            6.021**      -8.388*     -4.162** -12.318**           -14.065      -11.914
                                                  [5.733]   [6.624]          [2.606]     [4.479]      [1.726]   [5.314]           [9.504]     [10.497]
Log(Female high-skill wage)2                     0.633**     0.460          -0.290**      0.402*     0.201** 0.604**               0.671        0.572
                                                  [0.269]   [0.311]          [0.124]     [0.218]      [0.085]   [0.263]           [0.445]      [0.492]

Other Controls                         No          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes

Observations                           45           45           45             45          45           45           45             45           45
R-squared                            0.215        0.635        0.573          0.787       0.613        0.674        0.460          0.742        0.702
Note: The unit of observation is a state (including DC). The data is from the 1970 to 2000 US Census and 2008 to 2011 ACS. The sample is restricted to
whites. Attitudes are measured using the 1973 to 2014 General Social Survey and are not available for 5 states (Hawaii, Idaho, Maine, Nebraska, Nevada,
and New Mexico). Each column is a separate regression with the difference in evermarried rates between high-skilled and low-skilled for females (Panel
A) and males (Panel B) age 35 to 44 for each of the years indicated as the dependent variable. The high (mid) sexism dummy refers to the top (middle)
tertile of states in terms of conservativeness of gender norms as measured using the GSS. The attitude measure is the continuous measure of gender norms
from the GSS standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the sample of 45 states. Log(female high-skill wage) is the log average wage of full-
time (working 35 or more hours per week) females age 25 to 54 with a college degree in the preceding decade (t-10) in each state. Other controls include
the share of males with college education, the female and male skill premium, the female and male labor force participation skill premium, and a
quadratic in female and male high skilled wages. The labor market controls are measured among individuals age 25 to 54 in year t-10. Robust standard
errors are reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                  53
Table 9. Marriage Gap and the Interaction between Sexism and Women's Labor Market Opportunities Across
                                                US States
                                                 Dep Var. Difference in Ever Married Rates (High Skilled - Low Skilled)
                                                               A. Females                              B. Males
                                                     (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)
Log(Female high-skill wage)                       0.073**          -0.577       -0.894        -2.772**       -2.854**
                                                   [0.036]        [1.720]      [1.699]         [1.248]        [1.309]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*High sexism          -0.089***      -0.082***                       -0.032
                                                   [0.023]        [0.025]                      [0.020]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Mid sexism            -0.047*          -0.040                      -0.031*
                                                   [0.024]        [0.026]                      [0.015]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Sexism
Index                                                                              -0.022**                          -0.008
                                                                                    [0.010]                          [0.011]

Other Controls                                        No              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Year FE                                               Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
State FE                                              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes

Observations                                          225            225             225               225             225
R-squared                                            0.593          0.604           0.584             0.835           0.831
Note: The unit of observation is a state by decade (1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010). The data is from the 1970 to 2000 US
Census and 2008 to 2011 ACS. The sample is restricted to whites. Attitudes are measured using the 1973 to 2014 General Social
Survey and are not available for 5 states (Hawaii, Idaho, Maine, Nebraska, Nevada, and New Mexico). Each column is a separate
regression with the difference in evermarried rates between high-skilled and low-skilled for females (Panel A) and males (Panel B)
age 35 to 44 as the dependent variable. All regressions include year and state fixed effects. The high (mid) sexism dummy refers
to the top (middle) tertile of states in terms of conservativeness of gender norms as measured using the GSS. The attitude measure
is the continuous measure of gender norms from the GSS standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the sample of
45 states. Log(female high-skill wage) is the log average wage of full-time (working 35 or more hours per week) females age 25 to
54 with a college degree in the preceding decade (t-10) in each state. Other controls include the share of males with college
education, the female and male skill premium, the female and male labor force participation skill premium, and a quadratic in
female and male high skilled wages. The labor market controls are measured among individuals age 25 to 54 in year t-10. Robust
standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                      54
                        Table 10. Correlation between Female College Attainment and Social Norms Across US States
                                                                          Dep Var. Share of Females with College Degree (Age 35 to 44)
                                                                             Year=2010                      2000       1990        1980                  1970
                                                             (1)           (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)                   (8)
High Sexism Dummy                                         -0.020**     -0.025**                           -0.022*     -0.009 -0.016***                  -0.008
                                                           [0.010]      [0.012]                           [0.013]    [0.011]     [0.004]               [0.006]
Mid Sexism Dummy                                          -0.014**      -0.013*                            -0.013     -0.005      -0.007                -0.003
                                                           [0.005]      [0.007]                           [0.009]    [0.007]     [0.005]               [0.005]
Attitude measure: Better if man is achiever outside
home and women take care of home and family
(mean 0, var 1)                                                                     -0.018***
                                                                                      [0.006]
Diff. in Ever Married Rates (high-skill - low-skill) -
Females                                                                                0.146
                                                                                      [0.132]
Share of males with college degree                        0.986*** 0.879*** 0.869*** 0.857***                  0.813*** 0.900*** 0.712*** 0.554***
                                                           [0.034]  [0.075]  [0.057]  [0.082]                   [0.105]  [0.060]  [0.036]  [0.052]

Other Controls                                               No           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

Observations                                                  45           45           45           45            45           45           45           45
R-squared                                                   0.975        0.982        0.987        0.980         0.974        0.980        0.989        0.935
Note: The unit of observation is a state. Each column is a separate regression with the share of females age 35 to 44 with a college degree in each time period as
indicated in the columns as the dependent variable.The high (mid) sexism dummy refers to the top (middle) tertile of states in terms of conservativeness of
gender norms as measured using the GSS. The attitude measure is the continuous measure of gender norms from the GSS standardized to have mean 0 and
standard deviation 1 in the sample of 45 states. All regressions include a control for the share of men age 35 to 44 with a college degree in each country. Other
controls include a quadratic in female and male high-skilled wages, the female and male skill premium, and the female and male labor force participation skill
premium. The labor market controls are measured among individuals age 25 to 54 in year t-10. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                       55
Table 11. Female College Attainment and the Interaction between Sexism and Women's Labor
                          Market Opportunities Across US States
                                                      Dep Var. Share of Females with College Education
                                                           (1)                (2)              (3)
Log(Female high-skill wage)                               0.006           -1.934**          -1.637*
                                                        [0.030]            [0.800]           [0.914]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*High sexism                 -0.037*             -0.018
                                                        [0.020]            [0.016]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Mid sexism                   -0.020             -0.017
                                                        [0.017]            [0.015]
Log(Female high-skill wage)*Sexism Index                                                    -0.015*
                                                                                             [0.008]
Share of males with college education                  1.053***           0.940***         0.910***
                                                        [0.182]            [0.130]           [0.122]

Other Controls                                             No                   Yes                 Yes
Year FE                                                    Yes                  Yes                 Yes
State FE                                                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes

Observations                                               225                  225                 225
R-squared                                                 0.987                0.989               0.990

Note: The unit of observation is a state by decade (1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010). The data is from the
1970 to 2000 US Census and 2008 to 2011 ACS. The sample is restricted to whites. Attitudes are measured
using the 1973 to 2014 General Social Survey and are not available for 5 states (Hawaii, Idaho, Maine,
Nebraska, Nevada, and New Mexico). Each column is a separate regression with the share of females age 35 to
44 with a college degre as the dependent variable. All regressions include year and state fixed effects. The high
(mid) sexism dummy refers to the top (middle) tertile of states in terms of conservativeness of gender norms as
measured using the GSS. The sexism index is the continuous measure of gender norms from the GSS
standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the sample of 45 states. All regressions control for the
share of males age 35 to 44 with college education. Other controls include the female and male skill premium,
the female and male labor force participation skill premium, and a quadratic in female and male high skilled
wages. The labor market controls are measured among individuals age 25 to 54 in year t-10. Robust standard
errors clustered at the state level are reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        56
                      Appendix Figure 1: Convergence in Gender-Related Attitudes




Note: The graphs plot the average of the mean responses of individuals age 18 and older for each country by
country group and survey year. The top figure uses the gender-related question from the IVS while the bottom
figure uses the question from the ISSP. The sample of countries is restricted to those with available data in each
of the survey years.




                                                                57
Appendix Figure 2. Cohabitation Rates by Skill and Correlation between Marriage Gap
                                 Measures (2010)

                                                 A. Cohabitation by Skill                                                                                                  B. Marriage Gap including Cohabitation
                                .25




                                                                                                                                                               .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IE
                                                                                 FR




                                                                                                  Diff in Evermarried/Currently Cohabitating Rates (Females)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DK
                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                        FR        UK
                                                                   NL
                                                                                            NO                                                                                                                         NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FI
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BE
                                                                                           SE




                                                                                                                                                               0
    Cohabitating Rates Female

                                .15




                                                                                                                       High Skill-Low Skill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SE
                                                        CH
                                                                                      FI
            High Skill




                                                              BE
                                                             DK                                                                                                                          NL        GR
                                                                                                                                                                                              DE
                                                                                                                                                                                              ES
                                                                   UK
                                                        ES
                                                       AT                                                                                                                                     PT
                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                     AT
                                                                                                                                                                              CH




                                                                                                                                                               -.1
                                                DE
                                                 PT
                                                  IE                                                                                                                                IT
                                                 IT
                                .05




                                                                                                                                                               -.2
                                          GR
                                0




                                      0        .05           .1         .15      .2        .25                                                                       -.2              -.1                0              .1
                                                     Cohabitating Rates Female                                                                                                 Diff in Evermarried Rates (Females)
                                                             Low Skill                                                                                                                  High Skill-Low Skill




Note: The data is from the 2010-2011 EU-SILC. Panel A plots cohabitation rates of tertiary-
educated females aged 35 to 44 against the cohabitation rates of non-tertiary educated females of
the same age range. Panel B plots the skilled-unskilled gap in marriage+cohabitation rates against
the skilled-unksilled gap in marriage rates among females aged 35 to 44.




                                                                                                 58
  Appendix Figure 3. Correlation between Marriage Gap and Fertility Gap for Females
                                       (2010)



                                                .05
   Diff in Prob. of Having Children (Females)



                                                                                                                                         FI
                                                                                                                       NO
                                                                                                                                         US
                                                0


                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                   BE    DK                                   SE
                                                                                                               FR
               High Skill-Low Skill
                                                -.05




                                                                                     NL     KR                              UK
                                                                                     DE
                                                                                     GR             PT                           IE
                                                -.1




                                                              TW
                                                              AT                      JP
                                                                                       ES
                                                                        IT
                                                -.15




                                                                   CH
                                                -.2




                                                              HK

                                                       -.15             -.1                 -.05                   0                  .05
                                                                             Diff in Evermarried Rates (Females)
                                                                                      High Skill-Low Skill



Note: See Appendix Table 2 for a description of the data sources. The figure shows the cross-
country relationship between the skilled-unskilled fertility gap and the skilled-unskilled marriage
gap for females aged 35 to 44 in 2010.




                                                                                          59
                                                   Appendix Table 1: Classification of Countries by Sexism Groups
                                                                         IVS                                                           ISSP
                                                                                                                              % Agree: A man's job is
                                                                                              Sexism
                                                                       % Agree: When jobs Group (1:                              to earn money; a     Sexism Group
                                                                       are scarce, men have Low, 2: Mid,                      woman's job is to look (1: Low, 2:
                    Country                                             more right to a job   3: High)                          after the home and    Mid, 3: High)
Country              code          Region           Survey years            than women                           Survey years          family.
Sweden                SE           Nordic         2006, 2009, 2011             0.022              1                  2002               0.076               1
Denmark               DK           Nordic               2008                   0.023              1               2002, 2012            0.101               1
Iceland               IS           Nordic               2009                   0.026              1                  2012               0.067               1
Finland               FI           Nordic            2005, 2009                0.067              1               2002, 2012            0.108               1
Norway                NO           Nordic               2008                   0.047              1               2002, 2012            0.074               1
USA                   US         N. America          2006, 2011                0.061              1               2002, 2012            0.227               2
Netherlands           NL         W. Europe II     2006, 2008, 2012             0.096              1                  2002               0.125               1
UK                    UK         W. Europe I         2006, 2009                0.139              2               2002, 2012            0.183               2
France                FR         W. Europe I         2006, 2008                0.147              2               2002, 2012            0.166               2
Spain                 ES          S. Europe       2007, 2008, 2011             0.153              2               2002, 2012            0.215               2
Canada                CA         N. America             2006                   0.143              2                  2012               0.123               1
Germany               DE         W. Europe II     2006, 2008, 2013             0.171              2               2002, 2012            0.184               2
Ireland               IE         W. Europe I            2008                   0.169              2               2002, 2012            0.157               2
Belgium               BE         W. Europe I            2009                   0.187              2                  2002               0.246               2
Switzerland           CH         W. Europe II        2007, 2008                0.208              2               2002, 2012            0.242               3
Portugal              PT          S. Europe             2008                   0.207              3                  2002               0.336               3
Austria               AT         W. Europe II           2008                   0.208              3               2002, 2012            0.328               3
Italy                 IT          S. Europe          2005, 2009                0.219              3
Hong Kong             HK          East Asia          2005, 2013                0.243              3
Greece                GR          S. Europe             2008                   0.321              3
Japan                 JP          East Asia          2005, 2010                0.306              3               2002, 2012                0.276                    3
Korea                 KR          East Asia          2005, 2010                0.344              3                  2012                   0.333                    3
Taiwan               TW           East Asia          2006, 2012                0.428              3               2002, 2012                0.448                    3
Note: The data is from the 2006 to 2013 Integrated Values Survey (IVS) and the 2002 and 2012 International Social Survey Program (ISSP). The gender-related questions
are based on the responses of individuals age 18 or older. The table reports the fraction of respondents in each country who agree with each of the gender-related statements
in the IVS and ISSP (across all available survey years). The sexism group classifications (high, mid, low) are based on country-specific average of the residual individual-
responses after netting out the survey year effects.



                                                                                          60
                   Appendix Table 2. Data Sources for Cross-country Panel, by Year
                     1995*                   2000*                   2005*            2010*
UK                EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
France            EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Germany           EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Netherlands                               EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Ireland           EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Austria           EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Belgium           EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Switzerland                               EU-LFS/LIS                 EU-LFS/LIS   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Italy             EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Spain             EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Portugal          EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Greece            EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Sweden            EU-LFS/LIS              EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Finland           EU-LFS/LIS              EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Denmark           EU-LFS/ECHP             EU-LFS/ECHP            EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Iceland                                                          EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
Norway                                    EU-LFS/LIS             EU-LFS/EU-SILC   EU-LFS/EU-SILC
US                     CPS                     CPS                     CPS              CPS
Canada                 LFS                     LFS                     LFS              LFS
Taiwan                MPUS                    MPUS                   MPUS             MPUS
Hong Kong             Census                  Census                 Census           Census
Japan                                         JGSS                    JGSS             JGSS
South Korea           KLIPS                   KLIPS                  KLIPS            KLIPS
* or closest year with available data
Notes: EU-LFS: European Union Labor Force Survey
ECHP: European Community Household Panel
EU-SILC: European Union Statistics on Income and Living Conditions
LIS: Luxembourg Income Study
CPS: US Current Population Survey
LFS: Canadian Labor Force Survey
MPUS: Taiwan Man Power Utilization Survey
JGSS: Japanese General Social Survey
KLIPS: Korean Labor and Income Panel Study




                                                       61
            Appendix Table 3. Descriptive Statistics - Cross-country Data
                                               1995        2000        2005        2010

Difference in Evermarried Rates (high-
skilled - low-skilled), Females age 35-44    -0.0718     -0.0586     -0.0446      -0.0368
                                             (0.0299)    (0.0526)    (0.0532)     (0.0660)
Difference in Evermarried Rates (high-
skilled - low-skilled), Males age 35-44      0.00217      0.0130      0.0305       0.0404
                                             (0.0326)    (0.0440)    (0.0494)     (0.0487)
Share of Males with Tertiary Education        0.218       0.257       0.291        0.339
                                             (0.0767)    (0.0873)    (0.0882)     (0.0996)
Gender Gap in Share with Tertiary
Education (Female - Male)                    -0.0271     -0.0165      0.0101       0.0270
                                             (0.0460)    (0.0643)    (0.0756)     (0.0806)
GDP per capita (2014 dollars)                 29,885      34,482      38,816      40,299
                                              (5,691)     (6,428)     (8,260)     (8,173)
Annual wages (2000 US$), high-skill
females age 25 to 54                          26,863      26,452      29,031      31,672
                                              (7,334)     (8,386)    (10,252)     (8,978)
Skill premium, males age 25 to 54              0.490       0.435       0.407       0.418
                                              (0.249)     (0.253)     (0.162)     (0.171)
Skill premium, females age 25 to 54            0.441       0.396       0.374       0.385
                                              (0.234)     (0.219)     (0.172)     (0.184)
LFP Gap (College - No College), females
age 25 to 54                                   0.211       0.157      0.136         0.117
                                             (0.0745)     (0.110)    (0.0722)     (0.0794)
LFP Gap (College - No College), males
age 25 to 54                                  0.0338      0.0387      0.0297       0.0318
                                             (0.0284)    (0.0273)    (0.0379)     (0.0365)
No. Countries                                   17          23          22           23
Source: See Appendix Table A2. Please refer to the text and data appendix for details on the
construction of the variables.




                                              62
                Appendix Table 4: Classification of US States by Sexism Group

                            GSS Attitude Measure: Better if man is achiever outside home and
                                           women take care of home and family
                                                    Standardized residual after Sexism Group
                         % Agree (average from taking out year effects (mean (1: Low, 2: Mid,
                              1973 to 2014)                  0, sd 1)                3: High)
Arkansas                           0.61                        2.78                      3
Utah                               0.57                        2.12                      3
West Virginia                      0.56                        1.72                      3
Alabama                            0.53                        1.48                      3
Mississippi                        0.47                        1.29                      3
Kentucky                           0.47                        1.16                      3
Tennessee                          0.47                        1.08                      3
North Carolina                     0.47                        1.03                      3
Florida                            0.44                        0.76                      3
Texas                              0.43                        0.72                      3
Montana                            0.47                        0.61                      3
Louisiana                          0.42                        0.57                      3
Georgia                            0.42                        0.54                      3
Oklahoma                           0.42                        0.49                      3
Delaware                           0.37                        0.40                      3
Missouri                           0.40                        0.33                      2
South Carolina                     0.42                        0.31                      2
Washington                         0.38                        0.19                      2
Pennsylvania                       0.41                        0.10                      2
Illinois                           0.39                        0.03                      2
Indiana                            0.38                        0.00                      2
Ohio                               0.39                       -0.04                      2
California                         0.38                       -0.12                      2
Wisconsin                          0.38                       -0.22                      2
Arizona                            0.36                       -0.22                      2
New York                           0.36                       -0.30                      2
Colorado                           0.35                       -0.36                      2
Wyoming                            0.36                       -0.40                      2
Virginia                           0.35                       -0.50                      2
Kansas                             0.35                       -0.51                      2
Rhode Island                       0.37                       -0.52                      1
New Jersey                         0.35                       -0.56                      1
Michigan                           0.35                       -0.59                      1
Vermont                            0.31                       -0.60                      1
South Dakota                       0.29                       -0.60                      1
Oregon                             0.34                       -0.66                      1
Massachusetts                      0.31                       -0.87                      1
North Dakota                       0.33                       -0.89                      1
Maryland                           0.30                       -1.03                      1
Connecticut                        0.31                       -1.21                      1
Iowa                               0.30                       -1.32                      1
New Hampshire                      0.33                       -1.34                      1
Minnesota                          0.30                       -1.35                      1
Alaska                             0.25                       -1.54                      1
District of Columbia               0.22                       -1.94                      1
Note: The data is from the 1973 to 2014 General Social Survey. The first column reports the
fraction of individuals in each state who agree (strongly agree, agree) with the statement from
1977 to 2014. The second column reports the standardized value of the state-average of the
residual individual-level responses to the gender-related question in the GSS after removing
year effects. The state classifications (high, mid, low) reported in the last column are based on
the standardized sexism measure in column (2). Refer to text for details on the construction of
the attitude variable.




                                                 63
                                Appendix Table 5. Descriptive Statistics - US States
                                    1970               1980               1990               2000               2010
Female Marriage Gap (age
35-44)                              -0.051             -0.051             -0.051             -0.045             0.004
                                   (0.044)            (0.022)            (0.017)            (0.024)            (0.031)
Male Marriage Gap (age
35-44)                              0.006              -0.006             -0.001             0.018              0.064
                                   (0.034)            (0.016)            (0.017)            (0.029)            (0.041)
College Share - Males (age
35-44)                              0.187              0.265              0.324              0.279              0.329
                                   (0.067)            (0.098)            (0.091)            (0.098)            (0.106)
College Share - Females
(age 35-44)                         0.098              0.168              0.273              0.290              0.374
                                   (0.044)            (0.091)            (0.098)            (0.102)            (0.110)
Log annual full-time wages
- College females age 25-
54 in t-10                          9.594              9.860              9.893             10.115             10.342
                                   (0.171)            (0.157)            (0.158)            (0.205)            (0.189)
Skill premium for males
age 25-54 in t-10                   0.374              0.375              0.310              0.457              0.494
                                   (0.111)            (0.097)            (0.081)            (0.064)            (0.074)
Skill premium females age
25-54 in t-10                       0.529              0.510              0.399              0.475              0.478
                                   (0.123)            (0.133)            (0.064)            (0.072)            (0.076)

No. of States                        45                 45                 45                 45                  45
Note: The data is from the 1970 to 2000 US Census and the 2008 to 2011 ACS. The marriage gap is defined as the difference in
evermarried rates between college-educated and non-college educated females/males. The sample is limited to 45 states due to
data availability in the General Social Survey (used to create the state-level gender attitude measure).




                                                                64
             Appendix Table 6. Household Production and Gender Norms - US States
                                    Minutes a day spent in activity relative to California | Demographics
                                             Child Care                           Household Work
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)        (6)
                                    Females     Males        Both         Females       Males      Both
Better if man achiever outside
home, woman take care of
home (mean 0, var 1)                 0.427      -4.171**        -2.049         2.599      -3.376**      -0.761
                                    [2.161]      [1.660]       [1.294]        [2.477]      [1.657]     [1.612]
Mean of Dep. Var                      1.30         0.50         0.66          -19.56        -2.42       -11.99
Observations                           44           44           44             44           44           44
R-squared                            0.001        0.175        0.058          0.042        0.079        0.008
Note: The outcome variable is the state dummy coefficient of a regression of minutes spent a day in the activity
on state fixed effects, day of the week dummies, a dummy for whether the day is a holiday, number of children,
household size, age of the youngest child, education and age of the respondent, and if she has a partner living in
the household. The construction of the outcome variable in columns (3) and (6) also controls for gender. The
excluded state is for California. Data is from the 2003 to 2012 ATUS, with the sample restricted to individuals
aged 25-54 with at least one own child living in the household. Robust standard errors in brackets, *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          65
 Appendix Table 7. Correlation between the Marriage Gap and Social Norms among Individuals age 35-44 across US States -
                                        Controlling for Total Household Work (Beta)

                                                      Dep Var. Difference in Ever Married Rates (High Skilled - Low Skilled)
                                                          A. Females                                               B. Males
                                                          Year=2010                                              Year=2010
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
High Sexism Dummy                      -0.025**                 -0.023**                        -0.021                    -0.020
                                        [0.010]                  [0.010]                       [0.013]                   [0.013]
Mid Sexism Dummy                         -0.007                   -0.011                      -0.022**                  -0.020**
                                        [0.010]                  [0.007]                       [0.009]                   [0.008]
Attitude measure: Better if man is
achiever outside home and women
take care of home and family (mean
0, var 1)                                           -0.008**                   -0.008**                      0.000                      0.000
                                                     [0.003]                    [0.003]                     [0.005]                    [0.005]
Total Household Work                     -0.001       -0.000                                    0.000        -0.000
                                        [0.000]      [0.000]                                   [0.001]      [0.001]
Child Care Time                                                    0.001        0.001*                                    0.000         0.000
                                                                  [0.001]       [0.001]                                  [0.001]       [0.001]

Other Controls                            Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

Observations                               44           44           44           44              44           44           44           44
R-squared                                0.540        0.479        0.549        0.521           0.640        0.595        0.636        0.595
Note: See notes to Table 8. Total household work and Child care time are measured using the ATUS (see notes to Appendix Table 6). Robust standard
errors are reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                              66
Data Appendix for “Social Norms, Labor Market Opportunities, and the Marriage Gap for
Skilled Women” by Bertrand, Cortes, Olivetti and Pan

1. Construction of Key Variables

Educational Classification

For consistency across countries, individuals are classified as “skilled” if they have completed
tertiary education and “unskilled” if they did not complete tertiary education.

•   EU-LFS data (UK, France, Germany, Netherlands, Ireland, Austria, Belgium, Switzerland,
    Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Iceland, Norway)

    Skill levels were coded based on the level of education reported in the variable HATLEVID
    which summarizes the highest level of education or training successfully completed. Three
    classifications were provided: L, Lower secondary, M, Upper secondary and H, Third level.
    The L level corresponds to ISCED levels 1 to 3c. The M level corresponds to ISCED levels
    3-4, and the H level corresponds to ISCED levels 5-6.

    Individuals were coded as having completed tertiary education if they were classified as “H”
    i.e. having completed ISCED levels 5-6.

Based on the ISCED description of the education programs, we construct similar measures of
skill for the remaining countries. The details of how these variables are constructed for each
country are as follows:

•   US: CPS data – skilled individuals are classified as those whose highest educational
    attainment is an associate’s degree or more.
        o Unskilled: None-Some college no degree (Codes 0-90, 100, 110)
        o Skilled: Associate degree (91, 92), Bachelor’s degree (111), 5+ year of college or
           graduate degree (120-125).
•   Canada: LFS data – skilled individuals are classified as those whose highest educational
    attainment is a bachelor’s degree or more.
        o Unskilled: 0 to 8 years (0), Some secondary (1), Grade 11 to 13, graduate (2) Some
           postsecondary (3), Postsecondary degree or diploma (4)
        o Skilled: Bachelor’s degree (5), Graduate degree (6)
•   Taiwan: Manpower Utilization Survey (MPUS) – skilled individuals are classified as those
    whose highest educational attainment is junior college or more.
        o Unskilled: Illiterate (1), Self-educated (2), Primary school (3). Junior high school (4),
           Senior high school (5), Vocational school (6)
        o Skilled: Junior college (7), University (8), Masters (9) and PhD (10)
•   Hong Kong: Census – skilled individuals are classified as those whose highest educational         67




    attainment is a diploma or more
        o Unskilled: No schooling, Kindergarten, Primary 1-6, Secondary 1-5, Grade 12,
           Secondary 6 and 7, Craft level (including apprenticeship)



!                                                                                                1!
       o Skilled: Diploma/Vocational education, Higher Diploma, Associateship or equivalent
         courses in Universities, Diploma or certificate courses in post-secondary colleges,
         Nurse training courses, sub-degree distance learning courses, first-degree,
         postgraduate

•   South Korea: Korean Labor and Income Panel Study– skilled individuals are classified as
    those whose highest educational attainment is a 2-year program with a vocational, technical,
    or associate degree.
        o Unskilled: No schooling (2), Elementary school (3), Lower secondary (4) and (5)
           Upper secondary.
        o Skilled: 2-years college, vocational, technical, associate degree (6), University (4
           years or more) (7), Graduate school (master's) (8), graduate school (doctoral) (9)

Marriage market outcomes

For each country in our sample, we construct the ever marriage rates of women and men age 35-
44 by education. Individuals are coded as 0 if they report being single and 1 if they report any
other marital status classification (single, divorced, widowed, legally separated).

The definition of marriage for each country is as follows:

For countries in the EU-LFS data (UK, France, Germany, Netherlands, Ireland, Austria,
Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Iceland,
Norway), marital status was coded based on the following:

Marital status is the conjugal status of each individual in relation to the marriage laws of the
country (i.e. de jure status). Some countries (i.e. the Nordic, the Netherlands, France) have a
legal framework for registering partnerships (in most countries these are same-sex partnership
and they have a legal status parallel to married couples). Such information has also to be treated
in a harmonised way and it is proposed to treat them as married and classify them under group 2
when they still exists, else as 0 as appropriate (legal separation or death of one of the partners).

For the remaining countries (US, Canada, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Japan and South Korea), marital
status was defined as legal marriage.

Labor market variables

Construction of wage series:

•   Earnings sample restricted to full-time employees who work 35 or more hours per week
•   Annual wages for full-time employees age 25 to 54
                                                                                                       68




The country-specific annual wage measures are converted to 2000 USD dollars using the
following procedure:




!                                                                                                 2!
•   Country-level wage measures are first deflated to 2000$ using the country-specific CPI from
    the World Bank

    World Bank country-specific CPI data:
    http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FP.CPI.TOTL

•   The European local currencies are then converted to Euros (for the EU member nations)
    using exchange rates in 2000.

    Historical local currency to Euro exchange rates: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/exchange-
    rates/data/database

•   Finally, all wage measures are converted to 2000$ using PPP conversion factors for private
    consumption from the World Bank.

    World Bank PPP conversion factors, private consumption:
    http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.PRVT.PP?page=3

For countries that were not included in the World Bank data, we used the following data sources
to implement the conversions:

    -   Taiwan
           o CPI data from the Taiwan National Statistics Bureau
               http://eng.stat.gov.tw/ct.asp?xItem=12092&ctNode=1558&mp=5
           o PPP conversion rate for GDP at current prices (national currency per current
               USD) from: http://www.econstats.com/weo/V013.htm

    -   Hong Kong
           o CPI data from the Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department
              http://www.censtatd.gov.hk/hkstat/sub/so60.jsp


European Community Household Panel (1994 to 2001)

    -   Annual wage measures for 15 countries from 1994 to 2001
    -   Countries included: UK, Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Germany, Netherlands, Belgium,
        Austria, Ireland, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece

LIS data used to fill in the gaps from ECHP data for the following countries:
   - Switzerland 1992 (recoded to 1995)
   - Sweden, Norway, Finland 1995
   - Switzerland 2000
   - Switzerland 2004 (recode to 2005)




!                                                                                                3!
