NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RESTORING RATIONAL CHOICE:
THE CHALLENGE OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL REGULATION
John Y. Campbell
Working Paper 22025
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22025

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
This paper is the Ely Lecture delivered at the annual meeting of the American Economic
Association on January 3, 2016. I thank the Sloan Foundation for financial support, and my
coauthors Steffen Andersen, Cristian Badarinza, Laurent Calvet, Howell Jackson, Brigitte
Madrian, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, Tarun Ramadorai, Benjamin Ranish, Paolo Sodini, and Peter
Tufano for joint work that I draw upon here. I also thank Cristian Badarinza for his work with
international survey data on household balance sheets, Laurent Bach, Laurent Calvet, and Paolo
Sodini for sharing their results on Swedish wealth inequality, Ben Ranish for his analysis of
Indian equity data, Annamaria Lusardi for her assistance with financial literacy survey data,
Steven Bass, Sean Collins, Emily Gallagher, and Sarah Holden of ICI and Jack VanDerhei of
EBRI for their assistance with data on US retirement savings, Eduardo Davila and Paul Rothstein
for correspondence and discussions about behavioral welfare economics, and Daniel Fang for
able research assistance. I have learned a great deal from my service on the Academic Research
Council of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and from conversations with CFPB staff.
Finally I gratefully acknowledge insightful comments from participants in the Sixth Miami
Behavioral Finance Conference and the Fourth Conference on Household Finance and
Consumption at the European Central Bank, and from Alexei Alexandrov, Julianne Begenau,
John Beshears, Ron Borzekowski, Chris Carroll, Paulo Costa, Xavier Gabaix, Peter Ganong,
Stefano Giglio, Michael Haliassos, Deborah Lucas, Annamaria Lusardi, Vijay Narasiman, Pascal
Noel, James Poterba, Tarun Ramadorai, Jon Reuter, Paul Rothstein, Antoinette Schoar, Robert
Shiller, Andrei Shleifer, Emil Siriwardane, Jeremy Stein, Cass Sunstein, Richard Thaler, and
Jessica Wachter. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22025.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by John Y. Campbell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Restoring Rational Choice: The Challenge of Consumer Financial Regulation
John Y. Campbell
NBER Working Paper No. 22025
February 2016, Revised March 2016
JEL No. D12,D18,G28
ABSTRACT
This lecture considers the case for consumer financial regulation in an environment where many
households lack the knowledge to manage their financial affairs effectively. The lecture argues
that financial ignorance is pervasive and unsurprising given the complexity of modern financial
products, and that it contributes meaningfully to the evolution of wealth inequality. The lecture
uses a stylized model to discuss the welfare economics of paternalistic intervention in financial
markets, and discusses several specific examples including asset allocation in retirement savings,
fees for unsecured short-term borrowing, and reverse mortgages.

John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22025

1

Introduction

This lecture examines the case for intervention in consumer …nancial markets. The tension
between laissez faire and interventionist tendencies is as old as the discipline of economics
itself.

Laissez faire economists appreciate and defend the performance of free markets,

while interventionists identify market failures and argue that feasible policies can be found
to correct them. The problems of greatest concern to interventionists vary over time, but
famously include monopoly power since the late 19th Century, aggregate demand management since the 1930s, and, over the last one hundred years, consumer protection in various
spheres including food and drugs, autos and consumer durables, and …nancial services.
Interventionists are often motivated by the desire to forestall more extreme “revolutionary” responses to social problems. A standard goal of interventionism is to design policies
that restore the welfare properties that free markets would have if market failures were
eliminated, thereby restoring the validity of classical economics. Thus the trust-busters of
the Progressive era sought to restore competition, Keynesian economists seek monetary and
…scal policies that stabilize the macroeconomy and restore textbook microeconomics— the
“neoclassical synthesis” of Samuelson (1955)— and consumer regulators seek to restore the
choices that consumers would make if they were rational and well informed.
Richard T. Ely, one of the founders of the American Economic Association, was a leading
interventionist of his era. His chief concern was the problem of monopoly, but he also wrote
about the unethical nature and destructive e¤ects of competition in markets with poorly
informed consumers.2

He argued that such problems needed to be addressed in order to

preserve political support for a broadly free-market economic system.3
2

Reading his work

For example, Ely wrote in his Introduction to Political Economy (1894 ed.) “It is of no avail to say
that business is excluded from the domination of ethical principles, for it is precisely in our economic life
that ethical principles of any real validity must manifest themselves. It is only in an imperfect condition of
society that sharp practice and hard bargaining can ever appear to men to be morally right.” (p.68) A few
pages later he writes that “Competition tends to force the level of economic life down to the moral standard
of the worst men who can sustain themselves in the business community.” (p.83)
3
In The Strength and Weakness of Socialism (1894), Ely writes “If we allow things to take their own
course, if we remain passive in the presence of the evils which socialism has so amply demonstrated and

1

today, one is impressed by his broad interests and the contemporary nature of many of his
concerns, but also by the lack of evidence he provides for the e¤ectiveness of his proposals,
some of which re‡ect prejudices of his day.4 His life and work are an inspiration, but also a
warning that we need to rely on strong evidence rather than intuition when proposing any
intervention in the economy.
The subject of this lecture is household …nance, also known as consumer …nance. The
…nancial decisions of consumers have attracted increasing interest in recent years as an
area where competitive markets may deliver substandard outcomes that can be improved
through intervention. Within the last ten years, the reach of regulation has been extended
by the most important US consumer …nancial legislation since the New Deal of the 1930s,
notably the Pension Protection Act of 2006, the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility
and Disclosure Act (CARD Act) of 2009, and the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 that created the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Similar trends are visible around the world.
Household …nance is a contemporary focus of interventionist attention for several reasons.
Modern economies have evolved in a way that requires individuals to make more di¢ cult
…nancial decisions with bigger consequences. Most obviously, people are living longer, while
traditional de…ned-bene…t retirement systems that provide guaranteed income streams are
being replaced with de…ned-contribution systems that require people to accumulate and invest their own retirement savings.

Higher education is becoming increasingly expensive

everywhere, posing a …nancing challenge in countries where it is not publicly provided.
Many countries have also experienced increases in house prices which stress traditional systems for …nancing homeownership.

Improving information technology has made simple

…nancial transactions cheaper and easier, but it has also permitted the development of more
complex and confusing …nancial products. The global …nancial crisis of the late 2000s highlighted the interactions of these trends, and undermined public con…dence in the …nancial
vividly depicted, the result may well be that outcome which the evolutionary socialism of Marx has pointed
out. But there is no reason why we should remain passive in the presence of evils. On the contrary, there
is every reason why we should vigorously attack existing evils, and do so with the hope that they can be
abated and improvements in social conditions can be e¤ected.” (p.255)
4
For example, eugenics as illustrated in Studies in the Evolution of Industrial Society (1903), p. 138.

2

system. Finally, within the economics profession the emergence of behavioral economics has
opened the eyes of academics to …nancial behaviors that were not carefully examined before,
and to evidence that many households— particularly those with lower income, wealth, and
education— are not up to the challenges of managing their …nancial a¤airs.
When households lack the intellectual capacity to manage their …nancial decisions, they
make mistakes that lower their own welfare and can also have broader consequences for
the economy.

For example, if poorer people invest ine¤ectively and borrow expensively,

the wealth of poorer people will grow more slowly than the wealth of richer people even
if they have the same savings rates, a problem highlighted by Piketty (2014) and Lusardi,
Michaud, and Mitchell (2015). The mistakes of unsophisticated consumers can create rents
that distort competition, as emphasized by DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004), Akerlof
and Shiller (2015), and Zingales (2015).

To attract unsophisticated consumers, …nancial

institutions may lower the up-front costs and raise the hidden costs of …nancial products,
e¤ectively subsidizing consumers who are sophisticated enough to avoid the hidden costs.
Sophisticated consumers then have no incentive to adopt easier-to-use …nancial products,
a barrier to constructive …nancial innovation highlighted by Gabaix and Laibson (2006).
Household mistakes that are not purely idiosyncratic but are correlated across households
create endogenous risk, which must then be managed by the …nancial system at considerable
resource cost. Important examples include prepayment risk and default risk in mortgages
as discussed by Campbell (2006) and Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007), and
house price risk as emphasized by Shiller (2005).

Finally, the exploitation of household

mistakes by …nancial institutions can lead to corrosive mistrust of the …nancial system and
the institutions that govern the economy, a problem highlighted by Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2008) and Zingales (2015).
The remainder of this lecture explores the nature of the household …nance problem in
greater detail, and then discusses policy responses.

Although there are numerous tradi-

tional arguments for …nancial regulation of consumer products that do not rely on consumer
…nancial mistakes (Campbell et al. 2011), I concentrate on the more novel and controversial
3

case for intervention in response to such mistakes. In addition, I ignore the important but
widely discussed issue of how much households choose to save or borrow, focusing instead
on the ways in which they do so.5
Section 2 summarizes empirical evidence on the broad characteristics of household balance
sheets and consumer …nance systems in a number of major developed countries. This section
shows that there are striking di¤erences across countries which are hard to explain as the
result of fundamental di¤erences in tastes or technology. Instead, the structure of household
…nance appears to be importantly the result of historical social and political choices (some
of which may have been made inadvertently). There are also however important common
facts across countries. Richer people tend to take more …nancial risk, and also invest more
e¢ ciently. This has implications for the evolution of wealth inequality which are discussed
in subsection 2.1.
Section 3 asks what people …nd di¢ cult about household …nance. This section argues
that problems arise not only from traditionally de…ned …nancial illiteracy— the failure to
understand basic …nancial concepts— but also from di¢ culties in understanding the terms of
…nancial contracts, in learning from …nancial history, and in predicting one’s own behavior
and the behavior of others. In other words, people are ignorant not just about accounting,
but also about psychology and advanced topics in economics including asset pricing, information economics, and general equilibrium theory. Understood this way, the prevalence of
…nancial ignorance should not be surprising. Consumer …nancial decisions are complex, and
in fact rules of thumb taken from elementary economics often give the wrong answer.
The last two parts of the lecture discuss alternative policy responses to these problems.
Educational e¤orts to improve …nancial literacy and situation-speci…c disclosures can both
improve the quality of consumer …nancial decisionmaking, but these alone are unlikely to be
su¢ cient because of the breadth and advanced nature of the knowledge needed to navigate
5

Because of this focus, I do not address the important question of whether households have “presentbiased” preferences (Laibson 1997) that lead them to save less than they would if they were able to commit
to a savings plan. James Poterba discusses the issue of savings adequacy in his Ely Lecture (2014).

4

modern …nancial systems. Hence there is growing interest in consumer …nancial regulation.
Section 4 builds on an informal discussion in Campbell et al. (2011) to present an extremely
simple welfare analysis of …nancial regulation in a stylized model with both rational and
behavioral consumers.
Section 5 considers several speci…c examples of market trends and policy interventions
in consumer …nance.

This section argues that the Pension Protection Act of 2006 has

meaningfully a¤ected the asset allocation of retirement savings, while the CARD Act of 2009
and regulations of the bank overdraft market and the payday lending market have altered
the cost structure of short-term unsecured credit. The section also considers a market that
seems not to be working well, despite its apparent promise: the market for reverse mortgages.
Section 6 concludes, and an online appendix provides supporting details.

2

Stylized Facts of Household Finance

Contemporary research on household …nance is global in its scope.

The comparison of

household …nancial behavior around the world reveals striking di¤erences across countries in
average household balance sheets, but also important similarities in the within-country e¤ects
of wealth and other household attributes on …nancial behavior.

This section summarizes

some key patterns and draws lessons for the …eld.
Table 1, a re…nement of a table in Badarinza, Campbell, and Ramadorai (2015), reports
participation rates in various types of assets and liabilities among households in eight leading
industrialized countries: the US, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain,
and the UK.6 Financial assets, non…nancial assets, and liabilities are listed in descending
6

The data sources are the US Survey of Consumer Finances (2010), the Canada Survey of Financial
Security (2012), the Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey for Eurozone countries (2008
for Spain, 2009 for the Netherlands, and 2010 for Germany, France, and Italy), and the UK Wealth and
Assets Survey (2012). Both the HFCS and the SCF use multiple imputation, but for simplicity we present
results for one set of implicates (results are insensitive to this choice). Survey weights are adjusted to
impose equal weighting across households. Further details are available in the online appendix. Christelis,
Georgarakos, and Haliassos (2013) conduct a detailed comparison of balance sheets across these countries

5

order of their participation rate among US households. The bottom of the table displays
estimates of the participation rates in all risky …nancial assets (de…ned to include both bonds
and equities), and in equities alone, combining both direct holdings and indirect holdings in
mutual funds and retirement accounts. These “look-through” participation rates measure
the fraction of households that are exposed to …nancial risk, regardless of the form in which
this exposure is taken.7
A number of facts jump out from this table.

Deposits and transactions accounts are

almost universally held, but there is a minority of “unbanked”households whose size varies
enormously across countries. This group is relatively large in the US. Retirement assets
are important in countries with predominantly de…ned-contribution retirement systems, the
Anglo-Saxon and northern European countries. There is a low participation rate in risky
assets outside retirement accounts.

Directly held bonds play a minor role in household

…nance with the striking exception of Italy. The look-through participation rates in risky
assets and in equities are highly variable across countries, being over twice as large in the
Anglo-Saxon countries as in Italy and Spain.
Turning to non-…nancial assets, the homeownership rate is highly variable across countries, particularly low in Germany and high in Spain. On the liability side of the balance
sheet, the incidence of mortgage debt is also highly variable across countries but does not line
up well with the homeownership rate because southern European housing is much less likely
to be mortgage-…nanced. Auto loans, student loans, and credit card debt are prevalent in
Anglo-Saxon countries but not elsewhere.
Table 2 reports the average shares of these same assets and liabilities in household balance
sheets. Shares are calculated at the household level (including zeros for nonparticipants),
and then averaged across households. This procedure weights households equally, whereas
summing assets and liabilities across households and then calculating shares gives wealthy
(with the exception of Canada) and several other European countries, for households over age 50.
7
This look-through calculation, and the analogous calculation in Table 2, require imputation of the asset
allocation in retirement accounts using country-speci…c averages. The online appendix reports details of
this procedure.

6

households greater weight and can produce quite di¤erent numbers.

The top part of the

table shows the composition of assets, while the lower part shows the composition of liabilities
for those households that report liabilities. The very bottom of the table shows the shares of
risky assets and equities in household …nancial assets, looking through retirement accounts
to the underlying investments.
The table shows that non-…nancial assets are more important than …nancial assets in
all countries, but particularly so in southern Europe where owner-occupied housing is of
overwhelming importance. Among …nancial assets, retirement assets have the highest share
in Anglo-Saxon countries while deposits are more important in European countries. Looking through retirement accounts to the underlying …nancial investments, the risky shares in
…nancial assets are much larger in Anglo-Saxon countries and to some degree in the Netherlands than elsewhere in Europe. Naturally if one calculated risky asset shares relative to
total gross assets, including both …nancial and non-…nancial assets, the southern European
shares would be even lower. On the liabilities side of the balance sheet, households are far
more indebted in the Anglo-Saxon countries and the Netherlands than in the other European
countries.

Putting these facts together, household exposures to …nancial risks are highly

variable across countries.
The balance sheet shares in Table 2 are importantly in‡uenced by the presence of nonparticipants, who have zero shares in certain asset classes. To emphasize this point, Figure 1
plots the average shares of risky assets— including both long-term bonds and equities— across
all households in each country (panel A) and across participants in risky asset markets, that
is, households with nonzero risky asset shares (panel B). The …gure also breaks risky asset
holdings into de…ned-contribution retirement holdings, mutual funds outside retirement accounts, and directly held risky assets. The risky shares in panel A are highly variable across
countries, ranging from over 50% in Canada to less than 20% in Spain. These di¤erences
are driven largely by cross-country di¤erences in de…ned-contribution retirement holdings.
Among participants, however, the di¤erences are much smaller, ranging only between 50%
and 70% as shown in panel B. Thus the main e¤ect of a de…ned-contribution retirement
7

Figure 1: International comparison of average risky asset (bond and equity) shares

8

system is to increase the participation rate in risky …nancial markets, not the allocation to
risky assets conditional upon participation.
The cross-country heterogeneity illustrated in Tables 1 and 2 and Figure 1 implies that
household …nancial systems are strongly in‡uenced by some combination of national …nancial
regulation and national culture in …nancial matters. While households in each country may
take their own system for granted, the world as a whole o¤ers many alternatives— even
within this small group of advanced industrial economies— and there is no strong tendency
for convergence to a single “ideal”system.8
Within countries, however, the heterogeneity across households displays some important
common features.

Most notably, there is a strong tendency for the participation rate in

risky asset markets to increase with wealth. This is illustrated in panel A of Figure 2, which
shows the average risky share by deciles of gross assets in each of the eight countries studied
here. An upward slope is visible in all countries, which is steepest in the countries with the
highest average risky share.

However, there is a much smaller wealth e¤ect on the risky

share conditional on participation (panel B). These estimates do not control for covariates
of wealth, notably age, but results are broadly robust when one introduces such controls.9
The tendency for richer people to take more …nancial risk may in part be explained
by preferences with declining relative risk aversion, as suggested by Carroll (2002), Calvet,
Campbell, and Sodini (2009), Wachter and Yogo (2010), and Calvet and Sodini (2014) among
others. However, such preferences do not explain why the main channel for the e¤ect is an
8

Richard Ely would probably not be surprised by this. He wrote of the tendency for regulatory structures
to become accepted and hence almost invisible: “We speak continually of the increase of freedom, and imagine
often that we have been moving in the direction of no-government. It is probable, however, that laws were
never more numerous nor more far-reaching in their consequences than today... They construct a framework
within which we willingly move.” (Introduction to Political Economy, 1894, pp. 72-73.)
9
Wachter and Yogo (2010) and Guiso and Sodini (2013) present similar analyses and show a greater
tendency for risktaking to increase with wealth among risky market participants. The results here di¤er for
several reasons. First, risky assets are de…ned to include both stocks and long-term bonds. Second, de…ned
contribution pension assets are included. Third, the cuto¤s for wealth deciles are based on the wealth
distribution for all households, not just participants. Finally, these results report average, not median, risky
shares within each wealth bin. This makes a di¤erence because the cross-sectional distribution of risky
shares is right-skewed among households with lower wealth.

9

Figure 2: Average risky asset (bond and equity) shares across deciles of gross assets

10

increase in the participation rate among richer people or why the participation rate remains
well below one even at the top of the wealth distribution.

Limited participation among

poorer people may be rationalized by …xed costs of participation in risky asset markets
(Gomes and Michaelides 2005), but this explanation is less plausible at higher levels of
wealth.

2.1

Investment Strategies and Wealth Inequality

The correlation between wealth and risktaking is relevant for contemporary concerns about
wealth inequality. While the traditional view is that dispersion in wealth at retirement is
driven mainly by savings decisions when young (Venti and Wise 2001), attention has shifted
more recently to the allocation of savings between riskless and risky assets, and the choice of
risky assets. We have already seen that richer people have higher average risky shares in their
portfolios. In addition, richer people may invest their risky assets more e¤ectively. Piketty
(2014, Chapter 12) argues that for both reasons richer people tend to earn higher average
returns on their portfolios, and that this is a powerful force increasing wealth inequality.10
A di¢ culty in evaluating this concern empirically is that portfolio returns are di¢ cult to
observe. Household survey data are generally inadequate for measuring returns, or even the
detailed composition of portfolios within the broad asset classes already discussed. Research
on this topic must therefore use the high-quality administrative data on all components of
wealth that is available in Scandinavian countries, or administrative data on particular types
of wealth such as direct stockholdings.
In this part of the lecture I draw on such data to evaluate the potential of investment
returns to contribute to wealth inequality.

I consider a set of households, indexed by

i, with heterogeneous investment strategies.

In the absence of income and consumption

10

He writes “It is perfectly possible that wealthier people obtain higher average returns than less wealthy
people.... It is easy to see that such a mechanism can automatically lead to a radical divergence in the distribution of capital”(p.430). Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell (2015) build a model in which wealth justi…es
the acquisition of …nancial knowledge, increasing investment returns and amplifying wealth inequality.

11

(and hence in the absence of saving), the evolution of household i’s wealth is given by
Wi;t+1 = Wit (1 + Ri;t+1 );where (1 + Ri;t+1 ) is the gross return on household i’s portfolio.
Taking logs,
wi;t+1 = wit + ri;t+1
= wit + Et ri;t+1 + rei;t+1 ;

(1)

where Et ri;t+1 is the rational (econometrician’s) expectation of the log portfolio return for
household i, and rei;t+1 = ri;t+1

Et ri;t+1 is the unexpected component of the log portfolio

return.

I use the notation Var and Cov to denote the cross-sectional variance and covariance
of observations at a point in time. It follows from equation (1) that we can decompose the
time-series average change in the cross-sectional variance of log wealth from one period to
the next— the average change in wealth inequality— into three terms:
E [Var wi;t+1

Var (wit )] = E [Var (Et ri;t+1 )] + E [Var (e
ri;t+1 )]
+2E [Cov (wit ; Et ri;t+1 )] :

(2)

All the returns that appear on the right hand side of equation (2) are log returns, not simple returns. Cross-sectional variation in expected log returns causes growing cross-sectional
dispersion in wealth, consistent with the well-known fact that in an economy without consumption, investors who maximize expected log returns (holding the so-called “growth optimal portfolio”) control an ever-increasing share of wealth.

This is important because

uncompensated risk has no e¤ect on expected simple returns but it lowers expected log
returns at the portfolio level.11

Hence, di¤erences in diversi…cation across investors can

increase wealth inequality through this channel.
11
When returns are conditionally lognormal, Et ri;t+1 = log(Et (1 + Ri;t+1 )) (1=2)Vart ri;t+1 : Hence, an
uncompensated increase in portfolio variance that leaves the average simple return unchanged lowers the
average log return.

12

The …rst term on the right hand side of (2) is the cross-sectional variance in expected log
returns, caused by di¤erences across households in their diversi…cation of uncompensated
risk, their willingness to take compensated risk, or their investment skill. The second term
is the cross-sectional variance in unexpected log returns, the result of either exposures to
idiosyncratic risks or cross-sectionally varying exposures to common shocks.

The third

term is the cross-sectional covariance between log wealth and expected log return, which
captures any tendency for wealthier households to earn higher expected log returns. This
is the covariance emphasized by Piketty (2014), although Piketty does not make the critical
distinction between average return and average log return.12
To implement this analysis empirically, I report results from two international datasets
where both portfolio returns and proxies for wealth can be measured accurately. The …rst
dataset, used in Campbell, Ramadorai, and Ranish (2015), contains a universe of directly
held equities from National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL), one of two main electronic securities depositories in India, over the period 2002–2012 at a monthly frequency.
All directly held, publicly traded Indian equities are included, and this captures the great
majority of risky …nancial assets for Indian investors, since directly held foreign stocks and
mutual funds both have a very low market share in India. Wealth is proxied here by the
size of the NSDL equity account.

In this dataset, average log returns increase strongly

with account size, from 75-90 basis points per month among the smallest accounts to almost
140 basis points per month in the top decile of accounts.

This pattern re‡ects generally

increasing diversi…cation among larger accounts, which increases average log returns while
leaving average simple returns almost ‡at across the account size distribution.13
12

In any one period, the evolution of wealth inequality is also in‡uenced by the cross-sectional covariance
between log wealth and unexpected log returns and the cross-sectional covariance between expected and
unexpected log returns. However, these covariances are driven by unexpected common shocks to assets
favored by wealthy people, or assets with high expected returns, and thus they average to zero over time. The
framework can be extended to include saving as an additional in‡uence on the change in wealth inequality:
this adds three new terms which re‡ect the cross-sectional variance of savings rates and the cross-sectional
covariances between wealth and saving, and between saving and expected investment returns. The online
appendix to the lecture presents a more detailed analysis.
13
There are minor exceptions at the two extremes of the wealth distribution. The very smallest accounts
are tiny and tend to hold micro-cap stocks that have delivered high average returns in this period. The
largest 0.1% of accounts are somewhat less diversi…ed than smaller accounts, possibly because they belong

13

The same data can be used to calculate the three terms on the right hand side of equation
(2).

The sum of the three terms is 0.015 per month, of which a negligible share (less

than 0.05%) comes from the cross-sectional variance of expected returns, 57% comes from
the cross-sectional variance of unexpected returns, and 43% comes from the cross-sectional
covariance between log wealth and expected log returns.

The average level of the cross-

sectional variance of log account size is 4.55, and the average monthly change in this crosssectional variance over the sample period is 0.021 per month, almost 40% larger than the
sum of the three terms on the right hand side of equation (2).

This implies that in‡ows

to Indian equity accounts, which are not modeled in (2), have increased inequality in equity
account size over this period. Nonetheless a substantial fraction of the overall increase in
inequality is accounted for by investment returns.
A second international dataset is used in a paper by Bach, Calvet, and Sodini (BCS
2015), who extend earlier work by Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007) to focus on the
investment performance of the wealthy. BCS use annual administrative data from Sweden
over the period 2000–2008.

Their data are extremely high quality and include all major

components of wealth with the exception of private businesses. They measure realized and
expected returns on stocks held at the beginning of each year, assuming that no rebalancing
occurs during the year, and imposing a simple factor model and the assumption that alphas
are zero on average in all wealth groups.
BCS report that the sum of the three terms in equation (2) is 0.062 per year, of which
2% comes from the cross-sectional variance of expected returns, 22% comes from the crosssectional variance of unexpected returns, and 76% comes from the cross-sectional covariance
between log wealth and expected log returns. In the Swedish data the average level of the
cross-sectional variance of log wealth is 2.85, and the average annual change in this crosssectional variance is 0.039, almost 60% smaller than the sum of the three terms on the right
hand side of equation (2). Thus in Sweden, unmodeled savings ‡ows have reduced inequality
in …nancial wealth over this period (possibly o¤set by increasing inequality in housing wealth
to corporate executives who are encouraged or required to hold their employer’s stock.

14

in a period of rising house prices).
Several important di¤erences between the Indian and Swedish data and …nancial systems
preclude a direct comparison of the results. Since the Swedish data include riskless asset
holdings, an important reason for the covariance between log wealth and expected log portfolio returns in Sweden is that, like wealthy people in other countries, wealthier Swedes have
higher participation rates and higher average risky asset shares.

The presence of riskless

assets also lowers the cross-sectional variance of unexpected returns relative to what would
be measured in portfolios consisting only of risky assets. These e¤ects are not operative in
the Indian data.

In addition, mutual funds are much more widely held in Sweden which

further lowers the cross-sectional variance of unexpected returns. Despite these issues, both
datasets imply that household investment strategies in risky asset markets have substantial
e¤ects on wealth inequality relative to directly measured increases in inequality. The crosssectional variance of expected returns has only a negligible impact, but there are important
contributions both from the random realizations of undiversi…ed risky returns, and from the
tendency for wealthy people to earn higher average log returns through greater compensated
risktaking and more e¤ective diversi…cation.
Evidence that average log returns vary cross-sectionally is not in itself evidence that
households are choosing sub-optimal investment strategies. Maximizing average log return
is the investment objective only for an investor with log utility: a more risk-averse investor
may rationally choose a safer portfolio with a lower average return, while a more risktolerant investor may rationally choose a riskier portfolio with a higher simple average return
and a lower average log return.14

However, it cannot be rational to take uncompensated

idiosyncratic risk, and such uncompensated risk contributes signi…cantly to the patterns
discussed in this section.

I now turn to a broader discussion of the evidence that some

households make poor …nancial decisions.
14

Samuelson (1979), frustrated with the di¢ culty of convincing investors and academics of this, wrote an
article that concludes: “No need to say more. I have made my point. And, but for the last, have done so
in words of but one syllable.” The article is a tour de force but is almost incomprehensible because of the
di¢ culty of expressing oneself clearly with such a limited vocabulary. The article also contains a few errors
(two-syllable words).

15

3

What Goes Wrong in Household Finance?

3.1

Mistakes

Household …nance researchers have documented numerous cases where households make decisions that are hard to rationalize using any model of optimal choice. The most extreme
cases, although not necessarily the most important ones, have unambiguous optimal decisions that are insensitive to households’circumstances and preferences. When households
fail to make such decisions, their choices are hard to defend.15

Leading examples in the

literature include the failure to contribute to 401(k) plans with employer matches and immediate penalty-free withdrawals for older employees (Choi et al. 2011), and the failure to
locate taxable assets in non-taxable retirement savings accounts (Barber and Odean 2003,
Bergstresser and Poterba 2004).16
A related example that is more important for many households, but that is more sensitive
to household circumstances, is the failure to re…nance a …xed-rate mortgage when it is
advantageous to do so. Mortgages are much larger than other …nancial liabilities for middleclass households, and the savings from re…nancing can be substantial.

Campbell (2006)

observes that many US households fail to re…nance even at interest savings that are far
above both the thresholds calculated by academics (Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson 2013)
and the rules of thumb commonly used by …nancial advisers.

In the US, some of this

behavior could be explained by unmeasured constraints, but Andersen et al. (2015) show
that the same is true in Denmark, where re…nancing is always possible even for households
with negative home equity or a poor credit score. Similarly, Johnson et al. (2015) and Keys,
Pope, and Pope (2016) document household failures to respond to prequali…ed re…nancing
o¤ers.
15

One might draw an analogy with tax evasion charges for mob bosses. These are not the most serious
crimes, but they are the easiest to prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
16
Another candidate for this list is the simultaneous holding of both low-interest checking account balances
and high-interest credit card debt (Gross and Souleles 2002). However this can potentially be rationalized
if households have expenses that can be paid only in cash (Telyukova 2013).

16

The existence of such unambiguous mistakes raises the question whether other …nancial
decisions are genuinely the result of rational choice or are also distorted by optimization
failures. For example, the failure to participate in the stock market could be justi…ed by
large participation costs and high risk aversion, but in many cases is likely to be a mistake.
The tendency for apparently suboptimal behaviors to be stronger among households with less
income, wealth, and education is circumstantial evidence that supports this interpretation
(Campbell 2006, Guiso and Sodini 2013).

3.2

Five types of …nancial ignorance

Households that make …nancial mistakes are almost by de…nition …nancially ignorant. But
we need greater precision.

What exactly is it that consumers fail to understand, and

what features of …nancial problems make them hard for consumers to solve correctly? In
the remainder of this section I distinguish …ve aspects of …nancial ignorance: ignorance of
…nancial concepts, contract terms, …nancial history, one’s own behavior, and the strategic
behavior of others in market equilibrium. I discuss each of these in turn.

Ignorance of …nancial concepts

Many households lack understanding of even the most basic concepts needed to solve
a …nancial choice problem.

This has come to be called “…nancial illiteracy”.

Hastings,

Madrian, and Skimmyhorn (2013) and Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) are two comprehensive
recent surveys of the large literature on this subject.
During the past decade, a standard set of questions has been widely used to measure
households’conceptual understanding of …nance. Lusardi and Mitchell (2008) formulated
three questions, now known as the “Big Three”: one that asks about how interest payments
accumulate over time, one on the o¤setting e¤ects of in‡ation and nominal interest rates on
real purchasing power, and one on the relative risks of single-stock and mutual-fund investing.
17

The 2009 National Financial Capability Study (NFCS) added two other questions to create
the “Big Five”: one on the comparison of 15-year and 30-year mortgages and one on the
relation between interest rates and bond prices.
Figure 3 summarizes answers to the Big Five questions given in the 2012 update of the
NFCS. The total height of each bar shows the fraction of respondents, broken out by age
and gender (blue for men and red for women), who are …nancially illiterate as proxied by
giving two or fewer correct answers to the …ve questions.17 Financial illiteracy in this sense
is extremely common, a¤ecting an average of 28% of men and 44% of women across these
age groups. It is extremely high among young people: 57% of men and 68% of women aged
18-24 are …nancially illiterate. This is concerning because many young people do need to
make important …nancial decisions, most obviously with regard to the …nancing of higher
education through student loans. Financial illiteracy diminishes with age during working
life, bottoming out at 14% for men and 27% for women aged 65-69, but rises again in old age.
This is broadly consistent with a U-shaped life-cycle pattern in various …nancial mistakes
documented by Agarwal et al. (2009), although the bottom of the U is often reached 10-15
years earlier in their study.

Agarwal et al. attribute the U shape to o¤setting e¤ects of

accumulating experience and declining cognitive capability with age.
These results are particularly troubling because the Big Five questions are quite easy
relative to the level of understanding that is required to make good …nancial decisions in
practice.

The …rst question in particular sets an extremely low bar.18

It is not about

compounding of interest, but about the fact that interest rates are stated on an annual basis
so that interest is received …ve times over …ve years. A person could answer this question
correctly without any understanding of compounding.

Stango and Zinman (2009) report

evidence that consumers fail to understand compounding and seem to think about interest
rates as if they were simple rates, charged or paid on a constant base, rather than compound
17

This is an extremely low score since the expected number of correct answers is 2.17 if a respondent
guesses randomly without answering “Don’t Know” or refusing to answer any questions.
18
This question reads: Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2 percent per
year. After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow:
[more than $102; exactly $102; less than $102; do not know; refuse to answer.]

18

Figure 3: Financial illiteracy by age and gender, from the 2012 NFCS
rates, charged or paid on a base that changes over time. This “exponential growth bias”
leads consumers to underestimate the future value of an amount saved, given an interest rate
and time horizon, and to underestimate the interest rate implied by a given stream of level
payments, maturity, and principal amount of a loan. Exponential growth bias makes it hard
for consumers to compare up-front costs with interest costs, as in the case of a mortgage
whose interest rate can be reduced via the payment of initial points.
Survey respondents have unusual di¢ culty answering the question on risk.19 While the
proportion of incorrect answers is no higher than for some other questions, the proportion of
correct answers is lower and a large fraction of respondents say they don’t know the answer.
This matters because an understanding of diversi…cation and the tradeo¤ between risk and
return is necessary to make an informed decision about asset allocation in retirement saving,
and essential for e¤ective investing in risky asset markets as discussed in the previous section
of this lecture.
19

This question reads: Do you think that the following statement is true or false? “Buying a single company
stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.”[true; false; do not know; refuse to answer.]

19

The Big Five questions on mortgages and bond prices are also elementary compared to the
advanced conceptual knowledge that is required to select and manage a mortgage. Campbell
and Cocco (2003) discuss the subtle risk considerations that are involved in choosing a …xedrate versus an adjustable-rate mortgage.

Once a household has a …xed-rate mortgage,

the optimal re…nancing strategy is the solution to a di¢ cult real options problem whose
parameters include the …xed costs of re…nancing, the expected remaining life of the mortgage
(which depends on a household’s moving probability), the tax treatment of mortgage interest,
and the volatility of interest rates. Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (2013) have only recently
published a closed-form solution for this problem. Rules of thumb used by …nancial planners
and popularized in …nancial advice handbooks provide only rough approximations to the
optimal solution. The decision to default on an underwater mortgage is equally challenging
(Campbell and Cocco 2015).
Despite these limitations of the Big Five …nancial literacy questions, they remain popular
because they are brief and straightforward— and hence easy to insert into general surveys–
and because responses can be compared with many other surveys that have been conducted
around the world.20 Higher scores on these questions, and particularly the question about
risk, correlate with positive answers to questions about saving and retirement planning
(Lusardi and Mitchell 2011, 2014).

While this does not establish causality, it is plausi-

ble that a poor understanding of investment alternatives makes it harder to formulate a
…nancial plan.
Low …nancial literacy scores are associated with low income, wealth, and education, implying that …nancial illiteracy— like suboptimal investment behavior— is a particular problem
among people with low socioeconomic status. While it may be optimal for poorer people
to invest less in …nancial literacy, as pointed out by Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell (2015),
this raises concerns that a complex …nancial system particularly disadvantages poorer people
and contributes to wealth inequality.
20

Some attempts are being made to assess conceptual …nancial knowledge more thoroughly, for example in
van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011) and in the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment
(PISA) which works with high-school students (OECD 2014).

20

Ignorance of contract terms

The di¢ culties people have with household …nance are not just the result of innumeracy.
There is also evidence that people don’t understand the terms of …nancial contracts, as
would be the case if they fail to read the “small print”.

For example, Bucks and Pence

(2008) show that collectively, mortgage borrowers with adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs)
underestimate the extent to which their mortgage rate can change. Lee and Hogarth (1999)
report evidence that mortgage borrowers fail to understand the fees that create a wedge
between the contract interest rate on a mortgage and the annual percentage rate (APR).
Stango and Zinman (2014) show that consumers are often unaware of the circumstances
that trigger bank overdraft fees. Similar concerns with regard to credit card fees were an
important motivation for the CARD Act of 2009.
Some consumers appear to be unaware of the options that are built into certain …nancial
products.

The re…nancing option in a …xed-rate mortgage is a particularly important

example, as discussed above.

In an extreme case, even letters reminding borrowers of a

pre-approved re…nancing opportunity do not trigger action, possibly because borrowers are
suspicious that the o¤er is “too good to be true” (Johnson, Meier, and Toubia 2015, Keys,
Pope, and Pope 2016).
When households fail to understand all the costs of a …nancial product, …rms have an
incentive to lower salient “front-end”costs and increase obscure “back-end”costs. Thus the
complexity of …nancial products may be intentional as suggested by DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004), Célérier and Vallée (2015), and Grubb (2015) among others. If sophisticated
consumers can avoid back-end costs by altering their behavior (as in the case of credit card
or overdraft fees), competition may result in lower prices to sophisticated consumers who
thus receive a cross-subsidy from unsophisticated consumers (Gabaix and Laibson 2006). I
discuss this issue further in section 4.

21

Ignorance of …nancial history

In order to make savings and asset allocation decisions, people need to form views about
the likely returns on alternative investment strategies. It is rational to do this using all the
historical data that are available. However, it appears that in many cases, people rely on
their own much more limited and speci…c experiences to form their beliefs.
One type of evidence shows that people react to experiences shared within their cohort,
for example of stock returns and in‡ation (Malmendier and Nagel 2011, 2015).21 Another
type of evidence looks at idiosyncratic experiences that vary cross-sectionally within a cohort. For example, Choi et al. (2009) show that households save more in response to high
idiosyncratic returns in their 401(k) accounts, consistent with the idea that they extrapolate
these returns into the future. Campbell, Ramadorai, and Ranish (2015) and Huang (2015)
show that households increase their investment activity and portfolio tilts to equity styles
and industries, respectively, in which they have experienced high returns on the particular
stocks they picked within those styles and industries.
In principle it is possible that responses to idiosyncratic investment experiences could
result from investors learning about their skill, either at 401(k) investing in general, or at
stock-picking within speci…c styles and industries. However several recent papers have documented responses that cannot plausibly be attributed to learning about skill.

Knüpfer,

Rantapuska, and Sarvimäki (2014) show that heterogeneous labor market experiences during the Finnish Great Depression of the early 1990s have long-lasting impacts on Finnish
households’willingness to take …nancial risk, and Anagol, Balasubramaniam, and Ramadorai (2015) document that the random allocation of IPO shares to Indian households a¤ects
their subsequent equity investment behavior.
A related phenomenon is the tendency of individual investors to overweight familiar
21

A related strand of the behavioral …nance literature, for example Barberis et al. (2015), argues that
investors tend to extrapolate aggregate returns that have been realized over the recent past. Here too the
problem is that recent data are overweighted relative to longer-term …nancial history.

22

assets, in e¤ect treating them as safer than unfamiliar ones.22

This tendency generates

“home bias”or overweighting of domestic stocks relative to international ones (Lewis 1999,
Bekaert et al. 2015), overweighting of local and culturally familiar stocks (Grinblatt and
Keloharju 2001, Huberman 2001), overweighting of stocks in an investor’s own industry
(Massa and Simonov 2006), and even the extreme case of overweighting the stock of the
investor’s employer (Benartzi 2001). Some papers have attempted to justify such bias as
the result of informational advantage (Massa and Simonov 2006, Van Nieuwerburgh and
Veldkamp 2009), but evidence on the performance of overweighted familiar stocks is mixed
(Benartzi 2001, Døskeland and Hvide 2011), while there is some evidence that home bias
diminishes with education and …nancial literacy (Bekaert et al. 2015).

Ignorance of self

An important question is whether people understand their own di¢ culties with …nancial
problem-solving.

The same surveys that administer …nancial literacy questions often ask

respondents to assess their own …nancial knowledge. Figure 3 breaks the …nancially illiterate
population into two groups: those who express high con…dence in their …nancial knowledge
(giving themselves at least 5 out of 7 possible points), and those who do not.

The dark

shaded portion of each bar represents self-con…dent …nancial illiteracy. Remarkably, this is
more common than …nancial illiteracy with moderate or low con…dence, in all age groups and
both genders. The self-con…dent share of …nancially illiterate individuals is higher among
men, and it increases with age. More generally, seniors retain their average con…dence even
while their average …nancial literacy scores decline with age.
At the individual level, one can detect a positive correlation between …nancial literacy
and self-con…dence, but the relationship is quite weak. Regressions of the con…dence score
on dummies for correct answers to each of the Big Five questions in the 2012 NFCS deliver
statistically signi…cant and positive coe¢ cients, but the R2 of the relationship is below 6%
22

Bhamra and Uppal (2014) present a formal model of this behavior and show that it can have sizeable
negative e¤ects on household welfare.

23

both in the population as a whole, and among those under 65 and over 65 years old. While
measurement error can certainly reduce the measured correlation between …nancial literacy
and con…dence, it does appear that people are heterogeneous in both dimensions.
These …ndings imply that there are two groups of people we should be concerned about.
Financially illiterate people with low self-con…dence are likely to have a strong demand for
assistance with …nancial problems, and to be relatively responsive to defaults and other
nudges.

Overcon…dent …nancial illiterates with high self-con…dence may make di¤erent

types of mistakes, such as underdiversifying or trading excessively, and these mistakes may
be harder to correct.
A related issue is that many …nancial problems require people to predict their own future
behavior. In some cases, this may be relatively straightforward, as when families estimate
the length of time they will occupy a home while choosing a mortgage. In other cases, it
may be challenging, as with …nancial instruments that require attention to manage correctly.
Some people may fail to predict their own inattention to future bank account balances (in
the case of overdraft fees) or interest rates (in the case of mortgage re…nancing).

Grubb

(2015) surveys a growing literature on this type of overcon…dence.23

Ignorance of incentives, strategy, and equilibrium

A …nal aspect of …nancial ignorance is “naïveté”, a failure to understand the incentives
faced by other parties and the e¤ects these incentives have on their strategic behavior and on
market equilibrium. There is direct evidence that this is a common phenomenon. A report
to the European Commission by Chater, Huck, and Inderst (2010, Table 4.50), for example,
surveys European purchasers of retail …nancial products and …nds that over 40% of them
are unaware of any payments made to …nancial product providers, salespeople, brokers, or
…nancial advisers.
23

An important theme of this literature, outside the scope of this lecture, is that consumers overestimate
the self-control they will have over their own future consumption spending (Heidhues and Köszegi 2010).

24

The behavior of …nancial market participants also provides strong if circumstantial evidence that households are naïve about incentive e¤ects.

Malmendier and Shantikumar

(2007), for example, study the stock recommendations of sell-side security analysts, which
are well known to be biased upwards, and show that small equity traders respond as if they
take the recommendations literally while large traders appear to adjust for the bias. Audit
studies of US …nancial advisers (Mullainathan, Noeth, and Schoar 2012) and Indian life insurance agents (Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar 2012) …nd that these advisers tend to recommend
products that improve their own compensation over the most suitable and a¤ordable products for clients.

Such behavior has greater potential to increase advisers’ income if their

clients are unaware of it.
A series of papers studying mutual fund performance has shown that actively managed
funds sold through brokers, particularly domestic equity funds, tend to underperform both
directly sold mutual funds and broker-sold index funds (Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano
2009, Del Guercio and Reuter 2014, Reuter 2015).

This is true even before broker sales

fees, and all the more so after fees. Yet index funds have a market share below 3% among
broker-sold funds, and mutual funds’ payments to brokers predict their in‡ows positively
and their performance negatively (Christo¤erson, Evans, and Musto 2013).
Finally, the degree of price dispersion in …nancial products such as index mutual funds
(Hortacsu and Syverson 2004), mortgages (Woodward and Hall 2012), and credit cards
(Stango and Zinman 2015) implies a very high return to time spent shopping and negotiating
in retail …nancial markets. Yet it appears that many households do minimal shopping (e.g.
Chater, Huck, and Inderst 2010 Table 4.65), a fact which helps to explain the survival of
high-cost providers.
A closely related type of …nancial ignorance is the failure to understand how other market
participants respond to relevant information that they possess.

The theory of rational

expectations equilibrium assumes that people correctly infer the information of others from
market prices, but such inference is extremely challenging. Behavioral …nance models from

25

Miller (1977) to Eyster, Rabin, and Vayanos (2015) and Glaeser and Nathanson (2015)
show that market price formation can be radically di¤erent when this inference is absent or
imperfect. Even when prices are una¤ected (perhaps because there are sophisticated, well
capitalized arbitrageurs in the market), naïve investors will su¤er poor performance if they
are unable to learn rationally from market prices.

3.3

Easy …xes? Financial education and disclosures

A natural response to …nancial ignorance is to try to cure it through …nancial education or
disclosures. These are variants of the same strategy, empowering individuals to understand
…nancial problems better and thereby to make better decisions.

The di¤erence is that

…nancial education is more general, particularly when o¤ered early in life, while disclosures
are speci…c to particular …nancial problems.
The e¤ectiveness of …nancial education can only be measured if one can …nd a source of
exogenous variation in educational exposure. Bernheim, Garrett, and Maki (2001) pioneered
the use of state-level variation in high school …nancial curriculum mandates, and reported
some evidence in survey data that …nancial education increases asset accumulation. More
recent work using larger administrative datasets obtains mixed results (Brown et al. 2014,
Cole, Paulson, and Shastry 2014).

Skimmyhorn (2015) studies a short personal …nance

course o¤ered by the US Army to new enlistees and documents some positive results for
debt management. Hastings, Madrian, and Skimmyhorn (2013) and Lusardi and Mitchell
(2014) survey this literature in greater detail, while Willis (2008) o¤ers a critical perspective.
The provision of unbiased …nancial advice can be understood as a more speci…c and
outcomes-oriented version of …nancial education. In order to be e¤ective, …nancial advice
must be of high quality and households must be willing to follow it. Foerster et al. (2015)
and Bhattacharya et al. (2012) study …nancial advice in Canada and Germany, respectively,
and report discouraging results.

Canadian …nancial advisors o¤er one-size-…ts-all advice

at relatively high cost, while customers of a German brokerage are largely unresponsive to
26

high-quality advice o¤ered in a …eld experiment.24
Putting these results together, while economics educators …nd it natural to call for increased …nancial education, the evidence for its e¤ectiveness is quite limited.

And one

must also keep in mind that …nancial education is costly because it competes with other
educational priorities in high school, and with productive hours in the workplace. In my
view …nancial education provides a means to improve consumer …nancial decisionmaking but
cannot be the whole solution to the problem of …nancial ignorance.
Disclosures are a popular alternative because they target speci…c decisions that people
…nd hard to make. Disclosure requirements are familiar from other contexts, such as food
labeling, and have modest costs compared to other types of …nancial regulation. There is
evidence that disclosures can alter consumer …nancial behavior, particularly when they are
designed with some psychological sophistication. Bertrand and Morse (2011), for example,
show that disclosures highlighting the dollar cost of repeated payday borrowing reduce the
number and size of payday loans subsequently taken out.
Disclosures however have several limitations. First and most obviously, disclosures cannot work if consumers are too …nancially ignorant to understand them. Second, it is sometimes possible for …nancial service providers to neutralize the e¤ects of disclosures by highlighting other information that distracts consumers. Ru and Schoar (2015) highlight this
problem in the context of credit card marketing.25

Third, if disclosure requirements are

not very carefully designed, they can be circumvented by o¤ering alternative products or
24

The reluctance of households to follow advice may limit the quality of the advice they receive. The
audit studies of Mullainathan, Noeth, and Schoar (2012) and Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar (2012) …nd
that advisers rarely argue against the expressed beliefs of prospective clients, regardless of the merits
of these beliefs. This is consistent with the view that advisers fear losing business if they contradict
clients. Public provision of unbiased advice, as o¤ered by the UK government’s Money Advice Service
(https://www.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/en) is one possible response to this problem. However it is hard
to customize such advice to households’ speci…c circumstances. Inderst and Ottaviani (2012) survey the
literature on …nancial advice, emphasizing the e¤ects of consumer naïveté on market equilibrium.
25
Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2015) point out that misleading marketing can sometimes take the
form of reminding consumers of unlikely but salient events, such as breakage of a new television set that
induces purchase of overpriced insurance. In this case a disclosure policy would have the di¢ cult task of
focusing consumers on information about breakage rates and actuarial costs.

27

by increasing alternative costs that are not covered by the requirements. Anagol and Kim
(2012) and Duarte and Hastings (2012) present examples of such cost-shifting in the Indian
and Mexican asset management industries.
Given these limitations of …nancial education and disclosures, it is natural to consider
more stringent interventions in consumer …nancial markets that alter consumer behavior
more directly.

The theoretical analysis of such interventions is the subject of the next

section.

4

The Behavioral Welfare Economics of Consumer
Financial Regulation

4.1

A simple model of costly regulation

Behavioral welfare economics analyzes the welfare implications of intervention in markets
where some consumers are making mistakes and failing to maximize their true utility. The
social planner is assumed to know agents’true utility and to be at least partly paternalistic,
that is, the planner places some weight on agents’ true utility as opposed to their selfperceived utility.26 In this situation the planner may be able to increase social welfare by
intervening to discourage mistaken choices.
Thaler and Sunstein (2008) use the word “nudge”to describe an intervention that a¤ects
the decisions of behavioral consumers while imposing negligible costs on rational consumers.
The canonical example is a default contribution rate or asset allocation in a retirement
savings plan, which is accepted by many participants even though any participant can opt
out by making an alternative choice. Nudges are appealing because of their minimal impact
26

The assumption that true utility is known is not innocuous (Goldin 2015). It is particularly problematic
in cases where agents maximize expected utility of random outcomes and disagree about state probabilities.
Brunnermeier, Simsek, and Xiong (2015) propose a welfare criterion that can be used in this case.

28

on rational consumers, but they have limitations. Overcon…dent behavioral agents may opt
out at high rates, particularly when o¤ered defaults that are far from their unconstrained
choices— that is, particularly in cases where they are making large mistakes. It can be hard
to design defaults that are su¢ ciently customized to accommodate heterogeneity in optimal
choices, and that adapt to changing household circumstances over time. Financial service
providers have incentives to circumvent defaults, just as they do disclosures, by making it
easy or tempting to opt out.
If nudges are unavailable or inadequate, consumer …nancial regulation must confront
the tradeo¤ between the bene…ts of intervention to behavioral agents, and the costs to
rational agents.

In this section I present a model to illustrate this tradeo¤.

The model

is extremely simple and neglects any interactions between behavioral reasons for consumer
…nancial regulation and more traditional market failures (Haltiwanger and Waldman 1989,
Campbell et al. 2011, Jackson and Rothstein 2015).27 The model also ignores the concern,
important in practice, that …nancial product providers can circumvent regulation or in‡uence
it through political pressure. Much more general treatments of behavioral welfare economics,
extending the canonical public …nance literature, can be found in O’Donoghue and Rabin
(2006), Mullainathan, Schwarzstein, and Congdon (2012), and Farhi and Gabaix (2015).
Two …nancial products are available to consumers, A and B.

Product A, the “plain-

vanilla”product, delivers utility normalized to zero for all consumers: UA = 0. Product B,
the “problematic”product, is correctly preferred by some consumers but mistakenly chosen
by others. As motivating examples, product A could be a bank account without overdraft
protection while product B could be the same account with overdraft protection; or product
A could be informal lending within the family while product B could be a payday loan.
A continuum of agents, with mass normalized to one, believe that they receive non27

Examples of traditional market failures that may be worsened by behavioral biases are market power in
search models, which may be increased by households’reluctance to search, and negative externalities such
as the negative e¤ects of debt collection on people who do not owe money (a major source of complaints
to the CFPB). It is also possible to write down models in which behavioral biases ameliorate traditional
market failures and, in the extreme, even increase social welfare.

29

negative utility UB = u from product B.28 u varies across agents with probability density
function f (u), CDF F (u), and upper bound h, but each agent knows her own value of u.
At each level of u, a fraction b of the agents are behavioral agents who receive lower utility
from the product, UB = u

1. In other words these agents overstate the utility they receive

from product B by a …xed amount normalized to unity. The overstatement might be due
to a mistake in assessing the suitability of the product ex ante, or a mistake in managing
it ex post. The remaining fraction (1

b) of the agents are rational and receive utility u

as they expect. Behavioral and rational agents are identical in all other respects, and this
rules out the possibility of nudging behavioral agents without impacting rational agents, or
of imposing “quali…ed investor”rules to exclude only behavioral agents from the product-B
market.
For a simple parametric example, assume a uniform distribution for u between 0 (the
lower bound consistent with choosing product B) and h (the upper bound). The parameter
h captures the heterogeneity of agents, both within the B-choosing group and between
the average of that group and the unmodeled A-choosing group. With this speci…cation,
f (u) = 1=h and F (u) = u=h. This example is illustrated in Figure 4. Self-perceived utility
on the horizontal axis runs from zero to h for all agents.
for rational agents, and from

1 to h

groups, true social utility runs from

True utility runs from 0 to h

1 for behavioral agents. Averaging across the two
b to h

b. Figure 4 shows a case where h < 1 (which

implies that all behavioral agents would be better o¤ switching to product A), and b < h.
However the parametric model also allows h

4.2

1 and b

h.

Intervention against a product

The …rst type of policy I consider is an intervention in the product market to discourage
the purchase of product B. I allow a consumer …nancial regulator to impose a charge c on
option B. The charge is salient (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009) so that all agents correctly
28

There can also be agents who prefer product A in the absence of regulation, but these agents are
una¤ected by regulation and can be dropped from further consideration.

30

True
utility

h

Rational
agents

h-b

0
Population
average

b

Self-perceived utility

h

h-1
-b

Behavioral
agents

-1

Figure 4: True and self-perceived utility of rational and behavioral agents
perceive its impact on the cost of the product. This induces a fraction F (c) of the agents
(all those with u

c) to switch to product A. Initially, I will assume that the regulatory

charge is rebated to the agents in lump sum, so there is no deadweight cost of the regulation.
Initially, I assume that the regulator is fully paternalistic, using the agents’true utility
(not their self-perceived utility) to evaluate social welfare. Then, the social welfare function
is
W (c) =

Z

h

[u

(3)

b] f (u)du:

c

In the simple parametric example with a uniform distribution for u within the range 0
to h, we have F (c) = c=h, and a regulatory charge equal to h is su¢ cient to close down the
whole market for product B. The social welfare function in this example can be written for
c

h as
W (c) = 1

c
h

h+c
2
31

b :

(4)

The derivative of social welfare with respect to the regulatory charge is
dW
b c
=
;
dc
h

(5)

which is positive at c = 0 for the usual reason that rational agents a¤ected by the regulation
are indi¤erent at the initial optimum, while behavioral agents gain (O’Donoghue and Rabin
2006, Dávila 2015).

The second derivative is

1=h, so the second-order condition holds.

The negative second derivative results from the fact that as c increases, the rational agents
who respond at the margin are increasingly disadvantaged by the switch from product B to
product A, while the gain to the marginal behavioral agents is declining. Even though each
behavioral agent overstates the utility of product B by the same amount, the self-perceived
utility of product B relative to product A is greater, and the true disutility is smaller, for
those behavioral agents who respond at the margin to higher levels of c.
The optimum policy sets dW=dc = 0 provided that c

h, which implies that the optimum

c is
c =b
for b

(6)

h. Such a charge induces a fraction b=h of the initially B-choosing agents to switch

to product A. If b > h, then any charge above h is su¢ cient to close down the market for
product B and achieve the social optimum.
These results illustrate a point emphasized by Campbell et al. (2011), that product-level
…nancial regulation should be stronger when there are more behavioral agents in the market
and when the value of a product to rational agents is smaller relative to the mistakes made
by behavioral agents.29 As h becomes small, product B o¤ers little even to rational agents,
and the prevention of mistakes dominates all other considerations. This is the premise of
Senator Elizabeth Warren’s famous analogy between mortgages and toasters: consumers all
29

Recall that the size of the mistake made by behavioral consumers has been normalized to unity. If one
were instead working in dollar terms, with a mistake that costs behavioral agents M , then the maximum
dollar bene…t of the product to rational agents would be H = hM , and the optimal regulatory charge in
dollars would be C = bM , equal to the average dollar mistake made by agents using the product.

32

require the same features in toasters, and we take it for granted that toaster design is strictly
regulated for safety.30 With a large h, however, there is a meaningful tradeo¤ between the
protection of consumers who mistakenly choose product B and the bene…ts that rational
consumers obtain from the product.
The above analysis can be adapted to allow the regulator to place some weight on agents’
self-perceived utility. This might re‡ect uncertainty about the true utility function, or antipaternalistic political pressure on the regulator.31
positive weight

Suppose that the regulator places a

< 1 on the agents’ true utility, and weight 1

on the agents’ self-

perceived utility, that is, the regulator is only paternalistic to the degree

.

De…ne a

parameter b = b. Then the previous expressions for the social welfare function and the
optimal policy hold after substituting b for b. As the regulator becomes less paternalistic,
and b decline, and it is as if there are more rational agents and fewer behavioral agents.
Distributional considerations push in the opposite direction. If behavioral agents have
lower wealth and income, the social planner may place greater weight on gains to them than
on losses to rational agents. Within the simple linear modeling framework used here, this is
equivalent to the social planner setting b > b, acting as if there are more behavioral agents
and fewer rational agents.

What if the regulatory charge cannot be fully rebated?

In many consumer regulatory applications, it is not realistic to assume that interventions
take the form of taxes delivering revenue that can be rebated to consumers. Instead, the
deadweight burden of …nancial regulation is often emphasized by its opponents. Suppose
that a fraction

of the regulatory charge c cannot be rebated but instead is a deadweight

30

Warren (2007) argues that similar strict regulation is appropriate in the mortgage market. “It is
impossible to buy a toaster that has a one-in-…ve chance of bursting into ‡ames and burning down your
house. But it is possible to re…nance an existing home with a mortgage that has the same one-in-…ve chance
of putting the family out on the street— and the mortgage won’t even carry a disclosure of that fact to the
homeowner.”
31
An example of such pressure is a 2015 television commercial attacking the CFPB: “CFPB Denied”,
viewable online at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wF7HFQSpDQE.

33

cost. Then
W (c) =

Z

h

[u

b

(7)

c] f (u)du:

c

In the parametric example,
c
h

W (c) = 1

h+c
2

b

(8)

c ;

and
dW
=
dc

1
h

[b

h

(1

(9)

2 )c] :

For the problem to be well behaved, we need a small

such that

< 1=2 and

< b=h.

If these conditions are met, the optimal policy is
c =
provided that c < h. If c

b
1

h
2

(10)

;

h, any charge above h is su¢ cient to close down the market

for product B and achieve the social optimum.
It is easy to see from equation (10) that the scale of the optimal intervention is increasing
in the fraction of behavioral agents b, and decreasing in h whenever the deadweight cost of
intervention is positive. However the optimal intervention in the presence of a deadweight
cost need not be smaller than the optimal intervention in the previous case without a deadweight cost. For example, if b = h=2 then c = h=2 regardless of the value of . And in
general the derivative dc =d has the same sign as (c

h=2). The reason is that increasing

the regulatory charge c shrinks the number of people who pay the charge, and beyond a
certain point further increases in c reduce the total deadweight loss. Given the parametric
assumptions we have made the greatest deadweight loss is at c = h=2, corresponding to an
intervention that cuts the size of the product-B market in half. To the right of this point,
the optimal response to an increase in the deadweight cost of intervention is to increase the
scale of the intervention to reduce the number of people paying the charge. Of course, the
social gain from any given intervention does decline in .
34

If

is large enough, then the problem ceases to be convex. For example, if
dW
=
dc

b

h
h

= 1 then
(11)

+ c:

In this case, when b < h we have dW=dc < 0 at the point c = 0 ; and the second derivative
is always positive.
that W (0) = h=2

The optimal policy is to set c = 0 or c = h.

Equation (8) implies

b, while W (h) = 0. Thus, the optimal policy is c = h if b

h=2, and

c = 0 otherwise. In this case the regulator will shut down the market altogether if in the
costless case it would reduce market size by more than half, and will avoid any intervention
otherwise.

4.3

Intervention against mistakes

The interventions considered so far are crude in the sense that they penalize a product that
is sometimes used mistakenly, by imposing a regulatory charge, but do not speci…cally target
the mistakes made by behavioral agents. I now consider interventions that do target such
mistakes.
Suppose that product B is not inherently inappropriate for behavioral agents, but requires
some sophistication to use properly. The consumer …nancial regulator can make the product
easier to manage, thereby reducing the scale of behavioral mistakes, but the cost of such a
requirement is borne by all users of the product.

In this case the size of the behavioral

mistake may be written g(c), where g(0) = 1, and g(c)
welfare becomes
W (c) =

Z

0 and g 0 (c)

0 for all c. Social

h

[u

bg(c)

c] f (u)du;

(12)

c

where as before

is the deadweight cost of the intervention. It is natural to assume that

= 1 in this case, since real resources are being used to improve the ease of use of product
B.

35

For a simple parametric example, consider the previous case of a uniform distribution for
u and assume g(c) = 1

c for c

1= . Then the social welfare function is

W (c) = 1
where

=

c
h

h+c
2

b

c ;

b . This has the same form as equation (9), but with a parameter

Previous results therefore apply substituting

(13)
< .

for .

An important di¤erence from the previous analysis is that now it is possible for

to be

negative. If this is the case, then consumer heterogeneity (which also measures the average
bene…t of product B to rational agents) increases the scale of the optimal intervention c ,
that is dc =dh > 0.

The reason is that a high h makes the …nancial product valuable to

consumers who know how to manage it properly, so it is worthwhile to devote resources to
mitigating the mistakes of behavioral agents in using the product.
The e¤ectiveness of the intervention in mitigating mistakes is measured by the parameter
. It is not necessarily the case that greater e¤ectiveness increases the optimal scale of the
intervention, for reasons similar to those discussed earlier.

However, greater e¤ectiveness

does increase the social bene…t of any given intervention.

Mistakes and transfers

Some mistakes by behavioral agents are product management failures that generate fees to
product providers. Examples might include credit card late payment fees, or bank overdraft
fees. Gabaix and Laibson (2006) emphasize that in a competitive …nancial market, fees from
behavioral agents are passed on to all purchasers of the product in the form of lower product
prices.

Thus, in equilibrium rational agents bene…t at the expense of behavioral agents.

Such a mechanism potentially a¤ects the welfare analysis of consumer …nancial regulation
because losses to behavioral agents are transfers to rational agents, not social losses.
To understand the issue, I now alter the simple product choice model so that each be36

havioral agent generates a unit fee that is passed on to all purchasers of product B. This is
the extreme case where the misperceptions of behavioral agents are entirely about transfers
that they make to rational agents.

The subsidy per purchaser is b, and if the subsidy is

removed the price of product B increases by b so rational agents’net-of-cost utility declines
by this amount.
Interventions against products, of the sort discussed in section 4.3, have the same social
bene…ts in this case as they did before, and accordingly the optimal scale of these interventions is unchanged. The reason is that interventions against products a¤ect rational and
behavioral agents in the same proportion that they exist in the population. In e¤ect the
social planner uses the preferences of a weighted average of rational and behavioral agents,
and transfers net out from this weighted average.
Interventions against mistakes, of the sort discussed in this section, have lower bene…ts
and a smaller optimal scale in the presence of transfers.

Eliminating mistakes bene…ts

behavioral agents but, if there are transfers, it hurts rational agents and the social planner
must take this into account.
To illustrate this point, consider an intervention with cost c that reduces the size of the
behavioral agents’ mistakes to g(c) = 1

c.

Such an intervention reduces the subsidy

to purchasers of the product by b c, raising its price accordingly. Only agents whose selfperceived utility u > c(1 + b ) = b
c will now buy the product, so the intervention has an
ampli…ed e¤ect on the size of the market for product B. De…ne a parameter b = =(1 + b ).

Then the social welfare function takes the same form as equations (7) and (8), substituting b
c
for c and b for . There is no direct e¤ect of g(c) on social welfare, as there was in equation
(12), because transfers cancel out of the social welfare function. The optimal intervention
is generally smaller than in the case without transfers, because an intervention of any given
scale has an ampli…ed e¤ect on the size of the market for product B.

37

5

Recent Developments in Consumer Financial
Markets

This lecture has made the case that consumer …nancial illiteracy is a su¢ ciently serious problem, and hard enough to cure through …nancial education and disclosures, that some degree
of …nancial regulation should be considered even if it imposes costs on rational households.
The previous section developed this point in a simple theoretical framework with a regulator
using a paternalistic social welfare function. In this section I review some developments in
consumer …nancial markets over the past decade and interpret them in this light. In turn
I consider trends in the asset allocation of retirement saving, in fees charged for unsecured
consumer credit through credit cards, bank overdrafts, and payday loans, and in the market
for reverse mortgages.

5.1

Asset allocation in retirement saving

The US retirement system is a particularly clear illustration of the general truth that household …nancial decisions occur in an institutional context and are importantly shaped by that
context.

The retirement system in place today is the result of two trends, one operating

over the last forty years and the other over the last …fteen years.

The …rst trend is the

gradual shift from de…ned-bene…t (DB) to de…ned-contribution (DC) retirement plans, a
shift inadvertently initiated by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of
1974 and the creation of tax-favored 401(k) plans a few years later, but also driven by longterm economic forces such as increasing life expectancy which make DB pension promises
more expensive for private employers.

This trend has forced individuals to take greater

responsibility for their own retirement planning. The second trend, in part a response to
the …rst, is the increasing use of “choice architecture” (Thaler and Sunstein 2008) to guide
individuals’choices through defaults and similar mechanisms. Behavioral economists have
documented the power of 401(k) plan defaults to a¤ect enrollment, contribution rates, and
38

asset allocation (Madrian and Shea 2001, Choi et al. 2004, Beshears et al. 2009, Mitchell and
Utkus 2012). These results are striking because plan participants can opt out of defaults
at low cost, thus defaults are low-intensity interventions with only modest side e¤ects on
rational households.
In the speci…c context of asset allocation, the US regulatory system changed in the mid2000s with the Pension Protection Act (PPA) of 2006 and subsequent rulemaking by the
Department of Labor. Prior to the PPA, employers hesitated to use risky funds as default
investments for fear of bearing legal responsibility for any losses incurred. This encouraged
the use of low-return money market funds for retirement saving. Under the PPA, certain
categories of broadly diversi…ed funds are quali…ed default investment alternatives (QDIAs)
that protect employers from any responsibility for loss. QDIAs include balanced funds (with
risk levels suitable for the company’s workforce as a whole), professionally managed accounts
tailored to an individual’s preferences and situation, and target-date funds (TDFs).

The

latter are a cheaper alternative to professional asset management with risk levels that are
calibrated to an individual’s retirement date and that gradually decline over working life.32
The growth of TDFs is a striking phenomenon of the last ten years. Mitchell and Utkus
(2012), using data on a panel of 401(k) plans administered by Vanguard, show that TDFs
have been adopted both through their designation as defaults in 401(k) plans, and through
active choice by plan participants. Even a purely administrative default designation, without
any auto-enrollment, increases TDF adoption, consistent with the view that participants have
an implicit demand for investment advice and pick plans that they regard as recommended
by their employers.

TDF adoption correlates with broader changes in 401(k) portfolios

(notably an increase in the share of diversi…ed equity among younger investors), implying
that households do not undo the TDF asset allocation by adjusting their holdings of other
funds.
32

This life-cycle pattern is consistent with the recommendations of portfolio choice theory under the
assumption that labor income is relatively safe, so that human capital is an implicit holding of a riskless
asset that declines as retirement approaches (Campbell and Viceira 2002).

39

These changes in portfolio allocation show up in aggregate statistics for the 401(k) system
as a whole.

Data provided by the Employee Bene…ts Research Institute (EBRI) and the

Investment Company Institute (ICI) show that between 2006 and 2013 the share of TDFs
tripled from 5% from 15%, while the share of concentrated equity (company stock) declined
from 11% to 7% (a continuation of a longer-term trend).

Overall holdings of diversi…ed

equity, including equity funds and the equity portion of balanced funds and TDFs but
excluding company stock, were little changed over this period (58% in both years, with a dip
in the period around the …nancial crisis), but the fraction of plan participants with little or
no diversi…ed equity exposure— that is, with less than 20% of their portfolios in diversi…ed
equity— declined from 26% to 18%.
TDFs also appear to have altered the pattern of risktaking by age. Figure 5 plots the age
tilt in several variables, de…ned as the di¤erence between the average value of the variable
for plan participants in their 20s and the average value for participants in their 60s. The
share of TDFs develops a positive age tilt in line with the growth of TDF adoption in the
population as a whole, since younger participants are more likely to invest in TDFs. During
the period of strong TDF growth since 2006, the age tilt in equity holding has increased (with
some falling back recently), and the age tilt in low (less than 20%) equity participation has
declined.33 Thus TDFs have moved overall asset allocation in the direction recommended
by standard …nance theory. These patterns, and the …ndings of Mitchell and Utkus (2012),
are consistent with the view suggested by Figure 3 that younger households, in particular,
are aware of their limited …nancial knowledge and responsive to the provision of low-cost
implicit investment advice.
Despite these favorable results, there are legitimate concerns about the role of TDFs
in the post-PPA US retirement system.

One is the level of fees.

Although TDFs are

typically cheaper than the brokers or …nancial advisers that they often replace, there is
meaningful variation in fees for these products just as there is for plain-vanilla index funds.34
33

The large decline in this age tilt in 2008 is driven both by the spread of TDFs among younger participants,
and by the response of older participants to the global …nancial crisis.
34
Chalmers and Reuter (2015) compare fees and performance for brokers and TDFs within an Oregon

40

Figure 5: Age tilts in the diversi…ed equity share, TDF holdings, and the share of 401(k)
participants with less than 20% in equities.
A related concern is the presence of idiosyncratic risk within supposedly diversi…ed TDFs.
Balduzzi and Reuter (2015) document considerable heterogeneity in both systematic risk
exposures and idiosyncratic returns in TDFs with similar target retirement dates.

They

attribute this to a tendency for employers to chase performance when they select fund families
for their 401(k) plans, and for new entrants in the TDF market to seek market share by
taking risk, knowing that they face greater rewards for outperformance than penalties for
underperformance.
A deeper unsettled issue is what institutional structure is needed to control con‡icts of interest in the provision of retirement savings products, when consumers may not be su¢ ciently
sophisticated to protect themselves. The Department of Labor is currently considering an
expansion of the …duciary standard for retirement investment advisers, with particular relevance for those advising the allocation of individual retirement accounts (IRAs). And it
retirement plan. They …nd average broker fees of 0.90% and inferior net performance of broker-advised
portfolios. Hortacsu and Syverson (2004) document wide dispersion in the costs of S&P 500 index funds.

41

is reasonable to ask whether employers, who are often treated as benevolent in behavioral
analyses of retirement savings, have incentives and opportunity to exploit behavioral biases
of employees when they design retirement bene…ts.35 More stringent …duciary standards are
likely to raise costs for rational households, but— as shown by the model of the previous
section— these costs must be traded o¤ against the bene…ts for unsophisticated households.

5.2

Unsecured consumer credit

Consumers with short-term borrowing needs can access several sources of unsecured credit,
including credit cards, bank overdrafts, and payday loans.

While credit availability pro-

vides important budget relief to households facing unexpected emergencies, there are serious
questions about consumers’ability to manage these credit products. These fall into three
main categories, each of which maps naturally into one of the types of …nancial ignorance
discussed earlier in this lecture.
First, the structure of fees is sometimes hard to understand. This is a particular concern
for credit cards and overdrafts, which o¤er a complex package of product features. Before
the passage of the CARD Act of 2009, credit card issuers could alter interest rates on existing
balances and charge substantial fees for late payments or overlimit borrowing.

Similarly,

banks can charge signi…cant fees for overdraft protection of checks, ATM withdrawals, and
debit card transactions.

Such fees depend on the account balance at each point in time,

which can be hard for consumers to track given bank delays in making deposited funds
available and (historically) bank discretion in ordering transactions that reduce balances.
As a notorious example, a sequence of many small debits and one large debit will generate
much larger overdraft fees if the large debit is processed …rst, exhausting the account balance,
35

The …duciary standard proposal is summarized at http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/newsroom/fscon‡ictso…nterest.html.
Bubb, Corrigan, and Warren (2015) argue that naïve present-biased employees overvalue employer matching
contributions to 401(k) plans because they anticipate saving more than they actually will. Generous
matching programs attract naïve employees at low cost to employers, especially in the presence of low
default contribution rates, and bene…t sophisticated employees at their expense.

42

than if the small debits are processed …rst while the account still has a positive balance.
Second, even if fees are well understood— as is likely the case for payday loans, whose
fees are paid on a stand-alone basis— consumers may not appreciate the implications for the
cost of credit. Payday loans charge fees of $15 to $20 for $100 loans over two to four weeks,
implying annualized percentage rates (APRs) of many hundred percent. While the Truth
in Lending Act (TILA) of 1968 requires rate disclosure, it is not clear that this is always
e¤ective. Consumers with low …nancial literacy may …nd it hard to understand the mapping
between dollar costs and interest rates.
Third, consumers may not be good at predicting their own future behavior and its implications for the cost of credit. Repeat borrowing by a minority of borrowers generates a large
fraction of the total fee revenue for short-term credit products (CFPB 2014). If consumers
fail to anticipate their repeat borrowing behavior, they may radically underestimate the cost
of an initial loan.
Regulatory responses to these problems have taken a variety of forms.

In all cases

the challenge is to help consumers who are making mistakes in their credit usage without
imposing too great a cost on consumers who are bene…ting from the availability of short-term
credit. The simplest strategy is to require disclosure, for example the Schumer box with its
standardized credit card terms or the CARD Act’s requirement for credit card statements to
compare the total cash payments implied by minimum monthly payments with those implied
by paying o¤ credit card debt in 36 months. A second strategy is to ban certain fees unless
consumers a¢ rmatively opt in to the associated service. The Federal Reserve required this
for overdraft protection of ATM and debit card transactions and the CARD Act required
it for credit card overlimit fees, both e¤ective in 2010.

A third strategy is to limit the

permissible size of fees to a “reasonable” level. The CARD Act has provisions of this sort
for credit card late fees, and bans inactivity fees altogether. Some states limit the maximum
rate on payday loans through usury laws, and the UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)

43

has imposed a cost cap on the UK equivalent of payday lending.36 A fourth strategy is to
restrict the permissible form of credit to limit the extent to which consumers can repeatedly
roll over loans, or to encourage an orderly process of paying o¤ debt. For example, in 2010
the state of Colorado required payday loans to be six-month installment loans rather than
lump-sum loans (Pew Charitable Trusts 2010, Zingales 2015), and in 2015 the CFPB has
published a draft proposal that would require payday lenders to limit repeat lending and
provide a¤ordable repayment options for rolled-over loans.37
An important function of economic research is to measure the e¤ectiveness of such interventions using modern techniques for identi…cation. Researchers have used …eld experiments
to measure the impact of implicit and explicit disclosures on credit usage (Bertrand and
Morse 2011, Stango and Zinman 2014).

The CARD Act, by regulating personal credit

cards but not otherwise similar small-business credit cards, created a natural experiment
that is exploited in Agarwal et al. (2015) building on preliminary analysis in CFPB (2013).
Agarwal et al. …nd that the Act considerably reduced the fees paid on credit cards, particularly by borrowers with lower credit scores, without increasing interest rates or reducing
the volume of credit. An important unresolved issue is to what extent this reduced bank
pro…ts, and to what extent interest charges on higher card balances o¤set the reduction in
fee revenue to banks. Variation in payday lending regulation across states, and within states
over time, can be used to identify its e¤ects (Melzer 2011, Carrell and Zinman 2014, Bhutta,
Goldin, and Homono¤ 2015).
Economic research can also guide policy design, but this requires a deeper understanding of mechanisms.

In terms of the stylized theoretical model laid out in the previous

section, the key questions are how to measure the fraction of behavioral households who
are wrongly choosing or misusing a credit product (b), the size of the damage caused by
misuse (normalized to one in the model), the bene…ts of the product when properly used
36

See https://www.the-fca.org.uk/price-cap-high-cost-short-term-credit/.

37

See http://www.consumer…nance.gov/newsroom/cfpb-considers-proposal-to-end-payday-debt-traps/.

44

(h), the deadweight cost of intervention ( ), and the e¤ectiveness of an intervention that
encourages proper usage ( ). Consumer …nancial regulatory agencies undertake this type of
research both to inform regulatory design and, in some cases, to meet the requirements for
cost-bene…t analysis of speci…c proposed interventions (Jackson and Rothstein 2015). For
example, in order to implement a UK legislative mandate to impose a payday lending cost
cap, the FCA used regression discontinuity analysis to compare outcomes for borrowers who
fell just below or just above a cuto¤ level for internal credit scores used by payday lenders.
These outcomes were measured using credit bureau …les on almost 2 million …rst-time loan
applicants, and a follow-up survey of 2,000 applicants.38 In the US, the CFPB has studied
the problem of repeated overdrafting by a small minority of bank customers (CFPB 2014).
The CFPB’s online complaint system can also be understood in these terms as a way to
gather data on ex-post regret by borrowers, which may be a symptom of behavioral bias
in borrowing or of failure to understand fees and borrowing costs.39 Academic economists
can contribute by developing better theoretical models of the interactions between rational
consumers, behaviorally biased consumers, and …nancial services providers, and by devising
credible ways to estimate the parameters of these models.

5.3

Reverse mortgages

As a …nal example of developments in household …nance, I brie‡y discuss the market for
reverse mortgages. These are credit products intended to ease the task of funding retirement
for households with limited …nancial assets but substantial housing equity.

As Poterba,

Venti, and Wise (2011) emphasize, this …nancial situation is quite common among older US
households; and it is likely even more common in countries where housing plays a larger role
in household balance sheets as illustrated in Table 2.
38

See
https://www.fca.org.uk/news/ps14-16-detailed-rules-on-the-price-cap-on-high-cost-short-termcredit.
39
See http://www.consumer…nance.gov/complaintdatabase/. The complaint system also has direct e¤ects
on …nancial services providers by publicizing anecdotes about their interactions with consumers.

45

The simplest way for a household to tap accumulated housing equity is to sell its home
and move to a smaller home or to rental accommodation. However, many older people do
not wish to move, and this creates a market for collateralized lending against home equity.
This can be done through home equity lines of credit or second mortgages, which are also
used by younger borrowers, but reverse mortgages are easier to qualify for and are speci…cally
tailored to the needs of older homeowners. A reverse mortgage has no monthly payments,
so the principal balance does not decline over time as it does in a conventional mortgage.
Instead, the principal increases at least as fast as the interest rate, and may increase even
faster if the loan is structured as a line of credit which the borrower gradually draws upon.
The accumulated principal is repaid when the home is sold, and the lender has no recourse
in the event that the sales proceeds of the home fail to cover this amount. However, the
borrower is responsible for payments of property taxes and homeowner’s insurance, and can
be foreclosed upon if these payments are not made.
Almost all reverse mortgages are insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA)
through the Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) program. This provides assurance
to borrowers that credit will be available in the future under the terms of the reverse mortgage, and it insures lenders against shortfalls caused by negative home equity at the time
the house is sold and the mortgage paid o¤. Given the support to the market provided by
FHA insurance, the reverse mortgage market is surprisingly small. A study conducted by
the CFPB under the terms of the Dodd-Frank Act (CFPB 2012) found that fewer than 3%
of eligible households had taken out reverse mortgages in 2011.
Reverse mortgages carry higher interest rates than home equity loans, and this has created
a perception that reverse mortgages are expensive.

Davido¤ (2015) argues that reverse

mortgages carry a valuable put option because of their no-recourse feature. The put can
be separated from the loan, with its high interest rate, by tapping a line of credit only in
circumstances where the value of the home has fallen below the credit available, and where the
borrower is willing to default and move. However, Davido¤ (2014) …nds that such “ruthless
default” is rare, with many borrowers leaving credit untapped even when additional credit
46

would be e¤ectively free to them.

In the absence of an optimal default strategy, reverse

mortgages do appear expensive (Lucas 2015) as well as di¢ cult to understand. Both factors
limit the demand for the products.
On the other side of the market, lenders appear reluctant to originate reverse mortgages
without the bene…t of FHA support.

This may be because banks cannot be sure that

homeowners will not learn to default ruthlessly in the future, even if they fail to do so today.
It may also be because banks fear undermaintenance by older homeowners, with negative
e¤ects on the quality of collateral (Melzer 2015) that can become particularly serious because
reverse mortgages o¤er only limited foreclosure rights to lenders.
Putting these observations together, the reverse mortgage market appears ripe for …nancial innovation, and there may be a role for public policy to encourage the development of
simpler, more a¤ordable products. For example, reverse mortgages might be particularly appropriate vehicles for automatic adjustment of principal balances in response to movements
in local house price indexes. Retirees are on a downward trajectory of housing consumption
and thus should wish to lay o¤ some house price risk, which is often not the case for younger
homeowners (Sinai and Souleles 2005). Adjustment of debt principal to house price indexes
preserves a homeowner’s incentives to maintain the house even in a falling housing market.
It also eliminates the problematic default option that relatively few homeowners know how
to exercise and that borrowers collectively appear to undervalue.
Another design principle might be to combine reverse mortgages with other products
attractive to seniors. One reason why retirees retain housing equity may be that they regard
it as a vehicle for funding emergency medical expenses and long-term care. A negative health
shock overcomes any reluctance to move, and home equity becomes available at the right
time to …nance spending.40 This issue could be addressed by marketing reverse mortgages
in combination with long-term care insurance and possibly annuities as well, since packaging
40

Consistent with this, Nakajima and Telyukova (2014) show that retirees run down both …nancial and
housing wealth faster in countries with greater public funding of health care, and Ameriks et al. (2015) …nd
that Vanguard clients report health care concerns to be a major reason for their limited dissaving.

47

these products is likely to mitigate the problem of adverse selection.
Lucas (2015) argues that reverse mortgages are expensive in part because of the high
costs of reaching older homeowners and educating them about the product.

This is an

example of the general phenomenon that marketing socially desirable …nancial products
has external bene…ts to the extent that it establishes favorable social norms and improves
…nancial literacy. In this circumstance, consumer …nancial regulation may be able to play
the positive role of promoting desirable innovation rather than the negative role of restraining
undesirable innovation.

6

Conclusion

The complexity of 21st Century …nancial arrangements poses a daunting challenge to households managing their …nancial a¤airs, to regulators attempting to assist them, and to the
economics profession. In this lecture I have argued that household …nancial mistakes create
a new rationale for intervention in the economy. I have emphasized that beyond the easy
cases where behaviorally biased households can be “nudged” to avoid mistakes with minimal e¤ects on rational households, …nancial regulators face a di¢ cult tradeo¤ between the
bene…ts of regulation to households that make mistakes, and the costs of regulation to other
…nancial market participants. The task for economists is to confront this tradeo¤ explicitly,
bringing to bear the highest quality evidence that modern applied microeconomics can make
available.

48

References
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes
Stroebel. 2015. “Regulating Consumer Financial Products: Evidence from Credit
Cards.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(1): 111–164.
Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2009. “The
Age of Reason: Financial Decisions over the Life-Cycle and Implications for Regulation.”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009(2):51–117.
Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, and David Laibson. 2013. “Optimal Mortgage
Re…nancing: A Closed Form Solution.”Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 45:591–
622.
Akerlof, George, and Robert J. Shiller. 2015. Phishing for Phools: The Economics
of Manipulation and Deception. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher Tonetti. 2015. “Late-in-Life Risks and the Under-Insurance Puzzle.” Unpublished paper.
Anagol, Santosh, Vimal Balasubramaniam, and Tarun Ramadorai. 2015. “The
E¤ects of Experience on Investor Behavior: Evidence from India’s IPO Lotteries.”
Unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania and University of Oxford.
Anagol, Santosh, Shawn Cole, and Shayak Sarkar. 2012. “Understanding the Incentives of Commissions Motivated Agents: Theory and Evidence from the Indian Life
Insurance Market.”Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 12-055.
Anagol, Santosh and Hugh Hoikwang Kim. 2012. “The Impact of Shrouded Fees:
Evidence from a Natural Experiment in the Indian Mutual Funds Market.” American
Economic Review 102(1):576–593.
Andersen, Ste¤en, John Y. Campbell, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, and Tarun Ramadorai. 2015. “Inattention and Inertia in Household Finance: Evidence from the
Danish Mortgage Market.” NBER Working Paper No. 21386.
Bach, Laurent, Laurent Calvet, and Paolo Sodini. 2015. “Rich Pickings? Risk and
Return in the Financial Portfolios of the Wealthy.” Unpublished paper, Stockholm
School of Economics and HEC Paris.
Badarinza, Cristian, John Y. Campbell, and Tarun Ramadorai. 2015. “International Comparative Household Finance.” Paper in preparation for Annual Review of
Economics.

49

Balduzzi, Pierluigi and Jonathan Reuter. 2015. “Heterogeneity in Target-Date
Funds: Optimal Risk-Taking or Risk Matching?” Revision of NBER Working Paper
No. 17886.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean. 2000. “Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth:
The Common Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors.” Journal of Finance 55(2):773–806.
Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean. 2003. “Are Individual Investors Tax Savvy?
Evidence from Retail and Discount Brokerage Accounts.” Journal of Public Economics
88:419–442.
Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer. 2015.
“X-CAPM: An Extrapolative Capital Asset Pricing Model.”Journal of Financial Economics 115(1):1–24.
Bekaert, Geert, Kenton Hoyem, Wei-Yin Hu, and Enrichetta Ravina. 2015.
“Who Is Internationally Diversi…ed? Evidence from 296 401(k).” NBER Working
Paper No. 21236.
Benartzi, Shlomo. 2001. “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Company Stock.”Journal of Finance 56(5):1747–1764.
Bergstresser, Daniel, John M.R. Chalmers, and Peter Tufano. 2009. “Assessing
the Costs and Bene…ts of Brokers in the Mutual Fund Industry.”Review of Financial
Studies 22(10):4129–4156.
Bergstresser, Daniel and James Poterba. 2004. “Asset Allocation and Asset Location: Household Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Journal of Public
Economics 88:1893–1915.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Daniel M. Garrett, and Dean M. Maki. 2001. “Education
and Saving: The Long-Term E¤ects of High School Financial Curriculum Mandates.”
Journal of Public Economics 80:435–465.
Bertrand, Marianne and Adair Morse. 2011. “Information Disclosure, Cognitive
Biases, and Payday Borrowing.”Journal of Finance 66(6):1865–1893.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2009.
“The Importance of Default Options for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from
the United States.”In Je¤rey Brown, Je¤rey Liebman and David A. Wise eds. Social
Security Policy in a Changing Environment, 167–195. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Bhamra, Harjoat S. and Raman Uppal. 2014. “Does Household Finance Matter?
Small Financial Errors with Large Social Costs.” Unpublished paper, Imperial College
and Edhec Business School.
50

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Andreas Hackethal, Simon Kaesler, Benjamin Loos, and
Ste¤en Meyer. 2012. “Is Unbiased Financial Advice to Retail Investors Su¢ cient?
Answers from a Large Field Study.”Review of Financial Studies 25(4):975–1032.
Bhutta, Neil, Jacob Goldin, and Tatiana Homono¤. 2015. “Consumer Borrowing
After Payday Loan Bans.” Unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Board, Stanford Law
School, and Cornell University.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2015. “Memory, Attention, and Choice.”Unpublished paper, University of London, Universitá Bocconi, and
Harvard University.
Brown, Alexandra, J. Michael Collins, Maximilian Schmeiser, and Carly Urban. 2014. “State Mandated Financial Education and the Credit Behavior of Young
Adults.” FEDS Working Paper No. 2014-68, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Alp Simsek, and Wei Xiong. 2015. “A Welfare Criterion
for Models with Distorted Beliefs.” Forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bubb, Ryan, Patrick Corrigan, and Patrick L. Warren. 2015. “A Behavioral
Contract Perspective on Retirement Savings.”Forthcoming in Connecticut Law Review
47.
Bucks, Brian, and Karen Pence. 2008. “Do Borrowers Know Their Mortgage Terms?”
Journal of Urban Economics 64:218–233.
Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini. 2007. “Down or Out:
Assessing the Welfare Costs of Household Investment Mistakes.” Journal of Political
Economy 115:707–747.
Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini. 2009. “Fight or Flight?
Portfolio Rebalancing by Individual Investors.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 124:301–
348.
Calvet, Laurent and Paolo Sodini. 2014. “Twin Picks: Disentangling the Determinants of Risk-Taking in Household Portfolios.” Journal of Finance 69(2):867–906.
Campbell, John Y. 2006. “Household Finance.”Journal of Finance 61:1553–1604.
Campbell, John Y. 2013. “Mortgage Market Design.”Review of Finance 17:1–33.
Campbell, John Y. and Joao Cocco. 2003. “Household Risk Management and Optimal
Mortgage Choice.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:1449–1494.
Campbell, John Y. and Joao Cocco. 2015. “A Model of Mortgage Default.” Journal
of Finance 70:1495–1554.

51

Campbell, John Y., Howell E. Jackson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Peter Tufano.
2011. “Consumer Financial Protection.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1):91–
114.
Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish. 2015. “Getting
Better or Feeling Better? How Equity Investors Respond to Investment Experiences.”
NBER Working Paper No. 20000.
Carrell, Scott, and Jonathan Zinman. 2014. “In Harm’s Way? Payday Loan Access
and Military Personnel Performance.”Review of Financial Studies 27(9):2805–2840.
Carroll, Christopher D. 2002. “Portfolios of the Rich.” In Luigi Guiso, Michael
Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli, eds. Household Portfolios. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Célérier, Claude and Boris Vallée. 2015. “Catering to Investors Through Product
Complexity.” Unpublished paper, University of Zurich and Harvard Business School.
Chalmers, John and Jonathan Reuter. 2015. “Is Con‡icted Investment Advice Better
than No Advice?” Revision of NBER Working Paper No. 18158.
Chater, Nick, Ste¤en Huck, and Roman Inderst. 2010. “Consumer DecisionMaking in Retail Investment Services: A Behavioural Economics Perspective.”Report
to the European Commission.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory
and Evidence.” American Economic Review 99(4):1145–1177.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2011. “$100 Bills on the
Sidewalk: Suboptimal Investment in 401(k) Plans.”Review of Economics and Statistics
93:748–763.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004.
“For Better or for Worse: Default E¤ects and 401(k) Savings Behavior.” In David A.
Wise ed. Perspectives in the Economics of Aging, 81–121. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009.
“Reinforcement Learning and Savings Behavior.” Journal of Finance 64:2515–2534.
Christelis, Dimitris, Dimitris Georgarakos, and Michael Haliassos. 2013. “Differences in Portfolios Across Countries: Economic Environment versus Household Characteristics.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(1):220–236.
Christo¤ersen, Susan E.K., Richard Evans, and David K. Musto. 2013. “What
Do Consumers’ Fund Flows Maximize? Evidence from Their Brokers’ Incentives.”
Journal of Finance 68:201–235.
52

Cole, Shawn, Anna Paulson, and Gauri Kartini Shastry. 2014. “Smart Money?
The E¤ect of Education on Financial Outcomes.”Review of Financial Studies 27(7):2022–
2051.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2012. Reverse Mortgages: Report to Congress.
Available online at http://www.consumer…nance.gov/reports/reverse-mortgages-report/.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2013. CARD Act Report: A Review of the
Impact of the CARD Act on the Consumer Credit Card Market. Available online at
http://www.consumer…nance.gov/reports/card-act-report/.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2014. Data Point: Checking Account Overdraft. Available online at http://www.consumer…nance.gov/reports/data-point-checkingaccount-overdraft/.
Davido¤, Thomas. 2014. “Do Reverse Mortgage Borrowers Use Credit Ruthlessly?”
Unpublished paper, University of British Columbia.
Davido¤, Thomas. 2015. “Can ‘High Costs’Justify Weak Demand for the Home Equity
Conversion Mortgage?”Review of Financial Studies 28(8):2364–2398.
Dávila, Eduardo. 2015. “Optimal Financial Transactions Taxes.” Unpublished paper,
New York University.
Del Guercio, Diane and Jonathan Reuter. 2014. “Mutual Fund Performance and the
Incentive to Generate Alpha.”Journal of Finance 69:1673–1704.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier. 2004. “Contract Design and SelfControl: Theory and Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2):353–402.
Døskeland, Trond M. and Hans K. Hvide. 2011. “Do Individual Investors Have
Asymmetric Information Based on Work Experience?” Journal of Finance 66(3):1011–
1041.
Duarte, Fabian and Justine S. Hastings. 2012. “Fettered Consumers and Sophisticated Firms: Evidence from Mexico’s Privatized Social Security Market.” NBER
Working Paper No. 18582.
Ely, Richard T. 1894. An Introduction to Political Economy. Hunt & Eaton, New York,
NY and Cranston & Curts, Cincinnati, OH.
Ely, Richard T. 1899. The Strength and Weakness of Socialism.
New York, NY.

Chautauqua Press,

Ely, Richard T. 1903. Studies in the Evolution of Industrial Society. Macmillan, New
York, NY.

53

Eyster, Erik, Matthew Rabin, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2015. “Financial Markets
where Traders Neglect the Informational Content of Prices.” NBER Working Paper
No. 21224.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix. 2015. “Optimal Taxation with Behavioral
Agents.” Unpublished paper, Harvard University and New York University.
Foerster, Stephen, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, Brian T. Melzer, and Alessandro
Previtero. 2015. “Retail Financial Advice: Does One Size Fit All?” Forthcoming
Journal of Finance.
Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron. 2007. “Limits
of Arbitrage: Theory and Evidence from the Mortgage-Backed Securities Market.”
Journal of Finance 62(2): 557–595.
Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 121:505–540.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Charles G. Nathanson. 2015. “An Extrapolative Model
of House Price Dynamics.” NBER Working Paper No. 21037.
Goldin, Jacob. 2015. “Which Way to Nudge? Uncovering Preferences in the Behavioral
Age.” Forthcoming Yale Law Journal.
Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides. 2005. “Optimal Life-Cycle Asset
Allocation: Understanding the Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Finance 60(2):869–
904.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju. 2001. “How Distance, Language, and Culture
In‡uence Stockholdings and Trades.”Journal of Finance 56(3):1053–1073.
Gross, David B. and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and
Interest Rates Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1):149–185.
Grubb, Michael D. 2015. “Overcon…dent Consumers in the Marketplace.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 29(4):9–36.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. “Trusting the Stock Market.”Journal of Finance 63(6):2557–2600.
Guiso, Luigi and Paolo Sodini. 2013. “Household Finance: An Emerging Field.” In
George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz eds., Handbook of the Economics
of Finance, Volume 2B, North-Holland, 1397–1531.

54

Haltiwanger, John and Michael Waldman. 1989. “Limited Rationality and Strategic
Complements: The Implications for Macroeconomics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104(3):463–483.
Hastings, Justine S., Brigitte C. Madrian, and William L. Skimmyhorn. 2013.
“Financial Literacy, Financial Education, and Economic Outcomes.” Annual Review
of Economics 5:347–373.
Heidhues, Paul and Botond Köszegi. 2010. “Exploiting Naïvete about Self-Control
in the Credit Market.” American Economic Review 100:2279–2303.
Hortacsu, Ali and Chad Syverson. 2004. “Product Di¤erentiation, Search Costs, and
Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2):403–456.
Huang, Xing. 2015. “Mark Twain’s Cat: Investment Experience, Categorical Thinking
and Stock Selection.” Unpublished paper, Michigan State University.
Huberman, Gur. 2001. “Familiarity Breeds Investment.” Review of Financial Studies
14:659–680.
Inderst, Roman and Marco Ottaviani. 2012. “Financial Advice.”Journal of Economic
Literature 50(2):494–512.
Jackson, Howell E. and Paul Rothstein. 2015. “The Analysis of Bene…ts in Consumer Protection Regulations.” Unpublished paper, Harvard University and Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau.
Johnson, Eric, Stephan Meier, and Olivier Toubia. 2015. “Leaving Money on the
Kitchen Table: Exploring Sluggish Mortgage Re…nancing Using Administrative Data,
Surveys, and Field Experiments.” Unpublished paper, Columbia Business School.
Keys, Benjamin C., Devin G. Pope, and Jared C. Pope.
Re…nance.” Forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.

2016.

“Failure to

Knüpfer, Samuli, Elias Rantapuska, and Matti Sarvimäki. 2014. “Labor Market Experiences and Portfolio Choice: Evidence from the Finnish Great Depression.”
Unpublished paper, London Business School and Aalto University.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.”Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112(2):443–477.
Lee, Jinkook and Jeanne M. Hogarth. 1999. “The Price of Money: Consumers’
Understanding of APRs and Contract Interest Rates.” Journal of Public Policy &
Marketing 18:66–76.
Lewis, Karen. 1999. “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption.”
Journal of Economic Literature 37(2):571–608.
55

Lucas, Deborah. 2015. “Hacking Reverse Mortgages.” Unpublished paper, MIT.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2015. “Optimal Financial Knowledge and Wealth Inequality.” Forthcoming Journal of Political
Economy.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2008. “Planning and Financial Literacy:
How Do Women Fare?” American Economic Review 98(2):413–417.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011. “Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning in the United States.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance
10(4):509–525.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2014. “The Economic Importance of
Financial Literacy: Theory and Evidence.”Journal of Economic Literature 52:5–44.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
116(4):1149–1187.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel. 2011. “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic
Experiences A¤ect Risk Taking?”Quarterly Journal of Economics 126:373–416.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel. 2015. “Learning from In‡ation Experiences.”
Forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Devin Shanthikumar. 2007. “Are Small Investors Naive
About Incentives?”Journal of Financial Economics 85:457–489.
Massa, Massimo and Andrei Simonov. 2006. “Hedging, Familiarity, and Portfolio
Choice.”Review of Financial Studies 19(2):633–685.
Melzer, Brian T. 2011. “The Real Costs of Credit Access: Evidence from the Payday
Lending Market.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1):517–555.
Melzer, Brian T. 2015. “Mortgage Debt Overhang: Reduced Investment by Homeowners
at Risk of Default.” Forthcoming Journal of Finance.
Miller, Edward M. 1977. “Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion.” Journal of
Finance 32(4):1151–1168.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Stephen P. Utkus. 2012. “Target-Date Funds in 401(k)
Retirement Plans.”NBER Working Paper No. 17911.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Noeth, and Antoinette Schoar. 2012. “The Market for Financial Advice: An Audit Study.”NBER Working Paper No. 17929.

56

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William J. Congdon. 2012.
“A Reduced-Form Approach to Behavioral Public Finance.” Annual Review of Economics 4:17.1–17.30.
Nakajima, Makoto, and Irina Telyukova. 2014. “Housing and Saving in Retirement
Across Countries.” Forthcoming in Joseph Stiglitz ed. Proceedings of International
Economic Association 2014 World Congress.
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin.
Public Economics 90:1825–1849.

2006.

“Optimal Sin Taxes.” Journal of

OECD. 2014. PISA 2012 Results: Students and Money, Financial Literacy Skills for the
21st Century (Volume VI). OECD Publishing.
Pew Charitable Trusts. 2013. Payday Lending in America: Policy Solutions. Available
online at http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/reports/2013/10/29/paydaylending-in-america-policy-solutions.
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Poterba, James M. 2014. “Retirement Security in an Aging Population.” American
Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 104:1–30.
Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. 2011. “The Composition and Draw-Down of Wealth in Retirement.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
25(Fall):95–118.
Reuter, Jonathan. 2015. “Revisiting the Performance of Broker-Sold Mutual Funds.”
Unpublished paper, Boston College.
Ru, Hong and Antoinette Schoar. 2015. “Do Credit Card Companies Screen for
Behavioral Biases?” Unpublished paper, MIT.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1955. Economics, 3rd ed. McGraw Hill.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1979. “Why We Should Not Make Mean Log of Wealth Big Though
Years to Act Are Long.”Journal of Banking and Finance 3:305–307.
Shiller, Robert J. 2005. Irrational Exuberance, 2nd ed. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles. 2005. “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge
Against Rent Risk.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 120:763–789.
Skimmyhorn, William. 2015. “Assessing Financial Education: Evidence from Boot
Camp.”Forthcoming American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

57

Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance.”Journal of Finance 64:2807–2849.
Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman. 2014. “Limited and Varying Consumer Attention: Evidence from Shocks to the Salience of Bank Overdraft Fees.” Review of
Financial Studies 27:990–1030.
Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. “Borrowing High vs. Borrowing Higher:
Price Dispersion and Shopping Behavior in the US Credit Card Market.” Forthcoming
Review of Financial Studies.
Telyukova, Irina A. 2013. “Household Need for Liquidity and the Credit Card Debt
Puzzle.” Review of Economic Studies 80:1148–1177.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About
Health, Wealth, and Happiness. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Van Niewerburgh, Stijn and Laura Veldkamp. 2009. “Information Immobility and
the Home Bias Puzzle.” Journal of Finance 64(3):1187–1215.
Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2011. “Financial
Literacy and Stock Market Participation.”Journal of Financial Economics 101(2):449–
472.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 2001. “Choice, Chance, and Wealth Dispersion
at Retirement.” Chapter 1 in Seiritsu Ogara, Toshiaki Tachibanaki, and David A.
Wise eds. Aging Issues in the United States and Japan. NBER, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL.
Wachter, Jessica, and Motohiro Yogo. 2010. “Why Do Household Portfolio Shares
Rise in Wealth?”Review of Financial Studies 23(11):3929–3965.
Warren, Elizabeth. 2007. “Unsafe at Any Rate.” Democracy 5:8. Available online at
http://www.democracyjournal.org/5/6528.php.
Willis, Lauren E. 2008. “Against Financial-Literacy Education.” Iowa Law Review
94(1):197–285.
Woodward, Susan E. and Robert E. Hall. 2012. “Diagnosing Consumer Confusion
and Sub-Optimal Shopping E¤ort: Theory and Mortgage Market Evidence.”American
Economic Review 102(7):3249–3276.
Zingales, Luigi. 2015. “Presidential Address: Does Finance Bene…t Society?” Journal
of Finance 70(4):1327–1363.

58

Table 1
International comparison of participation rates

Canada

France

Germany

Italy

Netherl.

Spain

Deposits and transaction accounts

92.6%

93.6%

99.6%

99.0%

91.8%

94.2%

98.1%

97.4%

Retirement assets and life insurance

57.6%

70.5%

37.5%

46.5%

18.0%

49.8%

23.6%

76.1%

Directly held stocks

15.1%

10.0%

14.7%

10.6%

4.6%

10.4%

10.4%

17.5%

Other ﬁnancial assets

13.4%

20.1%

10.2%

22.0%

4.2%

10.7%

6.8%

31.9%

Bonds

13.2%

7.4%

1.7%

5.2%

14.6%

6.0%

1.4%

28.2%

8.7%

11.6%

10.7%

16.9%

6.3%

17.7%

5.6%

5.4%

Vehicles and other durables

87.5%

100.0%

100.0%

73.2%

95.1%

82.6%

79.9%

100.0%

Main residence

67.2%

62.5%

55.3%

44.2%

68.7%

57.1%

82.7%

68.0%

Other real estate

14.4%

18.4%

24.7%

17.8%

24.9%

6.1%

36.2%

10.9%

Private businesses

12.1%

17.1%

10.7%

9.4%

18.4%

4.8%

15.0%

n.a.

Vehicle loans and other debt

48.5%

42.7%

28.7%

21.7%

15.3%

24.6%

27.2%

44.0%

Residential mortgage

47.0%

33.8%

16.9%

18.0%

9.6%

43.9%

26.8%

36.2%

Credit cards

39.4%

24.8%

n.a.

3.4%

1.4%

4.6%

7.3%

24.8%

Other mortgage debt

5.4%

6.4%

10.1%

6.0%

1.6%

2.5%

7.3%

4.8%

Overdrafts and credit lines

2.1%

39.9%

7.0%

19.8%

3.6%

20.8%

0.6%

n.a.

Direct and indirect risky assets

61.8%

72.7%

45.7%

54.5%

31.4%

59.2%

30.9%

65.2%

Direct and indirect equity

49.1%

72.3%

45.5%

53.5%

23.2%

58.6%

30.3%

64.0%

Mutual funds

UK

USA

We report the fractions of households which hold respective categories of assets and liabilities. We include
accounts with positive balances, as well as ones which households report as active, but which hold amounts
equal to zero during the time of the interview. The top part of the table refers to ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial
assets and the bottom part to mortgage- and non-mortgage debt. Retirement assets include all types of
deﬁned contribution plans (public, occupational, or private) which have an account balance. The symbol
"n.a." denotes asset or debt categories for which holdings are not separately classiﬁed, or for which data has
not been collected.

Table 2
International comparison of the allocation of household wealth
We calculate the respective share of each wealth category relative to the total asset and debt holdings of
the household and report averages across the population. The top part of the table refers to financial and
non-financial assets and the bottom part to mortgage- and non-mortgage debt. Retirement assets include
all types of defined contribution plans (public, occupational, or private) which have an account balance.
The symbol "n.a." denotes asset or debt categories for which holdings are not separately classified, or for

Spain

UK

Netherl.

13.3%

24.1%

6.1%

10.5%

1.5%

16.8%

1.4%

25.1%

Deposits and transaction accounts

11.6%

9.9%

22.0%

30.0%

11.9%

21.3%

10.5%

5.9%

Other financial assets

2.1%

1.2%

1.0%

3.5%

0.3%

0.8%

0.7%

0.8%

Mutual funds

1.3%

1.3%

0.7%

2.4%

0.6%

1.6%

0.4%

0.3%

Directly held stocks

1.3%

1.0%

1.0%

0.9%

0.2%

0.6%

0.5%

0.6%

Bonds

0.5%

0.2%

0.1%

0.6%

1.6%

0.6%

0.1%

1.1%

Main residence

40.6%

31.9%

38.9%

29.9%

53.2%

43.3%

61.2%

34.6%

Vehicles, valuables and other assets

22.5%

22.6%

18.5%

13.4%

19.1%

11.1%

8.6%

28.7%

Private businesses

3.5%

2.6%

2.7%

2.0%

3.4%

1.7%

3.2%

n.a.

Other real estate

3.2%

5.2%

9.1%

6.7%

8.2%

2.2%

13.3%

2.8%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

Mortgage debt for primary residence

52.7%

38.1%

31.5%

33.8%

35.5%

60.6%

48.3%

51.1%

Vehicle-, student loans and other debt

31.2%

28.2%

44.5%

32.7%

50.8%

22.5%

35.5%

34.2%

Credit card debt

12.1%

12.4%

n.a.

2.3%

3.0%

1.1%

3.4%

9.8%

Other debt secured with real estate

3.3%

5.4%

15.7%

9.5%

4.7%

2.4%

12.2%

4.8%

Overdrafts and credit lines

0.7%

15.9%

8.3%

21.7%

6.2%

13.4%

0.5%

n.a.

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

Direct and indirect risky assets

38.2%

50.3%

22.6%

29.0%

18.5%

40.2%

15.7%

42.2%

Direct and indirect equity

21.2%

26.0%

9.2%

8.6%

6.2%

16.2%

6.2%

21.2%

Italy

Canada

Retirement assets and life insurance

France

USA

Germany

which data has not been collected.

