                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              HOW CRASHES DEVELOP:
                    INTRADAILY VOLATILITY AND CRASH EVOLUTION

                                             David S. Bates

                                         Working Paper 22028
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22028


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2016




I am grateful for comments on earlier versions of the paper from seminar participants at Iowa, Northwestern,
Houston, and Lugano, and from conference participants at the 2012 IFSID Conference on Structured
Products and Derivatives and McGill University’s 2014 Risk Management Conference. The University
of Iowa provided research support for this project. There were no relevant nor material external financial
relationships that could have influenced this research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by David S. Bates. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
How Crashes Develop: Intradaily Volatility and Crash Evolution
David S. Bates
NBER Working Paper No. 22028
February 2016
JEL No. C22,G13

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper explores whether affine models with volatility jumps estimated on intradaily S&P 500 futures
data over 1983-2008 can capture major daily outliers such as the 1987 stock market crash. I find that
intradaily jumps in futures prices are typically small, and that self-exciting but short-lived volatility
spikes capture intradaily and daily returns better. Multifactor models of the evolution of diffusive
variance and jump intensities improve fits substantially, including out-of-sample over 2009-13. The
models capture reasonably well the conditional distributions of daily returns and of realized variance
outliers, but underpredict realized variance inliers.


David S. Bates
Henry B. Tippie College of Business
Department of Finance
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242-1000
and NBER
david-bates@uiowa.edu
                                                 1


       What is a crash? In the jump-diffusion model of Merton (1976), a crash is a rare event –
a single adverse draw from a Poisson counter, with a vanishingly small probability of multiple
adverse draws within a single day. While this model may be successful at capturing outliers in
daily returns, it does not appear to capture the intradaily evolution of major market downturns.
The 23% drop in the S&P 500 index on Monday, October 19, 1987 from the preceding Friday’s
closing level did not occur within five minutes, for instance; it took all day to achieve the full
decline.   Indeed, papers such as Tauchen and Zhou (2011) that use bipower variation to
decompose realized variance into diffusive and jump components suggest there were no jumps at
all on October 19. Instead, it was a draw of two standard deviations from a day that happened to
have an unusually high intradaily realized volatility of 12%.

       While the increasing availability of high-frequency data generated some exploration of
intradaily volatility evolution, including in stock markets, there has been little direct estimation
of stochastic processes with stochastic volatility and jumps using intradaily data. Papers such as
Andersen and Bollerslev (1997) focus on volatility dynamics; in particular, reconciling GARCH-
based volatility evolution estimates from daily versus intradaily data. As described in Andersen
(2004), the recognition that realized variance effectively summarizes intradaily volatility
information and sidesteps the issues of fitting pronounced diurnal volatility patterns and
announcement effects shifted the focus of most intradaily research to realized variance. Whether
jumps are important has been assessed indirectly in this literature, using the bipower variation
approach of Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2004, 2006) to assess intradaily jump
contributions to realized variance. That approach maintains the Merton (1976) presumption that
jumps are rare.

       This indirect evidence and more direct parametric estimates by Stroud and Johannes
(2014) on intradaily data indicate a fundamental mismatch between jump magnitudes from
intradaily versus from daily stock market data. Bates (2006, 2012), for instances, estimates daily
jump standard deviations at about 3%, excluding the 1987 crash. Intradaily jump standard
deviations inferred from bipower variation are an order of magnitude smaller: about 0.5% in
Tauchen and Zhou. Stroud and Johannes estimate comparable intradaily magnitudes: 0.2% -
0.4% for the standard deviation of unexpected jumps in 5-minute returns, and similar magnitudes
for predictable announcement effects.      Such estimates require multiple intradaily jumps to
                                                          2


explain the occasional 4-10% daily return magnitudes, which is inconsistent with the rare-jump
hypothesis.

         This paper develops an affine multifactor multifactor stochastic volatility/jump model for
the intradaily evolution of S&P 500 futures that potentially reconciles intradaily and daily
results. The key feature of the model is “self-exciting” synchronous and correlated jumps in
intradaily stock returns and volatility – essentially a stochastic-intensity and multifactor
generalization of the Duffie, Pan and Singleton (2000) volatility-jump model. Every intradaily
jump substantially increases the probability of more intradaily jumps in volatility and in returns;
and these can accumulate into the major outliers in daily returns that we occasionally observe.
The model is estimated on 15-minute S&P 500 futures returns over 1983-2008 via the Bates
(2006, 2012) approximate maximum likelihood (AML) filtration methodology, taking into
account special features of intradaily futures data. The methodology provides direct estimates of
the frequency and distribution of intradaily jumps, as well as estimates of the intradaily evolution
of volatility and jump intensities. The 2009-2013 period is used for out-of-sample tests of the
model.

         While assorted nonaffine continuous-time models have been proposed and estimated
predominantly on daily stock market data,1 affine models have a couple of advantages for
exploring how crashes develop. First, affine models are closed under time aggregation. An
affine model fitted to intradaily returns generates an affine model for daily returns, which can
then be tested against observed daily data.

         Second, affine models are well suited to the current research focus on realized variance.
Realized variance asymptotically approaches quadratic variation at higher sampling frequencies;
and quadratic variation is an affine random variable in affine models with stochastic volatility
and jumps. This property holds for any affine model; standard assumptions in the bipower
variation literature such as no leverage effects and rare large jumps are unnecessary. This paper
derives the conditional characteristic function of daily quadratic variation for the proposed

1
 Chernov et al (2003) estimate diffusive log variance models on daily stock market data. The models have
substantial volatility feedback, which is similar to the self-exciting jumps feature here. Stroud and Johannes (2014)
have jump-diffusive models for intradaily log variance, but with constant jump intensities rather than self-exciting
jumps. Calvet and Fisher (2008) propose a tightly parameterized Markov Chain model for daily log variance that
also lacks volatility feedback. Aït-Sahalia et al (2015) and Fulop et al (2015) have affine models with stochastic
volatility and self-exciting volatility jumps, which they estimate on daily stock market data.
                                                3


intradaily model, assesses how well it approximates the conditional characteristic function of
daily realized variances from 15-minute returns, and uses it for various diagnostics of those
realized variances.

       I explore three issues. First is the specification issue of identifying the appropriate time
series model, using an extensive 1983-2008 history of S&P 500 futures that includes extreme
stock market movements in October 1987 and in the fall of 2008. I find that multifactor models
with self-exciting but short-lived volatility spikes substantially improve model fits both in-
sample and out-of-sample.

       Second is the issue of time aggregation: how well do various proposed affine models
estimated using 15-minute returns capture the statistical properties of daily returns and daily
measures of intradaily realized variance? Any estimation methodology applied to 15-minute
returns is perforce focused on fitting the conditional distributions of those data. Not all high-
frequency phenomena remain important at longer horizons, however. Examining how well the
models fit daily returns and realized variances are major goals of this paper, and serve as
additional tests of model specification.

       Third, I explore the informational content of realized variance, which is a noisy signal of
intradaily variance when intradaily jumps are present. A priori, directly estimating (filtering)
underlying volatility from the full set of observed intradaily returns should be more accurate than
using any summary statistics such as realized variance or bipower variation based upon those
same data. However, directly using intradaily returns involves significant costs, both in time and
in requiring explicit modeling of phenomena such as minimum tick sizes and diurnal variance
fluctuations. I therefore examine the magnitude of the informational loss when filtering latent
volatility solely from observed daily realized variance, within the framework of explicit affine
parametric models and a filtration methodology that identify how such filtration should be
conducted.

       Section 1 of the paper describes the intradaily and overnight data, the multifactor models
and estimation methodology, and how well the models fit.           Section 2 contains additional
diagnostics using intradaily realized variance, while Section 3 concludes.           Overall, the
multifactor affine models with volatility spikes do a reasonably good job of matching the
                                                     4


properties of intradaily and daily S&P 500 futures returns, especially as more factors are added.
Furthermore, the most general 3-factor model captures the occasionally extreme observations of
realized variance reasonably well; and those are when extreme daily stock market returns occur.
The models do underpredict the frequency of small realized variance observations, indicating
that some specification error remains.

1. Data and models

1.1. Data

        S&P 500 futures began trading at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) on April 21,
1982, using the open-outcry pit trading prevailing at the CME at that time for all futures
contracts. Initial trading hours were 9 AM to 3:15 PM Central Standard Time, with CME pit
trading typically extending 15 minutes beyond trading at the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE).2 On September 30, 1985, the NYSE and CME shifted the opening time by a half-hour,
to 8:30 AM CST. Starting in December 1990, both the NYSE and CME instituted fewer trading
hours on trading days adjacent to Christmas, the Fourth of July, and Thanksgiving.

        In 1992, the CME introduced after-hours electronic trading through its Globex trading
platform. In 1997, the CME introduced “E-mini” S&P 500 futures contracts, which were 1/5th
the size of regular S&P 500 futures contracts and traded exclusively on Globex, including during
the day.     Trading activity switched increasingly to electronic trading via Globex, which
accounted for 84% of CME group volume by 2011.3

        The CME provides data in two formats: “End-of-Day” daily summaries and “Time and
Sales” data. The former contains open, high, low, close, and settlement prices, as well as volume
and open interest, while the latter contains the time and price of every daily transaction in which
the price changed from the previous transaction. Bid and ask prices are also recorded when the
bid price is above or the ask price is below the price of the previous transaction. No information
is provided regarding the volume of transactions at a particular price. I acquired both sets of data
for the original full-sized S&P 500 futures contract for January 3, 1983 through December 31,


2
  The CME and NYSE closed at the same time over October 23 through November 6, 1987, in the aftermath of the
1987 stock market crash.
3
  CME Group, “Twenty Years of CME Globex,” June 21, 2012. (http://www.cmegroup.com/education/files/globex-
retrospective-2012-06-12.pdf).
                                                  5


2013. I discarded the bid and ask data, and also transactions that were subsequently cancelled.
The data over 1983-2008 are used for parameter estimation, whereas those over 2009-2013 are
used for out-of-sample testing.

          S&P 500 futures contracts typically mature on the third Friday of March, June,
September and December – except for March 2008 contracts, which matured a day earlier
because of Good Friday. Of the available maturities, I selected the shortest maturity with nine or
more days until the third Friday, that being the most actively traded contract according to the
“End of Day” volume data. For instance, I used data for March 1983 futures maturing on March
18, 1983 up to the close of trading on Wednesday, March 9. Prices of June 1983 contracts were
then used for computing overnight futures returns from Wednesday to Thursday, and for
intradaily and overnight returns from Thursday, March 10 to the close of trading on Wednesday,
June 8.

          I constructed intradaily 15-minute log-differenced futures prices broadly along the lines
of the 5-minute futures returns in Chan et al (1991) and Andersen and Bollerslev (1997), by
taking the last observed future price in every 15-minute interval. 15-minute returns were used
instead of 5-minute primarily to triple optimization speed on this large data set, but also to span
some of the short-duration price limit constraints on futures returns over 1989-2002 that are
discussed below. For after-hours trading, I extended the time window by one minute, typically
up through 3:16 PM CST, because trades were often recorded shortly after trading had officially
ended. Overnight futures returns were constructed as the difference between the log of the
futures price at the end of the first 15-minute trading session (typically 8:30 – 8:45 AM CST)
and the log of the futures price of comparable maturity at the end of the preceding day. This
approach allows some time for the incorporation of overnight news into the futures price, during
the especially volatile initial fifteen minutes of trading. Furthermore, skipping the first 15
minutes when computing overnight returns spans possible constraints on opening futures prices
from the price limit system instituted by the CME in 1989. The final data set consists of 6,557
overnight returns and 168,297 intradaily returns, from December 31, 1982’s closing price
through December 31, 2008.

          The CME’s price limit system was created in response to the stock market crash of
October 19, 1987, and paralleled the NYSE’s “circuit breaker” system. The CME’s price limits
                                                       6


typically involved four prespecified constraints: a relatively tight initial band relative to the
previous day’s short-maturity S&P 500 futures settlement price that temporarily constrained both
upward and downward moves at the open, and three progressively lower price limits (Levels 1
through 3) that temporarily constrained downward moves during the day. Hitting a price limit
triggers a specific time interval during which the price limit remains in effect, followed by a two-
minute trading halt if the price limit is binding (“locked limit”), followed by the resumption of
trading with a new and lower price limit in effect. For instance, price change constraints over
1989-1996 were 5, 12, 20, and 30 points, respectively, over which time the S&P 500 index rose
from 300 to 700. The 5-point opening limit lasted only until 8:40, with a trading halt from 8:40
to 8:42 if binding. A 12-point downward move triggered an interval lasting 30 minutes or until
2:30 PM CST, during which time futures contracts could be traded at or above the limit but not
below. If the price limit was binding at the end of the interval, a two-minute trading halt was
declared, followed by the resumption of trading with the 20-point lower limit in place. Hitting
the 20-point downward limit started another interval of 30 minutes or until 2:30, followed by a
trading halt (if still binding) and the 30-point limit taking effect for the remainder of the day.
Separate rules applied if the futures price was locked limit at the close of the preceding day.

        Limits on the opening price change were removed on October 15, 1997, as part of a
revision in the circuit breaker system. The levels of permissible downward price changes
changed over time, partly because of the rise and fall in the level of the S&P 500. In addition,
the price constraints were significantly widened on May 13, 2001 to roughly 5%, 10%, and 15%
of the end-of-quarter S&P 500 level, with roughly 20% being the maximal permissible daily
price movement. These limits were relaxed further in January 2008 to 10%, 20% and 30%,
respectively, to be consistent with the Dow Jones-based percentages used on the NYSE. (A 5%
price limit remained on after-hours trading on Globex.) These revisions in 2001 and 2008
considerably reduced the frequency of trading halts, with an apparent absence of such halts in
intradaily data over 2003-2008.4 Even the 10.4% intradaily drop in the December 2008 futures
price on October 15, 2008, to 898.5 from October 14’s settlement price of 1002.3, did not exceed



4
John Nyhoff at the CME kindly provided me with a list of dates and times when the S&P 500 futures price limits
were hit. Stroud and Johannes (2014) note that the GLOBEX-traded E-mini contract hit its overnight limit on
October 24, 2008.
                                                        7


the 120-point limit that the CME had set on September 30, 2008 as the 10% limit for the fourth
quarter of 2008.

        The corresponding time intervals triggered by hitting a price limit were also shortened to
roughly 15 minutes in 1996, and to roughly 10 minutes in 1997. However, longer halts could
ensue contingent upon trading halts at the NYSE. The major such incident was the tripping of all
three levels of NYSE circuit breakers on October 27, 1997.

        Trading at the CME also halted sometimes because of exogenous events in New York or
Chicago. For instance, the explosion of a Con Edison transformer in New York delayed the open
of the NYSE and CME on December 27, 1990. On April 13, 1992, the accidental flooding of
utility tunnels in Chicago shut down the CME, but not the NYSE.5 Both the NYSE and CME
closed following the attacks on September 11, 2001, and did not reopen until September 17.

        Price limits can artificially constrain observed futures returns. Consequently, I extended
the time interval whenever a price limit was hit until that limit had expired and was no longer
potentially binding on the futures price. Similarly, I extended time intervals whenever trading
was suspended until trading had resumed, and computed returns over the expanded interval. For
instance, the CME suspended trading at 11:15 AM CST on October 20, 1987, the day after the
1987 stock market crash;6 and the December 1987 futures price rebounded when the trading
resumed at 12:05 PM. I combined returns over 11:15 AM to 12:15 PM into a single one-hour
interval, with an associated log-differenced futures price of 13.76%.7 There were 103 instances
over 1983-2008 of expanded time intervals, out of 174,859 total observations.

        The gravitation of trading activity to the smaller “E-mini” Globex-traded S&P futures
contract did affect the quality of the data on the larger S&P 500 contract used for out-of-sample
testing over 2009-13.           In particular, 15-minute intervals without transactions occurred
increasingly frequently: 5 in 2011, 37 in 2012, and 166 in 2013. These cases were treated as
missing observations, with the return horizon expanded until a transaction was recorded.

5
  A list of market closings at the NYSE is available at http://www.nyse.com/pdfs/closings.pdf. Additional CME
trading suspensions were identified by searching the data for periods without reported trades, and matching them
against news reports.
6
  See Carlson (2006, p.11).
7
  Andersen and Bollerslev (1997) follow Chan et al (1991) in omitting data over October 15 through November 13,
1987. They also linearly interpolate prices when data are missing, yielding roughly identical successive 5-minute
returns.
                                                  8


1.2. Models

        I model the continuous-time process for the log futures price                         ln    underlying
observed intradaily and overnight S&P 500 futures returns as a potentially multifactor affine
jump-diffusion of the form


                                      ½
                                                                                                           (1)


                                          for    1,

where      and       are Wiener processes with correlation , the             ’s are Poisson counters with
stochastic intensities     that depend linearly upon the variance state variables, and
1 is the expected percentage jump size.


        A key empirical issue is how many state variables are necessary to adequately summarize
the evolution of futures prices. Potential specifications are categorized as SVJ(I,J,K) models,
where I is the number of underlying state variables                  ,…,           ′ that determine diffusive
variance and jump intensities; J is the number of synchronous jump processes for futures prices
and variance state variables; and       1 is the number of jump processes for futures prices only.


        Furthermore, the underlying state variables are divided into a core jump-diffusive
variance state variable       and additional pure-jump state variables                   that capture transient
variance shocks. Log futures jump distributions are modeled as in Duffie, Pan and Singleton
(2000; henceforth DPS) as                             , where        ~         ̅         is the exponentially
distributed jump in spot variance conditional upon              1,       ~         ̅ ,       is an independent
normal shock, and         captures the degree to which synchronous jumps in futures prices and
variance covary. The Poisson counter            identifies futures price jumps (with a               -sensitive
jump intensity) that are unaccompanied by volatility jumps – an extension that substantially
improves overall fits.
                                                      9


         The multifactor specification for     in equation (1) allows considerable flexibility in how
S&P futures and total diffusive spot variance can evolve. Whereas univariate models such as
DPS must have invariant jump distributions to be affine, multivariate models allow the
distributions of jumps in stock market returns and in total diffusive spot variance to vary as the
components of          change. Those components can have different degrees of persistence, and
different correlations with contemporaneous stock market returns.


         Affine models such as (1) imply that the joint cumulant generating function of returns
                  and future spot variances           conditional upon current          is affine in   ,

                                Φ, | ,         ln         e              |
                                                                                                           (2)
                                                     τ; Φ,           τ; Φ,          .

      ;∙ and     ;∙ solve a system of ordinary differential equations, with known analytical
solutions for two broad cases: the stochastic-intensity models of Bates (2000) without variance
jumps, and the constant-intensity model of Duffie, Pan, and Singleton (2000) with variance
jumps. The more general specifications in which volatility jumps affect the intensity of future
jumps – e.g., the “self-exciting” volatility-jump models of Carr and Wu (2008) and Andersen,
Fusari and Todorov (2015) – lack known analytical solutions for                   ;∙ and     ;∙ , which must
be evaluated numerically.

         Self-exciting jumps are plausibly a major explanation for the intradaily development of
major daily outliers.      I consequently use intermediate volatility-jump models with jump
intensities

                                                      ∗            for       1                             (3)
                                                      ∗          ∗ for       1.

The jump intensities       for each Poisson counter           are assumed constant within each intradaily
or overnight period, reset at the end of every period, and depend upon the spot variance levels
  ∗   prevailing at the start of the period. This allows jumps to be self-exciting across periods,
while retaining the analytic tractability of the constant-intensity DPS model. The recursive
structure in (3) for      1 allows the initiation of additional self-exciting volatility components
to depend upon the level of core volatility      .
                                                                   10


           By iterated expectations, the joint conditional cumulant generating function of future
returns                            and future spot variances                   conditional upon observing past data
             ,…,        is of the form

                                    Φ, |         ,       ln       exp Φ            ′          |
                                                                                                                             (4)
                                                              Φ, ;             |       Φ, ;

where        |         ≡ ln                  is the cumulant generating function of                   conditional upon data
     . The precise functional forms of                   ∙ and          ∙ for the SVJ(I,J,K) models are given in the
Appendix.

1.3 Rounding models and filtration

           Because S&P 500 futures had a price tick size of 0.05 through October 31, 1997, and
0.10 thereafter, observed intradaily futures returns are not drawn from a continuous distribution.
Indeed, 5% of all intradaily 15-minute returns over 1983-2008 are exactly zero despite
intervening intraperiod price changes,8 while 42% are over a range of ±5 price ticks.
Consequently, the above continuous-time models are assumed to represent the underlying
conditional distribution of futures returns; and those returns are rounded to the futures returns
actually observed.9 The scaled probability of an observed log futures return                                        ln         /
       over a horizon of length           is computed via Fourier inversion as the integrated conditional
density of all future realizations falling within ±½ price tick of the observed                           :

                                      ∈              ,        |


                          1            , ;                 , ;                                                               (5)
                                                     |                                            Φ
                         2
                                             ½                                ½
                 for          ln                     ,            ln               , and          one price tick.


Parameters are then estimated by maximizing the log likelihood function ln                                ∑ ln            , using
the AML filtration methodology discussed below for recursive updating of                                       |    ∙ .     The

8
    There were on average 30 price changes per period for those intradaily periods with a futures return of zero.
9
    See Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997, Section 3.3.2) for an overview of rounding models.
                                                  11


computed probabilities are scaled by                         to make the results comparable in magnitude to

log likelihood values based upon conditional probability densities.

       The conditional moment generating function                         |               exp         |       that summarizes
what is known about         at time t can be updated recursively over time via a straightforward
extension of the Approximate Maximum Likelihood (AML) methodology in Bates (2006, 2012):

                                  1            , ;                            , ;
                   |
                                                                  |                                            Φ.        (6)
                              2


Derivatives of Eq. (6) provide the noncentral posterior moments of                                    conditional upon adding
the latest datum       to the data set :

                                                                      |
                                      ,                                                       .                          (7)




       As in Bates (2006, 2012), the distribution of the latent                       ’s conditional upon information
   are modeled as independent and conditionally gamma, with joint conditional cumulant
generating function


                                                              ln 1                    .                                  (8)
                                      |



For an additional datum        , Equations (5) to (7) are used to update the posterior moments

                                      ,       ≡      ,        |                 ,         ,
                                                                                                                         (9)
                                      ,       ≡          ,    |                 ,         ,       .

From these are computed the parameters               ,        ,       ,         for               1, … ,   that summarize the
conditional CGF         |         for      . The algorithm is initiated using moment-matching
unconditional gamma distributions for the initial             .
                                                            12


1.4 Intradaily and overnight seasonals

        The effective length of any time interval of course differs for overnight and intradaily 15-
minute returns. In addition, there are intradaily variations in trading activity and volatility, as
well as day-of-the-week effects for intradaily and overnight effects. Finally, the actual length of
a given trading day occasionally varies because of late openings or early closings – especially the
half-day trading that began in December 1990 on specific days adjacent to Christmas, the Fourth
of July, and Thanksgiving.

        Wednesday was arbitrarily selected as the benchmark day, with Tuesday close to
Wednesday close representing one full business day. The effective division between overnight
returns (including the first 15 minutes of intradaily market trading) and intradaily returns (for the
remainder of the day, typically until 3:16 PM CST) was estimated as variance proportions
 1         ,           , respectively. Calendar time t increases on day n, time segment m by a daily
amount 252        constructed as follows:

                    1              exp           ′         overnight m     0
                                  exp        ,
     252                                                    exp     ′     intradaily m    0        (10)
                              ∑     exp              ,
                   5              exp                    for Sept. 10 ‐17, 2001 close to open

where          are day-of-the-week, holiday, and weekend dummies for overnight returns;              are
day-specific dummies for intradaily returns, including a half-day indicator for holiday-adjacent
shortened trading days; and             is the number of 15-minute segments available on day n after the
opening segment.

        The function          ,         follows Andersen and Bollerslev (1997) in using Gallant’s (1981)
flexible Fourier form approach to estimate the intradaily variance pattern:


                          ,                                                    1
                                                                                                   (11)
                                                             2                 2
                                                        13


where                             1 /2,                            1            2 /6, and 1          is an
indicator of the after-hours trading segment, typically at                  .10

           As discussed above, there were 102 occasions over 1989-2002 when intradaily futures
returns were constrained by endogenous price limits or exogenous market closings. In such
cases, I aggregated log futures returns over additional periods until the trading constraint or
market closing was no longer in effect, and treated the yearly time interval associated with that
aggregate log return as the sum of the spanned               ’s. This approach is equivalent when filtering
volatility to treating the subintervals of that full interval as missing observations.

           Table 1 contains the Vjump1b estimates of the parameters affecting intradaily and
overnight variance patterns, while Figure 1 shows the composite effect. Results from other
models were almost identical. Overnight trading (including trading in the first 15 minutes of
Wednesday morning) typically accounts for 18.7% of the return variance from Tuesday close to
Wednesday close.           Intradaily trading over the remainder of Wednesday accounts for the
remaining 81.7%. These patterns are roughly comparable for other days of the week. As shown
in Figure 1 and in the Table 1 estimates, there is a U-shaped weekly pattern to overnight return
variance and an inverse U-shaped pattern to intradaily variance, with the sum of the two
imparting a roughly flat but slightly increasing trend in business-day variance across the week.
Holidays during the week or as part of a holiday weekend substantially increase the variance of
“overnight” returns that span those holidays.

           Figure 2 shows the intradaily variance pattern for separate 15-minute returns over 8:45
AM through 3:16 PM, excluding the initial 8:30 – 8:45 interval.                      The roughly U-shaped
intradaily pattern replicates Andersen and Bollerslev’s (1997) Figure 6b, which was estimated on
5-minute S&P 500 futures returns using a GARCH model. Variance peaks in the afternoon at
2:15 – 2:30 PM CST and falls off thereafter, especially in the after-hours 3 – 3:15 PM trading
segment. Andersen and Bollerslev emphasize that it is critical to account for this periodic
intradaily pattern, which if ignored would strongly affect estimates of variance mean reversion.
Accounting for this intradaily periodicity is also important when estimating jump risk.
Substantial distributional mixing is occurring, with opening and closing returns having roughly


10
     There was no after-hours session on October 23 through November 6, 1987.
                                                14


double the variance (40% higher volatility) of mid-day returns. Failing to account for this
distributional mixing would exaggerate the conditional leptokurtosis of 15-minute returns, and
boost the estimated magnitudes of intradaily jump risk.

1.4 Volatility and jump parameter estimates

Table 2 contains estimates of the other jump-diffusion parameters that describe how diffusive
spot variances         evolve, and the distributions of jumps. Five models are considered, all
sequentially nested:

Model       Variance processes                       Jumps in log futures prices
SVJ1        One-factor diffusive process for         Normally distributed jumps, with   -
                                                     dependent jump intensity.

Vjump1a     One-factor jump-diffusion                Jumps are correlated with   jumps, and
                                                     have a   -dependent jump intensity.

Vjump1b     One-factor jump-diffusion                Two jumps: one uncorrelated with
                                                     jumps, one correlated. Both have -
                                                     dependent intensities.

Vjump2      Two-factor       additive     variance Three jumps, with the last two correlated
            process.           follows a jump- with        and     jumps, respectively.
            diffusion, while       is a pure-jump
            volatility spike process.
Vjump3      Three-factor    additive     variance Four jumps, with the last three correlated
            process.          follows a jump- with       , , and       jumps, respectively.
            diffusion, while        and       are
            pure-jump volatility spike processes.

        Comparing the models in Table 2 and in Figure 3 indicates two important sources of
overall improvement in fit. First is the issue of accurately modeling high-frequency price
changes of 0-5 ticks, which account for 42% of the data.          Of primary importance is the
introduction in model Vjump1b of a second futures jump component             that is uncorrelated
with variance jumps. This futures jump component is estimated as a high-frequency small-
amplitude jump component in Vjump1b, and is even higher in frequency and smaller in
amplitude for the more general Vjump2 and Vjump3 models (Table 2, Panel C).                 While
observationally equivalent for daily returns to just scaling up diffusive variance      , the
futures jump component helps model the 15-minute price changes of 0-5 ticks more precisely.
                                                         15


         Second is the impact of the 1987 crash. Better modeling of intradaily developments on
October 19 and 20 accounts for almost a quarter of the full-sample improvement in log
likelihood of the most general Vjump3 model versus SVJ1. The more general models also fit the
fall of 2008 progressively better, indicating the two largest stock market crises over 1983-2008
are substantially influencing parameter estimation. Turbulent markets at other times (the first
Gulf War, fall 1997, fall 1998, post-9/11/2001) do not appear to have had as distinct an impact
on log likelihood fits. However, log likelihoods are generally increasing throughout the full
1983-2008 sample.

         The more general models also have better fits over the out-of-sample 2009-13 period.
The progressively better fits of the Vjump1b, Vjump2 and Vjump3 models out-of-sample are
entirely attributable to better modeling of 0-5 tick price movements.

         The multifactor Vjump2 and Vjump3 models have progressively richer descriptions of
variance dynamics relative to the nested Vjump1b model. In particular, these two models
indicate that substantial and self-exciting volatility spikes are an important component of
volatility evolution. In the Vjump2 estimates,                is typically near zero and has a          -dependent
intensity that averages out to                          = 48 jumps per year. If a variance jump occurs of
average size 0.07,         increases to . 265         and the jump intensity increases by               ̅         1486
jumps/year, or 6 jumps/day.             This increase in jump intensity implies that                        ̅ /
     ̅       3.0 additional variance jumps are expected from every average-sized jump in                            .11
Furthermore, the positively skewed exponential distribution can have                       jumps that are two or
three times the average jump magnitude ̅ , with corresponding projections of six or nine
additional variance jumps. The associated futures price jumps are roughly mean-zero, with a
standard deviation of 0.36% and a strongly negative correlation (-.92) with the magnitude of the
variance jumps. The              spikes resulting from variance jumps are highly transient, with an
estimated half-life of roughly 1/3 day.

         The Vjump3 model decomposes variance jumps into small, medium, and large sizes, with
different properties and different associations with the futures returns from which they are

11
  This calculation is based upon a continuous-time stochastic intensity                              , with reversion
rate             ̅ for   . The increase in expected future jumps (from an increase in expected future jump
intensities) is approximately equal to but less than the number when jump intensities are constant within periods.
                                                      16


filtered. The moderately frequent            jumps of average size 0.070 in the Vjump2 model are
divided further in the Vjump3 model into frequent jumps in              of average size 0.022, and more
rare jumps in          with average size 0.076. The           jumps have little self-propagation, die off
rapidly within the day (half-life of 0.08 days), and primarily add additional and transient noise to
the combined spot variance process                   . The large and relatively rare    jumps have a -0-
.76 correlation with associated log futures jumps             ~     0.2%, 1.0%     , indicating they are
inferred from the largest 15-minute or overnight futures returns.            reverts towards zero with a
half-life of 1.6 days, implying some spillover across days. Sequences of                 jumps typically
initiate from near-zero values of         , with a      -dependent intensity that averages out to
               = 7.4 jumps per year. Conditional upon initiation, each average-sized                jump
generates an expected additional 4.9 jumps, through its impact on expected future jump
intensities.

        Define          as the total impact of the state variable     upon diffusive and jump variance,
using the variance factor loadings of Table 2, Panel D.               Figure 4 graphs the incremental
contributions of those total variance components to end-of-day total spot volatility
                ½
                    over 1983-2013. The total estimated number of jumps each day (close to close) is
also graphed, using a filtration procedure described in Bates (2006, Appendix A.4) for each
intradaily and overnight period.        The graph indicates that major but substantially transient
volatility spikes from          jumps tend to occur when core volatility               is relatively high.
Furthermore, the volatility spikes are typically the outcome of multiple synchronous jumps in log
futures prices and underlying volatility. For instance, the -32.7% change in the log futures price
on October 19, 1987 from the previous Friday’s closing value was the result of an estimated 34
jumps in        . The +5.7% and +17.4% returns on October 20 and 21 were the outcome of 97 and
52 jumps in         , respectively. The turbulent and predominantly falling market in the fall of 2008
was similarly the result of multiple intradaily and overnight jumps in                     and        that
accompanied predominantly negative stock market jumps.

        Figure 5 shows the intradaily evolution of the three factors over October 12-30, 1987. A
declining stock market over the week of October 12-16, including an accelerating drop on
Friday, October 16, set the stage for the stock market crash of October 19. A volatility spike
began developing late on Friday afternoon, and was stimulated further by the futures price
                                                 17


opening 5.8% down on the morning of October 19. Substantial intradaily drops over October 19
generated further substantial estimated increases in the volatility-spike factor             , which
ended the day at roughly 193% annualized (2.1% per quarter-hour). Major market turbulence on
October 20 contributed to further estimated increases in                , which peaked at 282%
annualized (3.1% per quarter-hour) at midday before ultimately declining in the afternoon and on
October 21. S&P 500 futures prices opened 13.7% down on October 22, prompting another
short-lived volatility burst that decayed as the market rebounded and stabilized.

1.5 Return diagnostics

       Whether the above models are broadly capturing the conditional distributions of returns
can be examined by looking at the normalized returns                                    ,    , where
        is the conditional cumulative distribution function derived from the specified models and
computed by Fourier inversion of the associated conditional characteristic functions. Under
correct model specification, these residuals are independent draws from a           0,1 distribution.
Table 3 reports in-sample summary statistics for the ’s from various models, while Figure 6
presents related normal probability plots. Normalized returns are computed at two horizons: for
intradaily and overnight returns conditional upon past data, and for future daily returns (close-to-
close) conditional upon past intradaily and overnight data up through the close of the preceding
day.

       Table 3 and Figure 6 indicate that the multifactor models are doing an increasingly good
job in-sample of capturing conditional distributions at the intradaily/overnight frequencies used
when estimating the models. The first four moments in all cases are roughly those of a standard
normal distribution, although there are statistically significant deviations in all cases. The graphs
in the first column of Figure 6 show that the multifactor models Vjump2 and Vjump3 help
capture intradaily outliers, which are often substantially sequential. Both models do well for |z|-
values less than 4, but have some difficulty in capturing the extreme tails (|z| > 4). The Vjump2
model underpredicts extreme negative returns while the Vjump3 model overpredicts those
returns; and both models underpredict extreme positive returns (z>4) in Figure 6.

       The Table 3 statistics for daily data indicate that the one-factor variance models Vjump1a
and Vjump1b have difficulty in capturing the stock market crash of October 19, 1987. Whereas
                                                 18


the Vjump1b model partially explains any single 15-minute intradaily outlier, the probability
under that model of observing the sequence of outliers that culminated in the overall -32.7%
change in log futures prices is low – the equivalent to observing a -7 standard deviation draw
from a standard normal distribution. By contrast, the 2-factor model Vjump2 successfully
captures the 1987 outlier as a volatility spike that is plausible under the (in-sample) parameter
estimates. The Vjump3 model does even better at capturing that one day – at the expense of a
generally worse fit for negative daily returns (z<0) in Figure 6.

       Autocorrelation estimates for        and | | are also given in Table 3, as tests of the
independence implications of a correctly-fitted model. All models have a small but statistically
significant negative autocorrelation in intradaily/overnight normalized returns – a result
reflecting a small negative autocorrelation in the original log-differenced futures prices.
Autocorrelations in absolute normalized returns are reduced (although still statistically
significant) under the Vjump2 and Vjump3 models, indicating the multifactor models capture
intradaily volatility dynamics better. At the daily horizon, the autocorrelation in normalized
returns is smaller, and is not statistically significant.           All models have a statistically
significant -7% autocorrelation in daily normalized absolute returns | |, indicating room for
improvement in the models’ implications for daily volatility dynamics.

2. Realized variance

2.1 Data description

       Define


                                            ln            ln                                      (12)
                                                 ,             ,



as the daily realized variance on date n from        sequential intradaily time intervals that begin 15
minutes after pit trading in the S&P 500 futures contract opens, and are typically 15 minutes in
duration. Because the effective length of the intradaily trading period varies on a daily basis, it is
desirable to rescale realized variance by the aggregate intradaily time interval
                                                 19



                               252       252                exp                                (13)



where exp                are the intradaily day-of-the-week effects reported in Table 1, and 252
converts the time units from yearly to daily. In particular,


                                                                                               (14)
                                                      252

is the realized volatility on a daily (24-hour) basis that can be compared to conditional volatility
assessments from daily close-to-close returns. The major impact of the daily 252        rescaling is
to eliminate the impact of half-days adjacent to holidays, which would otherwise look like
realized volatility inliers.

        Table 4 describes characteristics of various transforms of realized volatility, while
Figures 7A and 7B graph realized variance and volatility. Realized variance is an extremely
skewed and leptokurtic random variable, with especially pronounced outliers during October 19-
22, 1987. By contrast, a log transform for volatility (or variance) appears substantially better
behaved: substantially less pronounced skewness and excess kurtosis in Table 4, and more
discernable persistence in Figure 7B. Indeed, Figure 7B appears to offer significant support for
the 2-factor log variance process estimated on daily data by Chernov, Gallant, Ghysels and
Tauchen (2003), in contrast to the affine specifications explored here. However, as discussed in
Appendix A.3, this paper’s extended DPS volatility-jump model implies a heavy-tailed
distribution for realized variance, which is potentially compatible with the occasional extreme
outliers in Figure 7A.

        A Box-Jenkins analysis indicates realized variance follows an ARMA(3,1) process, using
a Bayes information criterion for model selection. The statistical reliability of the least-squares
ARMA estimation methodology is questionable given the extreme nonnormality of realized
variance data. Nevertheless, the result is supportive of the Vjump3 model, which implies an
ARMA(3,2) process for realized variance.
                                                                  20


2.2 The Fourier transform of realized variance

        As illustrated in Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2007), the realized variance literature
relies heavily upon the asymptotic convergence of realized variance to quadratic variation as the
sampling frequency increases.              Over short intervals of length                , squared log returns are
approximately the intraperiod quadratic variation:



                                                                                                                 (15)
                                                                                             .


The mean and variance of the divergence are of order                                for jump-diffusions with finite-
activity jumps, such as those considered in this paper. Consequently, the divergence of daily
realized variance computed using / intradaily squared log returns from intradaily quadratic
variation has mean and variance of order                          , yielding asymptotic convergence.

        Quadratic variation is an affine random variable for affine processes. The joint Fourier
transform of integrated future                     and of future                   conditional upon current           is
exponentially affine in         , with an analytical form derived in Appendix A.3 for the processes in
this paper. This joint Fourier transform provides an approximate joint cumulant generating
function for intradaily realized variance and of end-of-day spot variances conditional upon the
data    ,    available at the end of the previous day:

                 ln                          ,        |       ,
                                                                                                                 (16)
                                                 Φ,       ;                 ,           Φ,   ;      ,


where                 ,       ,…,     ,          is the vector of overnight and intradaily time intervals on
date        1, and        ,         ≡ ln              ,
                                                                    ,    is the joint cumulant generating function
given above in Equation (7) for the end-of-day spot variances                       ,    conditional upon data    ,

through the end of the day. The accuracy of this approximation is examined below, for the 15-
minute sampling frequency used in this paper.
                                                   21


        The joint cumulant generating function (16) provides several additional diagnostics of the
merits of the proposed affine processes. First, it is possible to recursively generate filtered
estimates     |   of total end-of-day latent variance from daily observations of intradaily realized
variance, using the same AML methodology used above with intradaily returns. While daily
realized variance perforce contains less information than the intradaily returns from which it is
computed, the information loss may possibly be viewed as tolerable relative to the significant
costs of developing a microstructure model consistent with those intradaily returns.

        The magnitude of the information loss for total end-of-day spot variance is reported in
Table 5, conditional upon the returns-based parameter estimates of Table 2. Returns-based
filtration has an 18% lower error (average conditional variance of residuals) than RV-based
filtration under Vjump2 model, and 31% lower under the Vjump3 model.                   However, the
theoretical filtration     ’s are close: 56% versus 48% for the Vjump2 model, and 85% versus
79% for the Vjump3 models. Realized variances can indeed subsume most of the information of
intradaily returns.

        Second, analytical or numerical derivatives of the joint cumulant generating function (16)
provide conditional forecasts of future realized variances. Table 6 compares next-day realized
variance forecasts with those from two other methodologies: ARMA models fitted to daily
realized variance data, and the HAR-RV-J regressions of Andersen, Bollerslev, and Diebold
(2003, Table 2B), who use bipower variation to decompose realized variance into diffusive and
jump components:


                                      ln   ,       ln   ,     ln    ,        ln   ,
                         2 252                                                                 (17)

                         max 0,                .


        Over the full 1983-2008 interval, filtered realized variance forecasts outperformed the
ARMA approach. The superior performance was especially pronounced for the Vjump3 model,
whose       of 0.271 substantially exceeded the ARMA’s        of 0.130. The ABD approach applied
to 15-minute returns did even better in-sample, with an      of 0.306.
                                                    22


         However, the ABD regression approach lacks subsample stability.              Out-of-sample
performance over 2009-13 is abysmal, while an HAR-RV-J model fitted as in ABD (2003) to the
1990-2002 period does well over the quieter 2009-13 period but much worse over the full 1983-
2008 period. The problem is the extreme outliers in 1987, which heavily affect regression fits
and performances in-sample versus out-of-sample. The ARMA(3,1) and Vjump time series
models categorize outliers better, and forecast substantially better than the ABD approach during
the quieter out-of-sample 2009-13 period.

         Finally, how well the proposed models match the overall conditional distributions of RV
realizations can be evaluated via normal probability plots, in the same fashion used above in
Figure      6     for     intradaily        and   daily     returns.       Normalized       residuals

                                  ,    ,Θ    were generated using quadratic variation CDFs evaluated
by Fourier inversion of a transform of Eq. (15), evaluated at           . Their statistical properties
are summarized in Table 7, while the corresponding normal probability plots are in Figure 8. As
a further diagnostic, comparable statistics and normal probability plots were generated from 100
runs of simulated intradaily data over 1983-2008, using model-specific parameter estimates and
estimated time gaps.

         Three results stand out. First, quadratic variation’s theoretical CDFs (green dotted line in
Figure 8) match realized-variance CDFs from simulated data (solid red line) for median and
above-median RV values, but not for below-median values. Quadratic variation is an imperfect
approximation to 15-minute realized variance, especially with regard to the frequency of RV
inliers. However, QV-based conditional CDF’s accurately capture the theoretical frequency of
RV outliers from simulated data; and those outliers are when extreme daily stock market returns
are observed.

         Second, the more general models match the conditional distributions better, when
compared with simulation-based benchmarks that correct the biases of the QV-based CDF’s.
The Vjump2 model substantially reduces the frequency of RV inliers and outliers, relative to the
Vjump1b model. The Vjump3 model captures RV outliers event better than the Vjump2 model,
but does slightly worse with regard to RV inliers. In all cases, however, the RV realization of
 26.9%      on October 20, 1987 remains a major positive outlier.
                                                  23


       Finally, even the most general Vjump3 model has substantial and statistically significant
deviations from simulation benchmarks, in Table 7 and Figure 8. While these affine models
capture the conditional distributions of daily returns reasonably well, as indicated in Figure 6,
there appears to be significant room for improvement in their predictions for the overall
conditional distributions of realized variances – especially the frequency of RV inliers. The
Vjump3 model does do a reasonably good job of capturing median, above-median, and extreme
RV realizations, however.

3. Summary and conclusions

       Finite-activity jump-diffusion models such as Merton (1976) posit that log-differenced
asset prices are drawn from a mixture of distributions, with major daily outliers the outcome of a
draw from a higher-volatility distribution. This model can be viewed as positing instantaneous
but instantaneously transitory spikes in intradaily and daily volatility. The intradaily evidence
does not support this description of volatility evolution. Instead, large daily market movements
are the accumulation over the day of a series of rapid and self-exciting intradaily increases in
conditional volatility, typically accompanied by a falling market.          Volatility can accelerate
rapidly from relatively low levels, and can subside quickly from high levels; but the shifts take
time to develop within a given day, and can spill over into subsequent days. These short-lived
volatility spikes affect both diffusive and jump volatility, with the former more important. The
initiation of a volatility spike is more likely when core volatility is already high.

       Furthermore, intradaily jumps tend to be small, with the largest ones in the Vjump3
model having a standard deviation of 1%. While these can look large at a 15-minute horizon,
they are small relative to the 4-6% daily returns occasionally observed, let alone the 28% drop in
December S&P 500 futures prices on October 19, 1987. It is the accumulation of higher
diffusive volatility and more frequent modest intradaily jumps that generates the major daily
outliers occasionally observed. These outliers are accompanied by sharp increases in observed
realized variance.

       The central intradaily dynamic proposed and estimated in this paper is self-exciting
intradaily volatility spikes that accompany modest and predominantly negative stock market
jumps. Such models have not to my knowledge been previously estimated on intradaily data; but
                                                24


somewhat similar models that have been estimated on daily data. Probably the closest to this
paper in spirit and results is Chernov et al (2003)’s two-factor diffusive log volatility process.
They find that daily stock market outliers are generated by the second volatility factor, which
possesses considerable volatility feedback and is negatively correlated with stock market returns.
Aït-Sahalia et al (2015) and Fulop et al (2015) estimate stock market processes with self-exciting
synchronous volatility and stock market jumps, using daily data. The generally lower number of
state variables in those specifications precludes the volatility spikes estimated in this paper.
Stroud and Johannes (2014) estimate multifactor models with synchronous volatility and stock
market jumps on 24-hour S&P 500 E-mini futures data over 2007-9; but their models have
constant-intensity rather than self-exciting jumps.

       More research on identifying intradaily jumps has been conducted in a nonparametric
framework, often building on the bipower variation approach of Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard
(2004, 2006). While this paper uses parametric rather than nonparametric estimation, it does
have two major implications for that literature.        First, the assumptions often underlying
nonparametric jump detectors are not empirically supported. Lee and Mykland (2008) assume
no volatility jumps; this paper finds pronounced intradaily volatility jumps. Barndorff-Nielsen
and Shephard allow for volatility jumps but assume no leverage effects; this paper finds
pronounced negative correlations between market returns and volatility increases. And although
Huang and Tauchen (2005) find their jump detector is insensitive to diffusive leverage, whether
such detectors are robust to negatively correlated and self-exciting jumps in volatility and asset
prices remains to be established.

       Second, applications of intradaily jump detectors to stock market data by Andersen et al
(2007) and Tauchen and Zhou (2011) largely focus on whether an identifiable jump occurred
within a given day. While of some use in rejecting the hypothesis of no jumps, a single
intradaily jump typically contributes little to overall daily variance. Intradaily stock market
jumps are modest in magnitude, as found in those papers and in this one. Their importance lies
more in their dynamic implications – a signal that future overall intradaily volatility from both
diffusive and jump sources is likely to rise substantially. It was such overall volatility increases
that generated the market moves exceeding 10% in magnitude in 1997 and 2008.
                                                 25


                                            References

Abramowitz, M., Stegun, I.A., 1972. Handbook of Mathematical Functions. Dover, 1972.
Aït-Sahalia, Y., Cacho-Diaz, J., Laeven, R.J.A., 2015. Modeling financial contagion using
mutually exciting jump processes. Journal of Financial Economics 117, 585-606.
Andersen, T.G., 2004. Discussion [of Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard, 2004]. Journal of
Financial Econometrics 2, 37-48.
Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., 1997. Intraday periodicity and volatility persistence in financial
markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 4, 115-158.
Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., 1997, Diebold, F.X., 2007. Roughing it up: Including jump
components in the measurement, modeling, and forecasting of return volatility. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 89, 701-720.
Andersen, T.G, Fusari, N., Todorov, V., 2015. The risk premia embedded in index options.
Journal of Financial Economics, 558-584.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E., Shephard, N., 2004. Power and bipower variation with stochastic
volatility and jumps. Journal of Financial Econometrics 2, 1-37.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E., Shephard, N., 2006. Econometrics of testing for jumps in financial
economics using bipower variation. Journal of Financial Econometrics 4, 1-30.
Bates, D.S., 2000. Post-’87 crash fears in the S&P 500 futures option market. Journal of
Econometrics 94, 181-238.
Bates, D.S., 2006. Maximum likelihood estimation of latent affine processes. Review of
Financial Studies 19, 909-965.
Bates, D.S., 2012. U.S. stock market crash risk, 1926-2012. Journal of Financial Economics
105, 229-259.
Calvet, L., Fisher, A.J, 2008. Multifractal volatility: theory, forecasting, and pricing.
Amsterdam, Academic Press.
Carlson, M., 2006. A brief history of the 1987 stock market crash, with a discussion of the
Federal Reserve response. Federal Reserve working paper, November.
Carr, P., Wu, L., 2008. Leverage effect, volatility feedback, and self-exciting market
disruptions: disentangling the multi-dimensional variations in S&P 500 index options. Baruch
College working paper.
Chan, K. Chan, K.C., Karolyi, G.A., 1991. Intraday volatility in the stock index and stock index
futures market. Review of Financial Studies 4, 657-684.
Chernov, M., Gallant, A..R., Ghysels, E., Tauchen, G., 2003. Alternative models for stock price
dynamics. Journal of Econometrics 116, 225-257.
                                                 26


Duffie, D., Pan, J., Singleton, K.J., 2000. Transform analysis and asset pricing for affine jump-
diffusions. Econometrica 68, 1343-1376.
Fulop, A., Li, J., Yu, J., 2015. Self-exciting jumps, learning, and asset pricing implications.
Review of Financial Studies 28, 876-912.
Gallant, A.R., 1981. On the bias in flexible functional forms and an essentially unbiased form:
The Fourier flexible form. Journal of Econometrics 15, 211-245.
Huang, X., Tauchen, G., 2005. The relative contribution of jumps to total price variance.
Journal of Financial Econometrics 3, 456-499.
Lee, S.S., Mykland, P.A., 2008. Jumps in financial markets: a new nonparametric test and jump
dynamics. Review of Financial Studies 21, 2535-2563.
Merton, R. C., 1976. Option pricing when underlying stock returns are discontinuous. Journal
of Financial Economics 3, 125-144.
Poppe, G.P.M., Wijers, C.M.J., 1990. More efficient computation of the complex error function.
ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 16, 38-46.
Stroud, J.R., Johannes, M.S., 2014. Bayesian modeling and forecasting of 24-hour high-
frequency volatility. Journal of the American Statistical Association 109, 1368-1384.
Tauchen, G., Zhou, H., 2011. Realized jumps on financial markets and predicting credit spreads.
Journal of Econometrics 160, 102-118.
                                                                     27


Appendix

A.1 Joint characteristic functions for futures prices and spot variance

         The fundamental building blocks for the multifactor and multi-jump models in this paper
are based on the single-factor Duffie, Pan, and Singleton (2000) model, which has constant-
intensity synchronous correlated jumps in log futures prices and in underlying spot variance:

                                                           ½
                                                                                                                                    (A.1)
                                                                                            .

       and           are Wiener processes with correlation ,                               is a Poisson counter with constant
intensity ,            ~            ̅ ) is the exponentially distributed jump in spot variance conditional upon
a jump, and                                  for       ~       ̅ ,        is the correlated jump in log futures prices
                                                                                                                               ½δ
conditional upon a jump, with expected percentage jump size                                                         1               / 1
   ̅             1. The key modification is to allow jump intensities to vary across periods, while
maintaining the DPS assumption of a constant intraperiod jump intensity.

         The generalized Fourier transform for future                                               ,           ,           and complex
   , ,           conditional upon current              is

                               τ; Φ, |       ≡       exp                                        |
                                                                                                                                    (A.2)
                                                 exp                             ;   , ,                ;   ,           .

       solves the backward Kolmogorov equation                                            0 associated with (A.1), implying
that         ;     and          ;   solve the following ordinary differential equations subject to                             0;         0
and      0;                :
                                                                             ,        ,
                                                                                                                                    (A.3)
                                                                     ½

where              ½                     ½       ,                       , and
                                                                               28


                     Φ,           ,        ≡                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                   (A.4)
                                               exp               ̅       ½
                                                                                                     1       .
                                                 1                                       ̅

     is used when estimating the number of jumps (Bates 2006, Appendix A.4), and is otherwise set
to zero. The solution for                      ;   is12
                                                                                                 ,       2                         (A.5)
                                                     ;       ,
                                                                                    ,Φ
where
                                                                                                     1
                                                         ,                                             and
                                                                                                     1                             (A.6)

                                                                                             2       .

The solution for          ;           is

                              ;       , ,                 Φ                          ;       ,                       ;   , ,       (A.7)

where

                                           ;   ,                               ;
                                                                     2                                   1
                                                                          ln 1                                                     (A.8)
                                                                                                             2
                                                         2
                                                                     ln 1
                                                                                     ,

                 ;    , ,                                ,               ; ,
                                                                                                                                   (A.9)
                                               ½                                                                 1
                                                                                   ln 1                                        1

for




12
  If jumps have stochastic intensity                , then    ; solves                       ½             ,     .
This is of cubic rather than quadratic order, and has an implicit but not explicit solution for ; , precluding rapid
evaluation. Self-exciting jump models typically have been solved numerically; e.g., Carr and Wu (2008).
                                                                              29



                                                               2 ̅                                                 ̅
                                                           2 ̅                                           ̅
                                                                                                                                                                               (A.10)
                                           2 ̅
                                                                          and
                            2 ̅           2 ̅
                            1         ̅        .

       For multifactor models, define                                         ;    ,         and                       ;        ,               as equations (A.8) and

(A.5) evaluated at the diffusive parameters                                                      ,       ,     , ,                      associated with variance

process      . For          1,       , ,                   and                         0. Let                              ,            ;        ,           ,           for     0 be

equation (A.4) evaluated at the jump parameters                                                              ̅ ,               , ̅ ,                 associated with jump

process      .   Its corresponding                                  ;     ,        ,         for                   0 is equations (A.9) – (A.10)

evaluated at parameters                    ,               ,            . Finally, let                                 ,                    exp                  ̅        ½

      1              for jump process                      (futures jumps unaccompanied by volatility jumps), with
associated              ;        ,                     ,        .        Because jump intensities are assumed constant
intraperiod, the generalized Fourier transform for future                                                                               ,                ,                conditional
upon current         is a multifactor extension of (A.2) and (A.7):

                             τ; Φ, |               ≡           exp                           ′                                              |

                 exp                                                                         ;       ,                                  ;        ,

                                                                                                                                                                               (A.11)
                                                                                         ′
                                               ;   ,                                                                                ;   ,            ,               .




A.2 Time aggregation

The assumption that jump intensities are constant intraperiod but vary across periods necessitates
a concatenated approach for multiperiod returns. By iterating expectations over (A.11), the
multiperiod conditional cumulant generating function
                                                                     30



           ln                          |                                                             ,       ,                     ,           ,             (A.12)



satisfies the backwards recursion


             ,           ;       ,         ,                                  ;                                                        ;   ,       ,


                                                                                                                                                             (A.13)
             ,           ;   ,             ,                              ;        ,             ,                           1


                 ,       ,                       ;       ,       ,                                       ;       ,           ,                     1

subject to the terminal condition                ,   ,       ,           0,                for           1, … , .



A.3 The joint Fourier transform of realized variance and future spot variances
A.3.1 Intraperiod quadratic variation

       Define        ≡                         as the quadratic variation of the log futures price for the
benchmark constant-intensity Duffie et al (2000) process (A.1) above. Its stochastic evolution is


                                                                                                                                                             (A.14)
                                                                                                                         ,

which is an affine system. Consequently, the generalized joint Fourier transform of future
quadratic variation and spot variance is an exponentially affine function of current                                                                   :

                             ,       ≡                               |    ,
                                                                                                                                                             (A.15)
                                           exp                                ;        ,                             ;       ,         V

for arbitrary complex            and            and                       .                      ∙ solves the backward Kolmogorov
equation             ∙   0 associated with (A.14), implying that                                                         ; ∙ and                       ; ∙ solve the
following recursive system of ordinary differential equations:
                                                                                                                                                             (A.16)
                                                     ½                                     subject to                            0;∙

                                                                                  1 subject to                               0,∙           0.                (A.17)
                                                              31


Equation (A.16) is of the same form as in (A.3).                               ;    ,       consequently has an analytical
expression given in equations (A.5) – (A.7) for                            and                .

         The expectation in (A.17) requires a solution for the joint Fourier transform of the
squared log futures jump               and the spot variance jump                       . Because       has an exponential

distribution,                                has a heavy-tailed distribution, with infinite values for the

moment generating function                            when Φ is real and positive. Quadratic variation                  is
consequently also heavy-tailed for the DPS process, although the conditional characteristic
function and moments of all orders exist. Integrating successively over the independent densities
of   ~      ̅ ,     and       ~          ̅    yields

                          ,       ≡                                    1

                                             1                         ̅
                                                           exp                                          1          (A.18)
                                      √1      2                            1       2

                                      exp                                  2                  ̅     1
                                                                                                            1
                                                  ̅            4                        2

where                         and                     . The function               for complex-valued z is the Fadeeva

or plasma-dispersion function (equation 7.1.3 in Abramowitz and Stegun (1972, p.297)). It is a
scaled version of the complex complementary error function (                                                     , and can
be evaluated using algorithm 680 of Poppe and Wijers (1990).13 Equation (A.18) is well-defined
for complex-valued            provided                       0 – which is not true for small positive real values
of Φ.




13
 Poppe and Wijers’ algorithm is accurate to 14 significant digits, whereas the complex-valued Faddeva function
ZERFE in IMSL is accurate to only 10 digits. Furthermore, ZERFE does not appear to be fully reliable for all
values of Φ, when compared with direct numerical integration over the exponential density.
                                                        32


              ;    ,       can be evaluated by integrating (A.17):

                   ;   ,                        ,                          ,       ,

                                                                                                              (A.19)
                                        ;   ,                         ,                    ,       ;   ,
                                                        2
                             ≡          ;   ,                     ;   ,

where             is the analytical solution                given above in equations (A.8) and (A.6), using
        and                . The approximation for                        uses trapezoidal integration, yielding a
                                                        3/2
numerical solution that is accurate to order                  .

A.3.2 Realized variance

        The divergence

                                                                                                              (A.20)


of per-period squared returns from quadratic variation has mean and variance of order                                  .
Consequently, the divergence
                                            /

                                                    Δ                                                         (A.21)



of daily realized variance from intradaily quadratic variation has mean and variance of order
     . Moments and other characteristics of realized variance can therefore be approximated by
the conditional characteristic function of daily quadratic variation.                          The use of trapezoidal
integration in (A.19) above reduces the accuracy of the resulting approximate conditional
characteristic function for realized variance to order                         √ , which is still asymptotically
convergent as intradaily time intervals go to zero.

        For the multi-state variable process (1) of this paper, per-period squared returns are
approximately

                                                                                       ,                      (A.22)
                                                                   33


with jump intensities                                     that are linear functions of        values at the beginning of
the period. Using a multifactor and multi-jump extension of the joint Fourier transform for
quadratic variation in equations (A.15) and (A.19) yields an approximate formula for the
generalized Fourier transform of squared returns variation and                                that is exponentially affine
in   :

             exp                                ′         |


                              τ;        ,                     τ;   ,
                                                                                                                   (A.23)


                                                                                         τ;     ,     .


         ,         are        ,              from (A.19) and (A.16) evaluated at the                diffusive parameters

of the ith spot variance process                      .                0 for    1 and is therefore omitted from the

summation.                         is               , 0 from (A.18) at jump parameters                    , including the

absence of volatility jumps                          ≡0 .                  is         from (A.19) evaluated at the

parameters                ,                 of the jth spot variance process      .

             Concatenating (A.23) backwards in time over a given day’s subintervals in a similar
fashion to (A.13) yields the generalized joint Fourier transform of future realized variance and
spot variances conditional upon current                       . I suppress overnight squared returns in the recursion
by setting               0 for the overnight period, when computing the joint transform of tomorrow’s
intradaily realized variance and end-of-day spot variances conditional upon information available
at the end of today. This joint transform can be used for conditional diagnostics of realized
variance, and for filtering end-of-day spot variance values conditional upon observed daily
realized variance.
                                                34


Table 1: Intradaily and overnight variance patterns of S&P futures returns; Vjump1b
estimates

          Parameter                Estimate     Std. error         t-statistic
                                      0.808          0.006              145.7

Intradaily variance pattern
                                       1.587         0.266              5.96
                                      -0.622         0.095             -6.53
                                      -0.058         0.036             -1.61
                                       0.750         0.050             14.90
                                       0.091         0.012              7.29
                                      -0.203         0.012            -16.90
                                      -0.018         0.007             -2.49

Day-of-the-week influences on aggregate intradaily variances, relative to
Wednesday. The t-statistics test the null hypothesis value of 1.
           Monday                     0.874         0.013             -9.39
           Tuesday                    0.967         0.013             -2.48
         Wednesday                       1
          Thursday                    0.987         0.014             -0.92
            Friday                    0.973         0.015             -1.84
          Half-day                    0.389         0.029            -21.20

Day-of-the-week influences on overnight variances, relative to Tuesday
close -> Wednesday open. The t-statistics test the null hypothesis of 1.
      Monday -> Tuesday             1.107           0.051                2.11
   Tuesday -> Wednesday                1
    Wednesday -> Thurday            1.078           0.050                1.56
      Thursday -> Friday            1.490           0.072                6.78
         2-day holiday              2.514           0.496                3.05
        3-day weekend               1.347           0.065                5.38
 4- or 5-day holiday weekend        3.191           0.301                7.29

Notes:        is the fraction of 24-hour variance attributable to intradaily trading, excluding the
first 15 minutes. Equation (11) in the paper gives the intradaily variance pattern for the above
parameters. Day-of-the-week influences are relative to benchmark Wednesday values of 1. The
1-.389 = 61.1% lower intradaily variance on the 41 half-days adjacent to holidays includes the
impact of fewer trading hours on those days.
                                               35


Table 2: Estimates of the log futures price process

                                    ½

                                                                                              (1)

                                        for   1

where I is the number of state variables in , J is the number of synchronous jumps in spot
variance and futures prices, and K is the number of jumps in futures prices only. Diffusive
shocks         and       have correlation , while the intraperiod jump intensities   of Poisson
counter      are given below in Panel C.

Panel A: Log likelihoods of various models

                       Number of                                Δ ln
Model       I   J K    parameters        ln              0-5   >5 ticks     All
                                                       ticks
In-sample (1983-2008)
SVJ1        1 0 1          28        891,425.32
Vjump1a 1 1 0              30        892,063.47      740.48     -102.32    638.16
Vjump1b 1 1 1              33        892,575.37     1533.22    -1021.32    511.90
Vjump2      2 2 1          42        893,212.58      255.16      382.05    637.21
Vjump3      3 3 1          51        893,432.73      146.89       73.24    220.13
Out-of-sample (2009-13)
SVJ1                                 172,284.08
Vjump1a                              172,313.58       -7.92       37.42     29.50
Vjump1b                              172,414.90      352.49     -221.66    130.82
Vjump2                               172,478.28      443.29     -249.10    194.20
Vjump3                               172,535.48      505.86     -254.46    251.40
                                             36


Panel B: Parameter estimates for specific models.
Parameter estimates are generally on an annualized basis, with Tuesday close to Wednesday
close equal to 1/252 years. The half-lives       252 ln 2 /           ̅ to variance shocks
are reported in days.

                     Vjump1a   Vjump1b         Vjump2                    Vjump3
Parameters\Model

Conditional mean
                      -.10       -.08       -.08                 .01
                      (.02)      (.03)      (.04)               (.04)
                       8.0        8.0        5.9       7.4       2.5        1.9        0.3
                      (1.5)      (2.5)      (4.3)    (2.95)     (9.0)      (11.7)     (3.7)
Variance processes
                       .155      .131       .108      .082       .092       .070       .071
                      (.003)    (.003)     (.003)    (.004)     (.004)     (.004)     (.009)
        days            3.6       5.2        9.4      0.35       13.4       0.08        1.6
                       (0.2)     (0.3)      (0.7)    (0.03)      (1.1)     (0.01)      (0.4)
                        .47       .51        .26                  .19
                       (.05)     (.02)      (.03)                (.03)
                       -.70      -.63       -.81                 -.99
                       (.07)     (.03)      (.08)                (.13)
                                                     37


Panel C: Jump parameters from specific models.
Annualized jump intensities for Poisson counter are
                                                      ∗          for   1
                                                     ∗         ∗ for   1

where ∗ ’s are annualized spot variances at the start of the period. Spot variance jumps are
distributed  ~        ̅ ), with no variance jumps ( ̅       0) for     0. Log futures price
jumps ~ ̅ ,         have correlation             ̅ /δ with variance jumps. Poisson counter
indicates high-frequency jumps in futures prices that are unaccompanied by volatility jumps.
  Δ | is the expected number of additional jumps over a 1-day or infinite horizon conditional
upon an average-sized variance jump ̅ . The estimated average length of an intradaily 15-
minute period was 1.20e-4 years. Standard errors are in parentheses.

               Vjump1      Vjump1b                  Vjump2                        Vjump3
                  a

                                                                5.4                        9.8      0.0
                                                               (2.8)                     (23.3)    (0.0)
                         38.3               130                0.36    229        6.5       5.5      .09
     10                  (3.7)              (30)              (0.06)   (82)      (2.2)    (1.3)    (.01)
                  2.0              0.31                5.6      2.1               6.5      2.0      0.7
     10          (0.1)            (0.02)              (1.5)    (0.6)             (2.2)    (1.3)    (0.2)
 ̅        10      -5.1    -1.0     -20.4     -0.8      -2.3    -2.5     -0.6       0.2     -3.2    -19.9
                 (0.7)   (0.1)      (4.0)   (0.2)     (1.4)    (3.9)   (0.2)     (1.7)    (2.2)    (8.6)
          10     32.6    11.4      90.2      6.9      20.2     36.5     5.6       17.8      6.3   103.3
                 (0.6)   (0.3)     (2.7)    (0.5)     (1.6)    (2.5)   (0.5)     (1.6)    (6.4)    (7.1)
     ̅          .0063             .0115              .0016     .070             .0006     .022     .076
               (.0002)           (.0006)            (.0002)   (.011)           (.0001)   (.003)   (.012)
                  -.27              -.49              -1.18    -.05              -1.89    -.02      -.10
                 (.01)             (.03)             (0.22)    (.01)            (0.40)    (.01)    (.02)
                  -.52              -.62               -.60    -.92               -.68    -.83      -.76
                 (.02)             (.03)              (.07)    (.05)             (.09)    (.96)    (.06)
Δ                0.46    16.4      0.13      5.1      0.22      2.6     5.6       0.16    0.20       1.7
                (0.02)   (1.4)    (0.01)    (1.1)    (0.04)    (0.3)   (1.6)    (0.03)   (0.11)    (0.2)
Δ         |      2.63    131       1.05      72        3.1      3.0     112        3.2    0.20       4.9
                (0.16)   (14)     (0.09)    (16)      (0.5)    (0.4)   (33)      (0.7)   (0.11)    (1.4)
                                          38


Panel D: Variance factor loadings

        Constant                                                              Total
Model   variance                         Jump variance loading       on       variance
and ’s                                       0       1         2       3      loading
Vjump1a               .0239     .0211               0.22                         1.22
                     (.0008)   (.0008)             (0.01)                       (0.01)
Vjump1b               .0171     .0165     0.50      0.26                         1.76
                     (.0008)   (.0010)   (0.03)    (0.02)                       (0.04)
Vjump2
                      .0116     .0077     0.63     0.23      0.05               1.91
                     (.0007)   (.0005)   (0.07)   (0.03)    (0.01)             (0.09)
            .0001     .0066     .0431                        0.28               1.28
           (.0000)   (.0007)   (.0041)                      (0.07)             (0.07)
Vjump3
                      .0085     .0053     0.72     0.21      0.03     0.10      2.05
                     (.0008)   (.0005)   (0.13)   (0.04)    (0.05)   (0.02)    (0.17)
            .0000     .0049     .0118                        0.01               1.01
           (.0000)   (.0006)   (.0009)                      (0.02)             (0.02)
            .0000     .0051     .0478                                 0.79      1.79
           (.0000)   (.0013)   (.0115)                               (0.14)    (0.14)
                                                 39


Table 3: Statistical properties of the normalized intradaily returns
                           , Θ for parameter estimates from various models. Under
correct model specification, the     ’s should be independent draws from a Gaussian distribution
with zero mean and unitary variance. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in
parentheses.

                     Vjump1a          Vjump1b             Vjump2        Vjump3

Intradaily and overnight returns (174,854 observations)
Maximum                   6.49             5.46            5.54           4.78
Minimum                 -7.38            -5.17            -5.01          -4.29
Mean                     .064             .063             .053          0.050
(Std. error)           (.002)           (0.002)           (.002)        (0.002)
Std. deviation           .956            0.970            0.999          1.001
Skewness                  .03             0.01            -0.01          -0.02
Excess kurtosis          -.11             -.20             0.02           0.00

Corr(     ,            -.013            -.015             -.012          -.013
(Std. error)           (.003)           (.002)            (.002)         (.002)
Corr(|      |, | |      .016             .025              .006          -.005
(Std. error)           (.003)           (.003)            (.002)         (.002)

Daily returns (6,558 observations)
Maximum                  4.10            3.99              3.54           3.91
Minimum                 -7.39           -7.11             -5.17          -4.84
Mean                    0.004           0.013             0.019          0.007
Std. error              0.013           0.013             0.013          0.013
Std. deviation          1.051           1.037             1.028          1.045
Skewness                 0.01            0.03              0.00          -0.04
Excess kurtosis          0.79            0.53              0.17           0.31

Corr(     ,            -.004            -.006             -.004          -.009
(Std. error)           (.012)           (.012)            (.012)         (.012)
Corr(|      |, | |     -.070            -.068             -.070          -.070
(Std. error)           (.012)           (.012)            (.012)         (.012)
                                                    40


 Table 4: Summary statistics for daily realized volatility measures

                                          ∑
 Realized daily volatility is                       , where 252     is the estimated length of the
 intradaily period in days, with an average value of 0.774 (Vjump3 estimates). ARMA models
 are estimated in RATS, using the Bayes information criterion for model selection.


 Maximum                          0.027530                  26.93%                         -1.312
 Minimum                          0.000003                   0.17%                         -6.380
 Mean                             0.000130                   0.91%                         -4.825
 (Std. error)                    (0.000012)                 (0.01%)                       (0.006)
 Median                           0.000062                   0.79%                         -4.847
 Std. deviation                   0.000982                   0.68%                         0.477
 Skewness                            63.4                     12.5                          0.63
 Excess kurtosis                    4553                      367                           1.83
 ARMA model                      ARMA(3,1)                 ARMA(3,1)                     ARMA(3,2)
 Major Rvol outliers: 26.9% (10/20/1987), 14.8% (10/19/1987), 11.4% (10/22/1987), 8.7%
 (10/10/2008)

 Table 5: The informational content over 1983-2008 of intradaily/overnight returns or
 realized variances for total latent variances, including jump risk.

                                              |       ,    ~ 0,     |

                                                                            |
                                 ≡1                        1

Model & Data                          |                                 |
Vjump2 | ,         0.0307       0.0301            3.3e-3        5.7e-3          1.4e-3     0.56
Vjump2 |           0.0307       0.0298            3.3e-3       11.3e-3          1.7e-3     0.48

Vjump3 |     ,     0.0315       0.0314            7.6e-3       11.6e-3          1.1e-3     0.85
Vjump3 |           0.0315       0.0310            7.6e-5       15.6e-3          1.6e-3     0.79

 Unconditional moments of latent end-of-day total variance    are based upon model-specific
 parameter estimates. End-of-day filtered total variances | use either all past intradaily and
 overnight returns ( , ) or all past observed daily realized variances (            ), with the in-sample
 moments over 1983-2008 reported in the table.
                                                 41


Table 6: Forecasting regressions for realized variance over 1983-2013

Forecasting regressions are of the form


with ’s reported for ,           0, 1 . The table gives the Mincer-Zarnowitz (MZ)
decomposition of the mean squared error into squared-bias (     0 , inefficiency (   1 and
residual-error (        components. Forecasts of next-day’s realized variance are from six
approaches: an ARMA(3,1) model fitted to daily realized variance over 1983-2008; RV
forecasts from the Vjump1b, Vjump2, and Vjump3 models; the HAR-RV-J regression approach
of Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2003, Table 2B), for the full 1983-2008 period, and for
their original 1990-2002 period.

The HAR-RV-J regression over 1983-2008 was

                0.05e‐5 1.63              0.013             0.008         4.50          ,
                5.03e‐5 0.88              0.038             0.015          2.78

where       max 0,               is the daily jump component given daily bipower variation
     computed from 15-minute returns and divided by the intradaily horizon 252 , measured in
days. HAR-RV-J standard errors (in parentheses) use Newey-West heteroskedasticity-consistent
estimation with 5 daily lags.

                        MSE     MZ decomposition (in %)
      Model              10      Bias2  Ineff.     Resid.

In-sample (1983-2008)
ARMA(3,1)               84.17      0         0        100       0.130
Vjump1b                 83.45      0        4         96        0.139
Vjump2                  79.42      0        17        83        0.179
Vjump3                  70.51      0        6         94        0.271
ABD (1983-2008)         67.14      0        0         100       0.306
ABD (1990-2002)         91.69      0        5         95        0.098

Out of sample (2009-13)
ARMA(3,1)               2.06       1         6         94        0.392
Vjump1b                 1.83       0         0        100        0.463
Vjump2                  1.84       1         0        99         0.456
Vjump3                  1.87       1         2        98         0.446
ABD (1983-2008)         4.67       0        51        49        -0.381
ABD (1990-2002)         2.10       0        1         99         0.378
                                              42


Table 7: Summary statistics for the residuals                                      ,  ,    over
1983-2008, on actual and simulated data. Normalized residuals should be i.i.d. standard
Gaussian conditional upon correct specification. Simulated data are from 100 runs of 6557 days
each, using model-specific parameter estimates and time gaps. The t-statistics for testing
compatibility between actual moments         and simulated moments         are
                      /            √1.01 .

                         Actual                Simulated data
    Statistic             Data            Average       Std. deviation          t-statistic
Vjump1b
 Maximum                   >7a               3.80               0.34               9.41
 Minimum                  -7.55             -4.52               0.42              -7.17
 Mean                    -0.191            -0.106              0.012              -7.27
 Median                  -0.155            -0.093              0.017              -3.59
 SD                      1.265              1.158              0.011               9.99
 Skewness                  -.32              -.12               0.03              -8.17
 Excess kurtosis          0.55               -.28               0.05              16.40
Vjump2
 Maximum                  6.46               3.80               0.31               8.52
 Minimum                  -5.50             -5.13               0.52              -0.71
 Mean                    -0.225            -0.163              0.014              -4.35
 Median                  -0.121            -0.096              0.022              -1.16
 SD                      1.250              1.211              0.009               4.10
 Skewness                 -0.40             -0.28               0.03              -3.50
 Excess kurtosis          0.16              -0.13               0.06               4.41
Vjump3
 Maximum                  5.88               3.80               0.34               6.04
 Minimum                  -5.62             -5.01               0.40              -1.53
 Mean                    -0.190            -0.156              0.012              -2.77
 Median                  -0.119            -0.112              0.017              -0.39
 SD                      1.245              1.215              0.011               2.88
 Skewness                 -0.33             -0.20               0.03              -3.78
 Excess kurtosis          0.20              -0.10               0.07               4.53

a
 The normalized residual observed on October 20, 1987 could not be computed for the Vjump1b
model, but is in excess of 7. The summary statistics consequently use a value of 7 for that
observation.
                                             43


Figure 1: Overnight (ON) and intradaily (ID) return horizons, relative to Wednesday
horizon (Tuesday close -> Wednesday close). Overnight returns for Monday (Friday close ->
Monday open) and for Tuesday through Friday include the first 15 minutes of the opening day,
as do overnight returns spanning 2-day holidays and 4- or 5-day holiday weekends.




Figure 2: Intradaily 15-minute horizons, as a percentage of the total intradaily horizon.
                                            44


Figure 3: Cumulative log likelihood differences relative to the 1-factor SVJ1 model.


                                                                                 Vjump3

                                                                                 Vjump2




                                                                                 Vjump1b




                                                                                 Vjump1a


                                                                      Out-of -sample
                                                 45


Figure 4: Components of annualized conditional volatility, and daily estimated number of
jumps. Total end-of-day variance estimates         from the 3-factor variance model Vjump3
include the contributions to both diffusion risk and jump risk.

                                               left scale




                    Daily Δ    (right scale)


                    Daily Δ    (right scale)
                                           46


Figure 5: Annualized intradaily conditional volatility factors over October 12-30, 1987
(100% annualized = 1.1% per ¼-hour). The December 1987 S&P 500 futures price (+) is on the
right scale.

               F (right scale)                      (left scale)
                                              47


Figure 6: Normal probability plots for various models. These plot the ordered normalized
residual values                           , Θ (+ symbols on the vertical axis), against the
models’ predicted values (red diagonal line) over 1983-2008.
 Intradaily and overnight returns                               Daily returns
              Vjump1b                                            Vjump1b




              Vjump2                                             Vjump2




              Vjump3                                             Vjump3
                                                48


Figure 7A: Daily realized variance        /


                       19871019: 0.0219 = (0.148)2
                       19871020: 0.0725 = (0.269)2
                       19871022: 0.0129 = (0.114)2




Figure 7B: Daily realized volatility          /2     , on a log scale
                                                                 49


Figure 8: Normal probability plots for realized variance. These plot the ordered normalized residual values
                              ,  , Θ (+ symbols on the vertical axis) against predicted values (green dotted lines) based upon
quadratic variation’s conditional CDFs, and against average values (red solid lines) from 100 runs of simulated data. The grey shaded
areas are 95% confidence intervals for the deviation between observed data and average simulated values.
                 Vjump1b                                     Vjump2                                      Vjump3
