NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OWNING, USING AND RENTING:
SOME SIMPLE ECONOMICS OF THE "SHARING ECONOMY"
John J. Horton
Richard J. Zeckhauser
Working Paper 22029
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22029

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

Thanks to Andrey Fradkin, Ramesh Johari, Arun Sundararajan, Samuel Fraiberger, Hal Varian and
Joe Golden for helpful discussions and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Author contact
information, datasets and code are currently or will be available at http://www.john-joseph-horton.com/
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22029.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by John J. Horton and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Owning, Using and Renting: Some Simple Economics of the "Sharing Economy"
John J. Horton and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 22029
February 2016
JEL No. D23,D47,L1
ABSTRACT
New Internet-based markets enable consumer/owners to rent out their durable goods when not using
them. Such markets are modeled to determine ownership, rental rates, quantities, and surplus generated.
Both the short run, before consumers can revise their ownership decisions, and the long run, in which
they can, are examined to assess how these markets change ownership and consumption. The analysis
examines bringing-to-market costs, such as labor costs and transaction costs, and considers the operating
platform’s pricing problem. A survey of consumers broadly supports the modeling assumptions employed.
For example, ownership is determined by individuals’ forward-looking assessments of planned usage.

John J. Horton
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West Fourth Street, 8-81
New York, NY 10012
john.horton@stern.nyu.edu
Richard J. Zeckhauser
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

Owning, Using and Renting:
Some Simple Economics of the “Sharing Economy”
John J. Horton
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
New York University*

Richard J. Zeckhauser
Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University

February 12, 2016

Abstract
New Internet-based markets enable consumer/owners to rent out their durable goods when not using them. Such markets are modeled to determine ownership, rental rates, quantities, and surplus
generated. Both the short run, before consumers can revise their ownership decisions, and the long
run, in which they can, are examined to assess how these markets change ownership and consumption. The analysis examines bringing-to-market costs, such as labor costs and transaction costs, and
considers the operating platform’s pricing problem. A survey of consumers broadly supports the
modeling assumptions employed. For example, ownership is determined by individuals’ forwardlooking assessments of planned usage.
JEL L1, D23, D47
Keywords: Sharing economy; peer-to-peer markets; rentals; Airbnb; Uber; bringing-to-market costs;
transaction costs

1 Introduction
In traditional rental markets, owners hold assets to rent them out. In recent years, technology startup
firms have created a new kind of rental market, in which owners sometimes use their assets for personal
consumption and sometimes rent them out. Such markets are referred to as peer-to-peer or “sharing
economy” markets. To be sure, some renting by consumer-owners has long existed, but it was largely
confined to expensive, infrequently used goods, such as vacation homes and pleasure boats, usually
with longer duration rental periods. More often, consumer-owner goods were shared among family and
friends, commonly without explicit payment. In contrast, these peer-to-peer (P2P) rental markets are
open markets, and the good is “shared” in exchange for payment.
A prominent example of a P2P rental market is Airbnb, which enables individuals to rent out spare
bedrooms, apartments, or even entire homes. Airbnb and platforms like it have been heralded by many,
* Author contact information, datasets and code are currently or will be available at http://www.john-joseph-horton.com/
Thanks to Andrey Fradkin, Ramesh Johari, Arun Sundararajan, Samuel Fraiberger, Hal Varian and Joe Golden for helpful discussions and comments.

1

as they promise to expand access to goods, diversify individual consumption, bolster efficiency by increasing asset utilization, and provide income to owners (Sundararajan, 2013; Edelman and Geradin,
2015; Botsman and Rogers, 2010). The business interest in these platforms has been intense; Airbnb
alone has attracted nearly $2.4 billion in venture capital investment and was valued at $25.5 billion during their most recent funding round.1 Companies organizing sharing markets have also attracted policy
interest, much of it negative (Slee, 2015; Malhotra and Van Alstyne, 2014; Avital et al., 2015).
Critics charge that the primary competitive advantage of these platforms is their ability to duck costly
regulations—regulations that protect third-parties.2 However, the counter-argument is often made that
existing regulations were designed to solve market problems that these sharing economy platforms solve
in an innovative fashion, primarily with better information provision and reputation systems (Koopman
et al., 2014), thereby making top-down regulation unnecessary. A better understanding of these markets,
and progress in resolving this policy debate, requires elucidating what economic problem these markets
address, why they are emerging now, and what their properties are likely to be in both the short- and
long-runs. This paper seeks to provide that elucidation.
Our first major question is why P2P rental markets only became a force in the 21st century. The economic problem P2P rental markets are able to solve—under-utilization of durable goods—is hardly new.
We argue that technological advances, such as the mass adoption of smartphones and the falling cost
and rising capabilities of the Internet, while clearly important, only provide part of the story. P2P rental
markets rely heavily on the hard-won industry and academic experience in the design and management
of online marketplaces. In particular, recommender systems and reputation systems, which emerged
during the early days of electronic commerce, are central to the function of P2P rental markets. The
knowledge so conveyed allows P2P rental platforms to overcome—or at least substantially ameliorate—
market problems such as moral hazard and adverse selection. We develop this argument in more depth
and point out relevant works from the literature.
Our second major question is what are the economic properties of P2P rental markets. For example, what determines the rental rate and the quantity exchanged in a P2P rental market? How much
total surplus is “unlocked” by the P2P rental market, and how is it distributed? How does the short-run
situation—where existing owners rent to non-owners—differ from the long run in which owners and
non-owners alike can revise their ownership decisions in light of the presence of a P2P rental market?
Does overall ownership increase or decrease, and who owns what goods in the new equilibrium? When
1 http://www.crunchbase.com/organization/airbnb; Uber, which also has a substantial P2P rental market (albeit with a substantial labor component) was valued at $62.5 billion in their last funding round. http://www.wired.com/2015/12/airbnbconfirms-1-5-billion-funding-round-now-valued-at-25-5-billion/.
2 For example, Dean Baker, in an opinion piece for the Guardian characterizes Airbnb and Uber as being primarily based on
“evading regulations and breaking the law.” “Don’t buy the sharing economy hype: Airbnb and Uber are facilitating rip-offs.”,
The Guardian, May 27th, 2014. Access online on January 19th, 2016. http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/
may/27/airbnb-uber-taxes-regulation. See Horton (2014b) for a discussion of the externalities imposed by Airbnb-style
subletting in rented apartments. Edelman and Geradin (2015) discuss both the promised efficiencies of “sharing economy”
platforms as well as the regulatory issues they raise. Cannon and Summers (2014) offer a playbook for sharing economy companies to win over regulators.

2

there are substantial bringing-to-market costs (such as labor, excess depreciation, and transaction costs),
who bears them, and how does it affect the short- and long-run equilibria?
To address these questions, we develop a simple model in which consumers initially decide whether
to purchase a good based on their expected usage. We consider a case where there are owners and nonowners, with the owners using the good less than 100% of the time and non-owners, while not purchasing
the good, would use it some of the time if they did own it.3 Some technological/entrepreneurial innovation then creates a P2P rental market that allows owners to rent their unused capacity to non-owners.
For clarity, we first assume that owners face no bringing-to-market (BTM) costs (i.e., no depreciation,
labor or transaction costs from rentals).
After the P2P rental market emerges, owners and non-owners use the good as if they were renting the
good at the market-clearing rental rate. Renters do face the rental rate, while for owners, the possibility
of rental creates a new opportunity cost for their own usage. The rental rate is increasing in the valuation
of the owners, which reduces supply, and the valuation of the renters, which increases demand. The
short-run rental market does not necessarily clear: if pre-P2P rental unused capacity exceeds demand,
a glut results. In practice, the inherent costs of bringing excess capacity to the market assures an above
zero price floor.
In addition to the short run, we consider a long run where owners and renters alike can revise their
ownership decisions. We find that if the short-run cost to rent the good 100% of the time is below the
purchase price, then ownership is less attractive. This will reduce purchase demand for the product. In
the long-run P2P rental market equilibrium, the purchase price equals the rental rate (when normalizing
the life of the good to 1). Owners and renters receive the same utility at the margin, thereby decoupling
individual preferences from ownership. The model offers an intuitive test for whether total ownership
will decrease in the long run: ownership decreases if the short-run rental rate is below the purchase price.
Surplus increases in both the short- and long-run P2P rental market equilibria relative to the presharing status quo. Although owners have less consumption, they are more than compensated with
rental income that exceeds their utility loss. The greatest gains in surplus are obtained when original
non-owners value the good nearly as highly as owners, suggesting that goods where income (rather than
taste or planned usage) explains ownership could offer the greatest increase in surplus. The existence of
a P2P rental market allows for a higher maximum price in the product market, as it can generate positive
demand for a good at prices for which even high-types would not buy without the possibility of rental.
When we assume that owners do face BTM costs, the model predictions change in several important
ways. If BTM costs are sufficiently high, no P2P rental market can exist in the short run. If the market
can exist, the BTM costs raise the rental rate and lower the quantity of the good transacted in the market,
in the both the long run and short run. However, BTM costs—being the equivalent of a per-unit sales
3 While we assume a purchase price that splits consumers into owners and non-owners, other equilibria are possible, such as

one where everyone owns the good. For a given set of consumer valuations, there is a range of product market prices that can
support a short-run P2P rental market. To support a P2P rental market, the purchase price of the good must be low enough that
there is a pool of owners, but not so low that everyone with any usage demand for the good already owns the good. Of course,
in the long-run ownership decisions can be revised.

3

tax—are not fully passed through in the rental rate, in either the short run or long run.
The presence of BTM costs changes the predictions about long-run ownership. Consumers with a
higher valuation now tilt towards ownership. The reason for the tilt is that owners using the good for
their own consumption avoid some of the BTM costs such as extra cleaning, handing off keys, dealing
with disputes, and so on. As in the short-run case, in the long run there is incomplete pass through of the
BTM costs. An implication of this finding is that the rental rate is lower than the purchase price (when
the life of the good is 1). As such, a firm would find it unprofitable to buy the good solely to rent it out
(though this result requires that there are no economies of scale in renting).
One important BTM cost is the fee imposed by the platform. If the platform keeps the fee constant,
the incentive for reducing BTM costs depends in part on the elasticity of demand in the P2P rental market, in that the platform finds it more attractive to lower BTM costs when demand is elastic since the
increase in quantity transacted will offset the relatively small reduction in the rental price. However,
the platform can always increase revenue by lowering BTM costs, as it can simply increase its own fee
accordingly, keeping the rental rate and transaction volume unchanged (but making more revenue on
each unit transacted). Whether this is optimal depends on the elasticity of BTM costs with respect to the
platform’s efforts.
Of course, goods will differ in the cost of bringing them to market, and this affects the P2P rental
market. Some of these BTM costs are straightforward, such as labor, depreciation, and complementary
consumables. For example, driving with Uber requires your labor, puts additional miles on your car,
and consumes gas. However, another aspect that is relevant to BTM costs is how amenable a good is to
“temporal division” and, hence, renting. For example, goods where usage can be planned for and easily
adjusted are easier to rent out with little loss in utility to the owner. Similarly, goods that are used in
large chunks of time—with no use in between—are more amenable to rental than goods that have usage
broken up into many small chunks of time.
Our third and final question is how the usage patterns for different goods are likely to affect BTM
costs. To do this, a convenience sample of consumers was asked a series of questions about a good (e.g.,
a BBQ grill), such as whether they own one, whether they have lent it out or borrowed it, and how much
they do or would use it (depending on ownership). If they do not own it, they were asked why. We also
asked questions about how the good in question is characteristically used, focusing on how predictable
that usage is and the typical size of usage “chunks.” We selected a number of goods and encouraged
respondents to answer our questions about multiple goods, as in some cases this allows us to control for
the identity of the respondent. The respondents were also asked for their household incomes.
Our main finding is that income is only important in determining ownership for a small number
of goods (e.g., vacation homes); for most goods, planned usage was the primary driver, supporting our
basic modeling framework. Looking across the population, goods that are owned more frequently are
rented less frequently, with the notable exception of cars. There is also a strong correlation between
goods that have predictable usage (“you know when you are going to use it”) and the good being used in

4

large chunks of time. This positive correlation implies that a larger class of goods would have relatively
low BTM costs than would be the case in the absence of this positive correlation. The survey results
suggest that important components of BTM costs are the ease with which usage can be shifted around
in time and the size of typical usage sessions.
The sharing economy is a relatively recent phenomenon. Thus, we conclude our paper with some
thoughts on how P2P rental markets might evolve. Our analysis focuses on a single homogeneous good,
but a key advantage of P2P rental markets might be in facilitating greater diversity in goods offered and
consumed. Beyond the direct utility this diversification provides, it might also increase the stock of people with direct experience with a particular good, which combined with the continued proliferation of
consumer-generated reviews and ratings might stimulate quality improvements. In that same vein, producers of goods might do more than simply improve quality, but also explicitly modify their goods to
make them more or less amenable to rental.

2 Related work on modeling and quantifying the sharing economy
Other work on the “sharing economy” has discussed its features and implications qualitatively. For example, Belk (2014) offers a number of examples of these different platforms and identifies their commonalities: (1) use of temporary, non-ownership models of using consumer goods and (2) a reliance on
the Internet to bring this about. Edelman and Geradin (2015) represents another example in this vein.
It enumerates the efficiency gains from P2P rental markets, such as reducing transaction costs and improving allocative efficiency. Edelman and Geradin is distinctive in that it discusses the regulatory policy
implications of sharing economy companies using the traditional “market failure” framework that motivates much of public economics. Other work has been more practically oriented, similar in spirit to the
empirical portion of our paper. For example, Hampshire and Gaites (2011) analyzes the feasibility of P2P
car-sharing in Pittsburgh.
The paper most closely related to ours is Benjaafar et al. (2015), who also consider the ownership
choice with and without the possibility of P2P rental, with participants differing in their expected usage. Although finding several results similar to our own—for example, they also find that total ownership
could increase following sharing, for more or less the same economic reasons we identify—the papers
differ in at least two important ways. First, Benjaafar et al. explicitly consider the matching aspect of
these markets, modeling how a participant’s utility from being an owner or renter can depend on the
possibility of finding the appropriate counter-party. For some questions, explicitly modeling these considerations is likely to be important, though for others—say in markets where platform pricing choices
clear the market—explicitly modeling the matching aspect is likely to be less important. Second, in our
model, owners and renters decide how intensively to use a good in light of the rental rate (or in the case
of owners, the opportunity cost created by the rental market). For some kinds of markets, such as for
rental housing, this economization is likely to be important, though for other goods with very low usage

5

rates, this factor is likely to be less important.
Another closely related paper (in part) is Einav et al. (2015), which covers some of the same ground in
explaining why peer-to-peer markets are flourishing now. They emphasize the role played by platforms
in matching buyers and sellers, maintaining a reputation system and using prices to clear the market.
They also provide a model of the economy, though the focus is on peer-to-peer sellers competing with
traditional firms.
Fraiberger and Sundararajan (2015) offers a calibrated model of the peer-to-peer rental market, focusing on automobiles. They also model consumers choosing among ownership, rental and non-participation.
They find that the introduction of sharing would decrease ownership but increase utilization. As in our
model, the biggest gains in surplus come to previous non-owners who gain access to the good.

3 Factors explaining the rise of peer-to-peer rental markets
The somewhat obvious economic rationale for P2P rental markets is that the owners of most durable
goods use them far less than 100% of the time. This under-utilization generates excess capacity that
could be rented out. The demand side in such a market would be non-owners who would like to use the
good, but not enough to purchase it.4
Given the obvious rationale for these markets, why have they only begun to flourish in recent years?
The creator of a potential rental market has to overcome a variety of problems. As with any market, there
are the typical search costs, such as finding and evaluating trading partners, and the Internet certainly
dramatically reduces these costs (Bakos, 1997). Furthermore, there are now nearly 20 years of industrial
experience in building online marketplaces and solving their characteristic problems. However, informational problems are but one major obstacle in creating rental markets; the other is resources.
Individuals lack the resources of firms that have historically dominated rental markets. For example,
individuals lack marketing budgets and expertise, ways of accepting payments that are convenient for
customers, standard contracts and procedures to draw upon, well-adapted insurance products, procedures and facilities for re-setting goods after use, and so on.5 Individual sellers lack brands, which have
proven highly relevant even in cases when quality differences are nonexistent (Bronnenberg et al., 2014);
in cases where goods truly are heterogeneous, a lack of a market reputation might completely foreclose
the possibility of trade. For P2P rental markets to draw in individual owners, the platform must find
ways to fill in these gaps and give owners firm-like resources. Given both the lack of firm-like resources
and the inherent information problems of rental markets, consumer-owned goods have historically just
been shared only among family members, neighbors and friends rather than strangers, except when the
potential gains from trade are quite large (such as in the example of vacation homes and boat rentals).
4 A non-owner might mean a non-owner in a particular place and time. Many Airbnb guests own homes—they just don’t own

homes everywhere.
5 As it is, even ostensibly “peer” platforms do seem to tilt towards quasi-firms that can reap economies of scale or enjoy other
firm benefits. For example, there are Uber drivers that manage fleets of vehicles and Airbnb “hosts” with multiple properties.

6

P2P rental markets have emerged as entrepreneurs have taken advantage of technological advances
to build facilitating platforms. The platforms dramatically lower transaction costs and provide individual
owners tools previously only available to firms. The maturation and increasing penetration of the Internet and the proliferation of smartphones (with high-resolution digital cameras) were the technological
shocks that made some of these P2P rental markets feasible. For example, Uber simply does not “work”
in a world where few consumers have GPS-enabled smartphones. Although these technology advances
are important, these P2P rental markets have also stood on the shoulders of their electronic commerce
predecessors, such as eBay, that made strides towards solving some of the informational problems inherent to online marketplaces.
A key challenge in all markets is facilitating trust among strangers, and this problem is acute in P2P
rental markets, given the “opportunity” renters have to misuse or destroy the owner’s capital. In most
markets, the buyer’s type matters little to the seller; in rental markets, the buyer’s type can be critical.
Facilitating trust is not an easily solved problem in online markets, but the experiences of early electronic commerce pioneers such as eBay provided P2P rental market entrepreneurs a number of effective
solutions to market problems related to trust. The flaws in early versions of these systems—such as the
ability and inclination of parties to condition their feedback on their trading partner’s feedback—also
clearly influenced the design of follow-on systems used in P2P rental markets. The rise of social networks such as Facebook has given platforms new opportunities to inject information into the platform
that parties can use to decide whether to contract.
Online markets in general lack many of the market-thickening coordination mechanisms available
in physical markets such as coordinating on time and geography.6 To compensate for the lack of geography and time as a coordinating mechanism, online marketplaces create taxonomies and extensively
classify goods, and capitalize on the vast numbers of potential customers. A complementary approach
is to make extensive use of search algorithms and recommendation systems (Resnick and Varian, 1997;
Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005). These kinds of approaches are particularly important in P2P rental
markets because the goods being rented are often highly differentiated (such as apartments), as are consumer preferences, making matching more important.7 P2P rental market platforms continue to invest
heavily in research designed to improve matching, some of it in collaboration with researchers. For example, Fradkin (2013) shows how personalized recommendations could improve match rates by 10% on
Airbnb.
In addition to simply finding each other, would-be trading partners must assess both each other and
the goods being traded. These assessments are aided by verifiable measurements made by the platform
6 Buyers and sellers of stocks benefit from agreeing that the New York Stock Exchange is open from 9:30-4:00. Geography also
matters; buyers and sellers of vegetables benefit from agreeing that the Union Square green market is located in the northwest
side of the Union Square Park.
7 Dinerstein et al. (2014) uses data from eBay to highlight the difficulties in creating search and ranking algorithms for differentiated products where price is only one dimension of interest; they show examples where limiting choice might be procompetitive. There is an increasing understanding of how individuals do search online: De los Santos et al. (2012) use detailed
web browsing data to show that customers rely more on a fixed sample size search strategy rather than sequential search.

7

on a number of dimensions, including past market history. As Varian (2010) points out, advances in
information technology are often advances in measurement. Consider that Uber is only possible because
both sides of the market now carry with them taximeters (when running the appropriate software) at all
times: a smartphone with GPS technology allows for the precise measures of distance traveled. In fact,
this computer-mediated approach works even better than the traditional taximeter in that both parties
can verify that the best route was taken. The proliferation of high-resolution digital cameras has similarly
made it easier for parties to inspect goods ex ante (Airbnb in particular benefits from this innovation).
One important platform innovation has been in reputation systems, which essentially digitize wordof-mouth information about product and service quality (Dellarocas, 2003). A substantial literature characterizes their practical importance to the functioning of the market (Cabral and Hortaçsu, 2010; Resnick
et al., 2000; Resnick and Zeckhauser, 2002). Other papers in this literature document ongoing efforts by
platforms to fix common problems with reputation systems. Topics include: reducing the role of reciprocity (Bolton et al., 2013); incentivizing the provision of feedback (Fradkin et al., 2015); introducing
new signals of quality, such as badges or other constructed measures (Hui et al., 2014; Nosko and Tadelis,
2015); and dealing with the tendency towards inflated reputations (Horton and Golden, 2015).
The reputation system is one particularly important example of an aspect of the market that individual participants would find too costly (or even impossible) to build and maintain. Platforms enjoy
scale economies for many costly tasks compared to individual owners. For example, they handle credit
card payments. They create tools for “self-serve” marketing (such as through attractive profile pages)
and through general platform marketing to bring renters to the platform. They also create software tools
that let owners manage their availability, learn about the attributes of potential renters, and so on.8
In addition to the nuts-and-bolts issues of running online marketplaces, there have also been considerable advances in the understanding of the business models used by two-sided marketplaces more
generally. This literature initially focused on traditional two-sided markets (with motivating examples
drawn from the credit card, video game, and newspaper industries) (Rochet and Tirole, 2003, 2006), but
in recent years it has seemed to be increasingly motivated by electronic commerce examples and focused on the key decisions faced by would-be platforms. For example, Hagiu and Wright (2014) analyzes
whether it is better to be a marketplace or a re-seller (with the Amazon versus eBay question being a clear
motivation). Hagiu (2014) discusses the strategic decisions faced by a would-be platform and is close to
a “how to” for would-be platform builders. Similarly, Eisenmann et al. (2006) offer strategic advice for
businesses in markets with a two-sided component.
8 Both Horton (2014a) and Fradkin (2013) consider the role played by platforms in overcoming search frictions related to
buyers trying to match with unavailable sellers—Fradkin in the case of Airbnb and Horton in the case of oDesk/Upwork. In the
context of online dating sites, Hitsch et al. (2010) present evidence that the realized matches are close to what the Gale-Shapley
algorithm would deliver, based on their estimates of underlying preferences.

8

4 Model
Before anyone can “share,” someone has to own and others have to not own (but still want to consume
at least some of the good). Our model’s first task is to explain how consumers divide between owners
and non-owners. Our model is built on the notion that goods can usefully be thought of as having an
intensive margin of usage, which in turn drives the extensive margin decision (i.e., ownership). The
assumption that consumers must consider the time required to use a good in making their consumption
plan is similar in spirit to Becker (1965). The possibility of sharing a good bears similarities to Varian
(2000). Varian discusses—in the particular context of information goods—how planned usage affects
the rent-versus-own decision.
We first consider what happens when the possibility of P2P rental emerges, thus allowing the existing
pool of owners to rent to non-owners. First, we assume that there are no BTM costs (such as labor and
transaction costs). We determine the equilibrium rental rate, the quantity transacted, and the changes
in consumer surplus. Next, we introduce BTM costs (such as depreciation, labor, and transaction costs)
and see how this changes the short-run equilibrium and whether a P2P rental market can emerge.
We then turn our attention to the long-run case, where owners and non-owners can revise their ownership decisions. First, we derive the equilibrium without any BTM costs and determine who owns in
equilibrium and what happens to total ownership. Then, we perform the same analysis, but assume
non-zero BTM costs.

4.1 Consumer decision about ownership based on expected usage
Every consumer has a unit of time to allocate to various activities, some of which involve using a good.
The good has a one-period lifetime. Consumers have to decide how much time, x ∈ [0, 1], to devote to
using that good. Using the good brings decreasing marginal utility. The consumer receives a benefit of
b(x) = 2αx, but also incurs opportunity cost c(x) = x 2 , where α ∈ (0, 1) parameterizes their valuation of
the good. With the functional forms chosen, α has a convenient interpretation, which is that α is the
fraction of the time a good would be used by an owner. The c(x) term is the opportunity cost of time,
which grows as more time is spent with the good in question rather than with the best alternative use of
one’s time.
The consumer’s utility for a given x is u(x) = b(x) − c(x) = 2αx − x 2 , and so the individual’s optimal
usage, conditional upon owning the good, is x ∗ = α, yielding indirect utility
v(α) = u(x ∗ ) = α2 .

(1)

The purchase price of the good is p, and so a consumer will buy the good only if α2 > p. Figure 1 illustrates the consumer’s problem, showing the utility from various levels of usage depending on that consumer’s value of α. The usage solution for each consumer is his or her α parameter, and since indirect
utility is just α2 , the optimal usage for each value falls along the curve traced out by x 2 . The purchase
9

Figure 1: Consumer’s optimal usage of a good and resultant decision about whether to purchase that
good
u(x ∗ ) = α2

u

Consumer
buys
α = 0.75
p

α = 0.55
x

Consumer
does
not
buy

α = 0.40
Notes: This figure illustrates the utility derived from
different levels of usage of a good, with individuals
differing in their values from usage based on their α
parameters.

price p determines who purchases the good, with all those having α2 > p deciding to own, and those
below choosing not to purchase the good.
Note that all owners have an amount of time, 1 − x ∗ , when they are not using the good. This unused
capacity is what they will be able to rent out, plus whatever amount becomes available because the owner
reduces their usage to reap rental income.

4.2 Three consumption possibilities with two consumer types but no rentals
There are three important potential market configurations with respect to ownership: (1) everyone owns,
(2) no one owns, and (3) some own and others do not. For our purposes, (3) is the interesting case. A
simple way to obtain this possibility is to assume two consumer types: αH and αL , with αH > αL , and to
assume a price that divides consumers into owners and non-owners, namely a p such that α2H > p > α2L .
Assume that there is a unit mass of consumers, with a fraction θ being high-types with α = αH and the
remaining (1 − θ) fraction of consumers being low-types with α = αL .
The product market demand curve for the good is

D(p) =




 0

θ


 1

: p > α2H
: α2H ≥ p > α2L
:p

10

≤ α2L

(2)

Figure 2: Three consumer market possibilities in the absence of peer-to-peer rental, with two consumer
types
αH

(1, 1)
Both types
own

High-types
own

αH
Neither type
owns
p

(0, 0)

p
αL
αL
Notes: Three consumer ownership possibilities.

The three market possibilities are shown in Figure 2, where the x-axis shows possible values of αL and
the y-axis shows possible values for αH . Since αH > αL by definition, we only consider the space above
the 45-degree line, which is partitioned into spaces where neither owns, both own, and only the hightypes own. The associated minimal-but-still-purchasing valuation parameter is shown as αH and αL for
the high- and low-types, respectively. The faint dotted lines illustrate the construction of the regions.
We are particularly interested in the rectangle where high-types own but low-types do not, because in
this region the purchasing high-types have excess capacity, αH < 1, but the low-types still value usage of
the good, αL > 0, despite their non-purchase. In this region, the immediate possibility of mutually beneficial rental exists between the two types (in the other market configurations a revision in the ownership
decision is needed to support a P2P rental market).

4.3 Short-run P2P rental market equilibrium
We now suppose that through some technological advance it becomes possible for the high-types to
rent their entire excess capacity to the low-types, with no BTM costs. However, no one can revise their
original ownership decision in light of this advance. Before the possibility of rental, owners were simply
consuming αH , leaving 1 − αH idle. If they had purchased the good, the low-types would consume αL .
However, with the new possibility of rental, each consumer’s decision problem will change.

11

Posit a market rental rate of r . The owner’s usage-optimization problem is now
2αH x − x 2 − p + (1 − x)r ,
| {z }

argmax
x

Rental income

whereas the renter’s optimization problem is
argmax
x

2αL x − x 2 − |{z}
xr .
Rental cost

Assuming an interior solution (which requires that 2αL > r ), both the renter and the owner choose to use
x ∗ (αi ) = αi − r /2,

(3)

where αi , i ∈ {H , L}, is their individual usage parameter value.
The P2P short-run equilibrium is characterized by a rental rate and a quantity rented. For the shortrun P2P rental market to clear
θ (1 − x H (r )) = (1 − θ)x L (r ),

(4)

where x H (r ) and x L (r ) are the usage of the good for the owners and non-owners, respectively. Recall that
θ is the fraction of high-types (and hence owners).
The market clearing rental rate is
r = 2 [(1 − θ)αL − θ(1 − αH )] .

(5)

Note that the short-run equilibrium rental rate is proportional to the difference between what low-types
would consume if they owned, (1 − θ)αL , and high-types would leave unused in the absence of the P2P
rental market, θ(1−αH ). As (5) shows, the rental rate increases in the valuation of either type (since higher
valuation from low-types increases demand while higher valuation from high-types reduces supply) and
declines with the fraction of high-types, as they provide the market supply. An increase in the relative
number of owners decreases rental rates, as

∂r
∂θ

< 0.

The quantity of the good exchanged is
Q = θ(1 − θ) (1 − (αH − αL )) .

(6)

Given this formulation, the quantity exchanged is largest when there are equal numbers of the two types.
The quantity exchanged is increasing in the valuation of the low-types (since a higher valuation causes
them to demand more of the good in the marketplace), but decreasing in the valuation of the high types
(since for any rental rate, a higher valuation causes them to supply less of the good to the market).
From (5), we can see that it is possible for supply to exceed demand even when the rental rate is

12

Figure 3: Market clearing in the short-run peer-to-peer rental market
S(r ) = θx H (r ) = θ(1 − αH + r /2)
S 1 (r ) = θ(1 − α′H + r /2)

r D(r ) = θx L (r )

Glut:
S 1 (0) > D(0);
θ(1 − α′H ) > (1 − θ)αL

r∗

Q∗

Q

zero. This can arise when the owner’s excess capacity in the absence of a rental market exceeds the nonowner’s usage if he or she were to own. This glut condition occurs when the total usage if everyone owned
the good, θαH + (1 − θ)αL , is lower than the actual stock of purchased goods.
Figure 3 illustrates market clearing with a positive rental rate, r ∗ , and the glut condition where the
supply and demand curves do not intersect. When the valuation of the high-types goes down from αH to
α′H , with α′H < αH , the supply curve shifts out (the dashed curve labeled S 1 (r )), such that even at r = 0,
the available supply, which would be θ(1 − α′H ), exceeds the demand from low-types, (1 − θ)αL , thereby
creating a glut.

4.4 Social surplus in the short-run peer-to-peer rental market
The introduction of the P2P rental market changes outcomes in two ways: high-type consumption goes
down (from x H = αH to x H = αH −r /2) and low-type consumption goes up (from x L = 0 to x L = αL −r /2).
The loss in utility for the high-type owners due to reduced consumption is
∆v H

£
¤ £ ¤
2αH (αH − r /2) − (αH − r /2)2 − α2H
{z
} | {z }
|
New
Old
r2
= − .
4

=

(7)

As we would expect, the greater the rental rate, the greater the loss in this consumption utility, as a higher
rental rate encourages owners to consume less. For the non-owners, the gain in utility from increased

13

consumption is
∆v L = α2L −

r2
.
4

(8)

To calculate the total change in social surplus, we can ignore the rental income for both consumer types,
as it is simply a transfer. The total change in surplus from the introduction of the P2P rental market is
thus
∆V = θ∆v H + (1 − θ)∆v L
= (1 − θ)α2L − r 2 /4.

(9)

This equation implies that the gain from the P2P rental market is the maximum surplus obtained by
the non-owners consuming at their preferred levels of usage, minus a term capturing the reduction in
consumption from both types required for the market to clear.9 As we know the equilibrium rental rate
from (5), we can write the total surplus as
V = θα2H + (1 − θ)α2L − r 2 /4
= θα2H + (1 − θ)α2L − [(1 − θ)αL − θ(1 − αH )]2 .

(10)

This expression indicates that the total surplus is equal to the surplus obtainable when everyone consumes their preferred amount of the good when facing no marginal cost, minus the square of the difference between how much is demanded when the rental rate is zero, (1 − θ)αL , and how much would be
supplied when the rental rate is zero, θ(1 − αH ). The greatest social surplus is “unlocked” by the emergence of the P2P rental market when non-owners are numerous and have relatively high valuations.

4.5 Bringing-to-market costs: labor, capital depreciation, and transaction costs
Our model thus far has assumed that owners can provide their unused quantities of the good to the
market at no cost. Now, we assume that the owner of the good must pay a BTM cost. This could be the
cost of labor for a good that requires a labor input, such as in the case of driving with Uber or cleaning
up an apartment when hosting on Airbnb; it also includes depreciation from additional usage as well
as the conventional transaction costs inherent in finding trading partners, coming to terms, executing
payments, handing off the good, and so on.
We will assume that the BTM cost is proportional to the amount brought to the market and is the
same magnitude for all owners. Let that cost on a per-unit basis be γ.10 The owner’s return to renting on
9 The ideal short-run P2P rental market is one where the excess capacity of the owners when they own equals the total de-

mand of non-owners if they were to own the good. Under this scenario, the market clears with zero rental rate and both owners
and non-owners get their preferred levels of usage.
10 Our model considers a single good and hence a single γ. In Section 5 we discuss how this value is likely to differ across
goods.

14

the P2P rental market is now just r − γ, and so x H (r ) = αH − (r − γ)/2. As we might intuit, this cost raises
the rental rate and lowers the transaction volume.
Market clearing with BTM costs requires that
θ(1 − (αH − (r − γ)/2)) = (1 − θ)(αL − r /2).

(11)

The new market-clearing rental rate is simply the rental rate when there are no BTM costs (from (5)) plus
the per-unit transaction cost scaled by the the size of supply side of the market, or
r BT M = r γ=0 + γθ.

(12)

Note that there is an incomplete pass through of the costs, and while pass through increases in θ, the net
effect on rental rates from a relative increase in owners is still negative.11
The quantity of the good exchanged is
1
Q BT M = Q γ=0 − γθ(1 − θ),
2

(13)

where Q γ=0 is the equilibrium quantity when there are no BTM costs. This quantity is defined in (6).

4.6 Bringing-to-market costs and existence of the peer-to-peer rental market
If BTM costs are sufficiently high, then no P2P rental market will exist. The highest possible BTM cost
that will still support a P2P rental market is
γ̄ = 2(1 − αH + αL ).

(14)

This condition comes from the requirement that r < 2αL ; otherwise, the cost of consuming any of the
good for a non-owner exceeds the marginal utility. As a check, note that from (13), when BTM costs
are at the highest possible level, γ = γ̄, Q BT M = 0 (using the definition of Q from (6)). There is no P2P
rental market when the reduced transaction volume from the BTM costs equals the amount that would
be supplied in equilibrium in the absence of those costs.

4.7 Revised ownership without bringing-to-market costs
We now consider what happens in the long run, when owners and non-owners can revise their ownership
decisions. For expositional ease, we will posit once again that BTM costs are zero. With this assumption,
the long-run utility from owning is
v iOW N = 2αi x i − x i2 + (1 − x i )r LR − p,
11 ∂r BT M = −2(α + (1 − α ) + γ < 0, as 2α > γ.
L
H
L
∂θ

15

(15)

whereas the utility from renting is
v iRE N T = 2αi x i − x i2 − x i r LR ,

(16)

where r LR is the market-clearing long-run rental rate. The first order condition for either choice is 2αi −
2x i − r LR = 0, and so x i∗ = αi − r LR /2. Computing the indirect utility for both decisions, we have
2
r LR

v OW N = α2i − p +

4

+ (1 − αi )r LR

1
and v RE N T = (r LR − 2α)2 .
4

(17)

Setting v OW N = v RE N T to find the conditions under which a user would be indifferent between renting
and owning, the αi term drops out, and we are left with the condition
p = r LR .

(18)

In the long-run P2P rental equilibrium, the rental rate equals the product market purchase price, and
ownership does not depend on either usage patterns or valuation.
For the long-run market to clear, we have to determine what fraction of consumers would choose to
own. Let f OW N be the fraction of consumers that purchase the good in equilibrium. As ownership does
not depend on valuation given that BTM costs are zero, we assume that both consumer types are equally
likely to own. For the market to clear,
£
¤
¡
¢
θ(1 − x H (p)) + (1 − θ)(1 − x L (p)) f OW N = θx H (p) + (1 − θ)x L (p) (1 − f OW N ).

(19)

This expression simplifies to
f OW N = θx H (p) + (1 − θ)x L (p)
= θαH + (1 − θ)αL − p/2,

(20)

thus indicating the intuitive condition that the fraction of consumers owning in the long run is the average usage rate in the population.
Product demand in the long run is just the fraction of consumers owning the good, or
D 1 (p) = f OW N
= θαH + (1 − θ)αL − p/2.

(21)

Before the P2P rental market emerged, there were “kinks” in the product market demand curve at α2H
and α2L . In contrast, in the long-run P2P rental equilibrium, product demand varies continuously over
the range of prices when both consumer types participate.
One implication of p = r LR is that there are no profits from owning simply to rent out, as the purchase

16

price is p and rental income from renting out all of the capacity is also p. In contrast, owners and nonowners that rent get an inframarginal surplus from their own consumption.

4.8 Product market demand in the long-run P2P rental market equilibrium
Many commentators on the “sharing economy” have assumed that the emergence of P2P rentals would
reduce ownership. Their argument is that there is a fixed amount of consumption for some good, a
“lump of consumption,” and that when idle goods are pulled into the market, demand can be met with
a smaller total number of goods owned. Our model shows that reduced ownership does not necessarily
follow, but the model does point to the condition under which total ownership would change, with no
BTM costs. The condition is that ownership will increase in the long run when the short-run rental rate
was above the purchase price, or that r SR > p. Intuitively, if the short-run rental rate were above the
purchase price, it would be attractive for individuals to buy the good purely to rent it out, as this would
be profitable even if one did not use the good at all.
To see this more formally, when r SR > p, it implies that
2[(1 − θ)αL − θ(1 − αH )] − p > 0
(1 − θ)αL − θ(1 − αH ) − p/2 > 0
θαH + (1 − θ)αL − p/2 > θ
D 1 (p) > D 0 (p),
(22)
where D 1 is the long-run product demand curve and D 0 is the pre-sharing demand curve. Recall that
in the pre-sharing product market, D 0 (p) = θ (for the range of prices where high-types purchased and
low-types did not), as only the high-types purchased the good. This is likely to occur in situations where
both consumer types have high valuations (making demand high and supply limited).12
A P2P rental market may lead to more or less ownership. However, it always increases the price at
which there is non-zero demand for the good by owners. The highest possible price for the good that
can support a market pre-P2P rental is p̄ 0 = α2H . Recall that in the pre-P2P rental market with two consumer types, if p > α2H , then no consumer buys the good (2). Let p = α2H , with would-be owners breaking
towards non-ownership rather than ownership, meaning D 0 (α2H ) = 0. In the long-run P2P market, the
rental rate would be r = p = α2H ; thus a high-type would demand x H = αH −α2H /2. As such, x H > 0, meaning there would still be positive demand from high-types at a price that would foreclose the possibility of
a non-P2P market, as αH > α2H .
12 One example of this kind of sharing-increases-demand phenomenon can be seen with the market for season tickets to

professional sports teams. Many teams now facilitate a resale market for their season ticket holders, charging a modest fee to
enable resales over the Internet. Presumably, these teams find that this quasi-secondary market does not decrease the demand
for season tickets. Belk (2014) also points out the possibility that sharing could expand, rather than contract, the market, giving
the example of time-sharing condominiums expanding the second-home vacation market.

17

One interesting aside is that if p > 2αL , then the long-run P2P equilibrium is one in which the hightypes simply trade among themselves, creating a market demand of just D(p) = θαH − p/2. These parameter values suggest the possibility of a transitory short-run phase in which low-types get access that
disappears once former-owners become renters and bid up the rental rate.

4.9 Long-run P2P rental market consumer surplus when both consumer types use the good
If both high- and low-types participate in the long-run P2P equilibrium, social surplus (assuming the
price of the good remains p) is
VLR =

1−θ
θ
(p − 2αH )2 +
(p − 2αL )2 .
4
4

(23)

By contrast, in the pre-P2P rental market, surplus was VN S = θ(α2H − p). The long-run gain in social
surplus in the P2P rental market is
VLR − VN S =

pθ
1−θ
(4 + p − 4αH ) +
(p − 2αL )2 .
4
4

(24)

The second term is clearly positive and the first term is as well, since αH < 1, and so the P2P rental market
increases the social surplus in the long-run, positing no change in the price of the good, p.

4.10 Long-run P2P rental market equilibrium with bringing-to-market costs
Now we consider the same long-run outcome, but assume positive BTM costs. When we do this, the
difference in the returns to owning versus renting for an individual with utility parameter αi is
v

OW N

−v

RE N T

¶
µ
αi − 1 − γ
rγ
.
+γ
=r −p −
2
4

(25)

As we would expect,v OW N − v RE N T = r − p if γ = 0. Note, however, unlike in the case with no BTM costs,
v OW N − v RE N T is larger for the high-types than the low-types because of the αi term appearing in the
difference. This implies that high-types would find ownership relatively more attractive. The economic
intuition is that because a high-type wants to use the good more than a low-type, it is more attractive to
use your own good rather than a rented good, as BTM costs are incorporated in the rental rate.
There are two possible long-run equilibria when BTM costs are positive: (1) some of the high-types
choose to rent, or (2) some of the low-types choose to own. For the first equilibrium, total ownership
goes down relative to the pre-P2P rental market case (as some owners are now renting), and vice versa
for the second equilibrium.
First, we note that r ≤ p +γ. Otherwise, someone could buy a good and then profitably rent all of it in
the rental market. A natural question is whether the long-run equilibrium with the BTM costs included
is analogous to the p = r LR result from (18); i.e., is r LR = p + γ? In other words, do the BTM costs get fully

18

incorporated into the rental rate? They do not, as was the case with the BTM costs in the short-run P2P
rental market (recall (12)).
In Equilibrium (1), in which some of the high-types rent, if r LR = p + γ, then high-type owners would
consume x = αH − p/2 and high-type renters would choose αH − (p + γ)/2. The utility of the high-type
N
RE N T
owners would be v OW
= 14 (p − 2αH )2 , while the utility of the high-type non-owners would be v H
=
H
¡
¢
2
1
2
4 p − 2α H + γ . Note that by assumption, α H > p, which implies that 2α H > p (recall that α < 1). As
RE N T
N
> vH
if r = p + γ. Thus, we conclude that for highγ > 0, (p − 2αH )2 > (p − 2αH + γ)2 and so v OW
H

types to be indifferent, r < p + γ. In the presence of BTM costs, a firm that bought the good solely to rent
would not merely earn no profits (as in the case with no BTM costs) but would instead suffer a loss.
Now consider Equilibrium (2), in which some of the low-types own. Recall that for low-types to demand any of the good in the P2P rental market, 2αL > r . Then, 2αL > p +γ, and thus 2αL > p. If r = p +γ,
then the utility of low-type owners would be v LOW N = 14 (p − 2αL )2 and v LRE N T = 14 (p − 2αL + γ)2 , and by
the same argument from the Equilibrium (1) case, v LOW N > v LRE N T .
The argument that the long-run P2P rental market rate does not fully pass through the BTM costs
becomes intuitive if we consider that γ plays a role equivalent to a per-unit sales tax. Therefore, so long
as neither side is completely elastic, the incidence of the tax will not fall wholly on the demand side (as
would be the case if r = p + γ). On the question of elasticity, Cullen and Farronato (2014) use data from
TaskRabbit to show that workers on this platform are highly elastic, with demand shocks met by large
increases in hours worked. Although TaskRabbit is more of a pure labor platform than, say, UberX or
Airbnb, if the suppliers in other P2P rental markets are similar, it suggests that the supply side of the
market would be able to pass through most of their BTM costs.

4.11 More complex BTM cost structures
Although we have assumed that BTM costs are constant and proportional to the amount of the good
rented, other possibilities are quite plausible. While we do not pursue the implications of these alternative possibilities formally, it is useful to consider the economic import of various types of cost structures.
First, any fixed cost to renting would create an economy of scale that would favor those with lots of capacity to sell on the rental market. When there were no BTM costs, ownership did not matter; when we
assumed BTM costs, ownership tilted towards those placing a high value on their own consumption. In
the presence of significant fixed costs, ownership would tilt back towards those who do not value their
own consumption, e.g., traditional rental firms.
We have assumed costs are homogeneous for all sellers in the P2P rental market. In practice, some
sellers presumably have lower costs than others, and the costs may rise with the quantity provided. To
illustrate the rising cost context, Uber drivers may find it cheap to supply one hour of labor after their 9-5
jobs, but find two hours nearly impossible if they have to pick up their kids from daycare at 6pm. Indeed,
Hall and Krueger (2015) report that Uber drivers work a surprisingly small number of hours relative to
taxi drivers despite generally higher wages, suggesting that they face increasing marginal costs per shift.

19

Both the heterogeneity of costs and the possibility of fixed costs suggest that in practice, the extensive
margin of supply is important: when rental rates go up, more owners of the good are pulled into the
market.
In the case of differential costs, and in the case of costs that rise with output, the equilibrium is
effectively the same as we outlined above. At the equilibrium, every owner/supplier will be operating at
the margin with BTM costs of γ. However, many of these owner/suppliers will be reaping inframarginal
benefits because they have a range where their BTM costs are below those priced into the market.

4.12 The platform’s incentives for reducing costs
One of the BTM costs faced by participants in P2P rental markets is the fee imposed by the platform.
While more complicated price structures are possible, the most common price structure seems to be
an ad valorem charge (sometimes with a minimum payment amount and some fixed fees): this is the
pricing structure of both Airbnb and Uber.
At a fixed rental rate r , we can think of the ad valorem charge as equivalent to a charge on the quantity
transacted (rather than on the dollar value of what was transacted), which allows us to write total BTM
costs as γ = γ0 +τ, where τ is the platform’s charge and γ0 are the “true” BTM costs (such as depreciation,
labor and so on). An owner renting out 1 − x units of the good would receive (1 − x)r in rental income,
bear “true” BTM costs (1− x)γ0 and then remit (1− x)τ to the platform. For any level of the BTM cost, the
platform can obtain higher revenue by reducing γ0 and raising τ by an offsetting amount. Of course, the
attractiveness of doing so depends on the elasticity of γ0 with respect to the costs the platform incurs to
reduce these BTM costs.
Lowering γ0 without increasing τ has an ambiguous effect on platform revenue, as it lowers the rental
rate but increases the quantity transacted. This suggests that the platform has stronger incentives to
lower BTM costs when demand is elastic, as the shifting out of the supply curve will greatly enlarge the
quantity transacted without significantly reducing price. This incentive for BTM cost reduction when the
platform demand is elastic suggests the benefits to society of having competing platforms (which presumably make demand more elastic), at least in this simple treatment of the platform’s pricing problem.
If we assume that the platform has removed all BTM costs and simply needs to set an optimal quantity charge, τ, then in the short run case the platform’s problem is
argmax
τ

¸
·
1
τ Q − τ(1 − θ)θ
2

(26)

which gives us a first order condition of τ∗ = 1 − (αH + αL ), or
τ∗ =

Q
.
(1 − θ)θ

(27)

The platform sets its optimal charge so that the realized transaction volume is half of what it would be
in the absence of the its charge. With this formulation, the platform charges the highest rates when
20

the market is imbalanced with respect to owners and sellers, which is also where quantity transacted
changes little with the imposition of the charge (i.e., the 21 τ(1 − θ)θ term is small).

4.13 Competition with conventional rental firms
The model predicts that in the long run, owning a good purely to rent it out offers no profits when BTM
costs are zero and a loss when BTM costs are greater than zero. This result is grim news for conventional
rental firms, though if there are economies of scale in rental, say, due to fixed costs, the situation is
improved, and possibly reversed.
There is already some evidence that P2P rental markets are affecting traditional rental firms: Byers
et al. (2013) find that Airbnb is already winning customers from hotels that cater to the lower end of the
market. The entrance of Airbnb lowered revenues by as much as 10% in some market segments; it also
seems to be lowering prices. Neeser et al. (2015) do not find the same revenue effects but do offer some
evidence that Airbnb may have pushed down prices in Nordic countries. On the ride-sharing side, there
are several signs that Uber is securing market share at the expense of existing taxi firms, such as falling
medallion prices and notable bankruptcies.13 The effects of competition are also potentially showing up
in service quality: Wallsten (2015) presents suggestive evidence from Chicago that consumer complaints
for traditional taxis fell following the entry of Uber.
Firms do have advantages over consumer-owners. They can enjoy economies of scale and expertise
in minimizing transaction costs. Edelman and Geradin (2015) give the example of how a conventional
hotel can, with a front-desk, handle the exchange of keys for hundreds of guests—a common source
of friction for Airbnb rentals. However, they also point out that, unsurprisingly, P2P rental platforms
invest heavily in trying to solve these kinds of problems. Indeed, Fradkin (2012) finds that in the case of
Airbnb, matching probability increased 18% over a two-year span, after controlling for search intensity.
A contributing factor was Airbnb reducing transaction costs by, for example, minimizing the amount
of information that had to be exchanged before completing a booking. In addition to these platformlead efforts, there is now a burgeoning industry providing complementary services to Airbnb hosts and
would-be UberX drivers. For example, a recently launched startup called Guesty aims to be a kind of
property management company for Airbnb rentals.

5 The attributes of goods and the feasibility of renting
In the model, the purchase price, the valuation of owners and non-owners, the size of the pool of owners
and non-owners, and the BTM costs of a good all affected whether a P2P rental market was possible.
And if it was possible, these parameters affected the markets characteristics in both the short and long
runs. In this section, we provide data on the attributes of some of these goods as a test of our modeling
13 “Yellow cab to file for bankruptcy”, San Francisco Examiner, January 6th, 2016. http://www.sfexaminer.com/yellow-cab-to-

file-for-bankruptcy/.

21

assumptions and predictions.
Goods that traditionally have been rented are expensive, durable goods that are used infrequently
but whose usage can be planned in advance. Examples include cars and hotels in distant cities, tuxedos,
certain kinds of specialty tools (e.g., rototillers, carpet shampooers), and so on. In the language of our
model, these are goods with high p, broad-based appeal (meaning a large pool of non-owners with a
non-zero α), and a sufficiently low BTM cost (low γ), relative to the rental rate.
The conditions necessary for the P2P rental market are similar, except that an equilibrium with
rentals is only possible if there are stocks of both owners and non-owners. When the price of a good
is so low that nearly every everyone owns it, no P2P rental market can exist, even when total usage is low
and the good is durable. For example, nearly every household owns a pair of scissors, and despite being
used very infrequently (on average, probably seconds a day), there is not a latent pool of non-owners
who would like access the scissors of owners. Other goods are expensive and durable but make poor
candidates for P2P rental because they are used by their owners more or less continuously—consider
prescription eyeglasses, wheelchairs, mobility scooters, furniture and so on.14
Other goods make poor rental candidates because their usage is difficult to plan. Some goods have a
highly predictable usage pattern—a family might arrange to rent a vacation home months in advance—
whereas other goods are much less predictable in their normal patterns of usage—the need for a back-up
electric generator is almost always a surprise in most locales. Goods with hard-to-plan usage are unlikely
to be rented easily as the temporal division problem is acute.
Another factor that would seem to affect suitability for rental is how much value a single session
of usage offers and thus whether renting can overcome the inherent transaction costs. While amount
of time rented is not necessarily proportional to the value created,15 the time of use is almost always
related to value. Goods that are used in small sessions are likely to make poor rental candidates. Goods
surely differ on this dimension: a person might use her vacation home in week-long chunks of time, her
lawn-mower in hour-long chunks, and her toothbrush in minute-long chunks.
The attributes that make a good “shareable” get attention from Benkler (2004). He points out that
some goods are “lumpy” in that you cannot buy less than some threshold amount, but once you own
it, it invariably has excess capacity. Benkler provides the example of a PC, which cannot be purchased
in fractional amounts, but once purchased, offers a certain amount of computation per unit of time,
whether you want it or not. Benkler is seeking goods with “relatively wide-spread private ownership and
[that] will systematically exhibit slack capacity relative to the demands of their owners.” This notion of
shareability as being related to the patterns of how goods are characteristically used also interests us
(though we differ from Benkler in that in our approach, the ownership decision and the amount of slack
capacity are not “givens” but rather economic decisions themselves).
14 For some of these goods there are traditional rental firms, but much of this is because the expected duration of use is so

short.
15 Consider that owners of champion racehorses can earn many hundreds of thousands of dollars from renting their animal’s
stud services for what could be a very small amount of time.

22

Figure 4: Google automatically generated query suggestions for “Airbnb for ” partial query

Notes: This screenshot shows the Google “auto-suggest” query completions for the
phrase “airbnb for”, which shows common queries entered by other users. This screenshot comes from the Google search toolbar in the Firefox browser, accessed on January
26th, 2016.

Predicting which goods are profitable candidates for P2P rental is a task best left to entrepreneurs
whose judgments will ultimately be evaluated by the market. However, it is still useful to get a sense of
where these markets might evolve by surveying consumers. One interesting source of market sentiment
about P2P rental comes from Google, which will “auto-complete” partial queries, providing a proxy for
what other Google users are searching for. Figure 4 shows the “auto-suggest” query completions from
the Google search toolbar for the partial query “Airbnb for.” Some of the queries are easy to understand:
cars, office space, parking, boats, storage, event spaces, and bikes are all indeed goods for which there are
already P2P rental markets. The phrase “airbnb for dogs” likely means kennel space and dog boarding,
not rental dogs, while “airbnb for food” likely means services where chefs will come to your house to
cook, ala KitchenSurfing.16
To move beyond the casual empiricism of considering which P2P rental markets might exist (or not)
for various goods, we conducted a consumer survey on Amazon Mechanical Turk. The model and the
survey complement each other in two ways. First, the survey helps justify some of the modeling conventions, such as making planned usage the primary explanation for the pattern of ownership rather than a
taste for ownership or wealth. Second, the survey offers a partial decomposition of the BTM costs.

5.1 Main empirical results
We find strong evidence that respondents who predicted that they would use a good more are more
likely to own that good. Increasing household income is associated with greater ownership, but even
16 And “Airbnb for ipad” is presumably the result of individuals looking for that iPad application made by Airbnb.

23

when controlling for income, predicted usage helps to explain ownership. Among non-owners, planned
usage was cited more often than a lack of income as the reason for non-ownership, with the exception of
certain extremely expensive goods like vacation homes. It may be the case that P2P rental markets might
create more welfare in developing countries, where individuals own fewer goods.
The predictability of usage and the size of usage sessions for a good tend to be positively correlated.
In other words, goods that are used unpredictably tend to be used for relatively short periods. These
kinds of goods are also more likely to be owned. When we inspect goods that are the “double opposite”—
predictable usage that occurs in large chunks—we see goods that are often already rented in conventional markets. These are also the goods where P2P rental markets seem to have had the most success.
Overall, we find that ownership and renting are gross substitutes, though there are notable outliers, such
as the car, which is both widely owned and rented, presumably mostly because of trips that are initially
taken by plane.

5.2 Design and administration of the survey
The survey focused on consumer decision making and usage patterns for a variety of goods. Although
MTurk offers a convenience sample, there is little reason to think its members would have highly idiosyncratic consumption patterns. Furthermore, for our purposes, the MTurk population is willing—and has
the incentive—to answer a tedious set of questions carefully. Workers on MTurk who have their work
“rejected” by dissatisfied employers become ineligible for the best, highest-paying kinds of work on the
marketplace and therefore are diligent. This respondent diligence makes it useful for certain kinds of
questions. (For example, Kuziemko et al. (2015) used the MTurk population to study elasticities of demand for redistribution.)
We hired US-based “Master” workers to answer questions about a consumer good, e.g., BBQ grill,
pick-up truck, men’s suit, canoe, etc. We asked questions about a total of 26 goods that we selected because we thought they would yield interesting answers and varied in purpose (e.g., recreation, home improvement, cooking and so on), purchase price, predictability, and usage size. We asked MTurk workers
whether they owned the good; whether they had ever rented or lent out the good; how much they would
use the good regardless of whether they actually owned the good; whether they would use the good in
one large chunk, or in many small chunks; whether their usage was predictable; why they did not own
the good; and finally, their household income. See Appendix A for the full list of goods as well as the
actual survey questions and answers. Each “human intelligence task,” or HIT, comprised a total of eight
questions about one particular good, with one question about family income. Workers were allowed to
answer for each of the sampled goods.

5.3 Ownership by an individual’s planned usage
In the model, consumers considered how much they would use some good and then compared the resultant usage utility against the purchase price. The model predicts increasing ownership in estimated
24

usage. Table 1 shows that individuals reporting greater expected usage are more likely to own the good.
Furthermore, while higher household income predicts ownership, the strong association between expected usage and ownership persists even after taking income into account.
To elicit expected usage, we asked respondents to select how often they would use a good in time
units, using familiar measures of time to label the responses, e.g., one hour a week, one hour a day and
so on. We framed the choices as being approximately on a logarithmic scale, with each increase in usage
being approximately a doubling of the fraction of time. See Appendix A for the actual options.
Column (1) of Table 1 reports an OLS estimation of
OWNi g = β0 + β1 log x i g + c g + ǫg ,

(28)

where OWNi g indicates ownership by respondent i of good g ; x i g is the respondent’s reported fraction
of time they estimate they would spend using the good, and c g is a good-specific fixed effect. Standard
errors are clustered at the level of the good. In Column (2), a control for the log of family income is
included; in Column (3), a respondent fixed effect is added.
Table 1: Respondent estimates of the fraction of time spent using a good and whether they own that good
Dependent variable:
Respondent owns the item?, (OWNi g = 1)

Log estimated usage, log x i g

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.0262∗∗

0.0259∗∗

0.0264∗∗
(0.0110)

(0.0111)
Log household income, log y i
Good FE
Respondent FE
Observations
R2

Y
N
411
0.4447

(0.0109)
0.1019∗∗∗
(0.0254)
Y
N
411
0.4651

Y
Y
411
0.5672

Notes: This table reports OLS regressions where the dependent variable is an indicator for
whether a respondent reported owning a particular good. In Column (1), the independent variable is that respondent’s estimate of what fraction of time he or she would spend using that
good (in logs). In Column (2), a regressor for the log of the respondent’s self-reported household income is added to the Column (1) specification. Column (3) uses the same specification
as Column (1), but a respondent-specific fixed effect is added. The sample is restricted to respondents who report some positive amount of predicted usage of the good and reported their
household income. All regressions include good-specific fixed effects, and standard errors are
clustered at the good level. Significance indicators: p ≤ 0.05 : ∗, p ≤ 0.01 : ∗∗, and p ≤ .001 : ∗∗∗.

As the model predicts, higher estimated usage is positively associated with ownership. The coefficient on the estimated usage regressor in Column (1) implies that a doubling of expected usage for some
good—say using a BBQ grill two hours a week instead of one hour—is associated with about a 2.5 percentage point increase in the probability of ownership.17 In Column (2), the coefficient on the usage
17 Assuming log points are approximately equal to percentage changes.

25

Figure 5: Fraction of non-owners citing income as the reason (rather than usage) for not owning a good
vacation home
high−end audio headphones
portable air conditioner
high−end digitial camera
pick−up truck
back−up electric generator
jet ski
diamond necklace
push lawnmower
cordless power drill
ride−on lawnmower
mountain bike
tuxedo
sewing machine
kid's bouncy castle
cat carrier (for transporting cats)
canoe
a men's suit

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

0%

25%

50%

75%

Fraction citing income = (1 − Fraction citing usage)
Notes: This figure plots the fraction of non-owners for each good citing income, among those that cited either
income or usage as the reason for non-ownership. Only goods with seven or more non-owners are included. Each
point estimate is contained within a 95% CI calculated using the Wilson method (Wilson, 1927).

regressor is the same magnitude, despite the inclusion of the log of self-reported household income (in
thousands) in the specification.18 As we would expect given that most of the goods listed are normal, a
higher income is associated with greater probability of ownership—a 10% increase in household income
is associated with a 1% increase in the probability of ownership. However, the lack of change in the usage regressor implies that the pattern found in Column (1) is not primarily the result of higher income
respondents being more likely to own and report greater expected usage generally (perhaps because of
greater leisure time). In Column (3), we re-estimate Column (1) but include respondent-specific fixed
effects as well. As with the other specifications, the strong positive relationship between expected usage
and ownership persists.

5.4 Self-reported reasons for non-ownership
The regression results in Table 1 suggest that both income and predicted usage are important for explaining the ownership decision. These two factors are presumably more or less important for different
kinds of goods. Figure 5 shows that there is substantial good-level heterogeneity in the reported reasons
of non-owners. However, for the goods we surveyed, explanations for non-ownership are strongly tilted
towards usage considerations rather than toward income considerations.
18 Household incomes imputed by taking the midpoint of the range associated with each bin (i.e., a respondent’s selecting

$10,000-$19,999 is imputed to have a $15K family income). There was only one top-coded respondent, who was given an
imputed income of 1.5 times the censoring threshold. See Appendix A for the actual income bands respondents could select
from.

26

Non-owners were asked for the primary reason for not owning a good and could cite usage (“We
wouldn’t use it enough to justify the purchase price”), income (“We would use it, but we simply do not
have the money”) or space (“We don’t have space for this item.”). In Figure 5, we plot the per-good
percentage of non-owners citing income as the reason for non-ownership (out of non-owners that cited
either income or usage—very few cited space). By construction, the fraction citing income is 1 minus
the fraction citing usage. The sample is limited to goods that had seven or more non-owners. There
are some goods for which income was not cited at all (e.g., sewing machine, tuxedo, canoe), and several
others where usage was overwhelmingly more likely to be cited. The only goods where a larger fraction
of respondents cited income rather than usage were high-end headphones and vacation homes.

5.5 Aggregate usage chunkiness and predictability
Two major practical determinants of the feasibility of a P2P rental market are the predictability and size
of usage sessions. Goods for which it is easy to predict when they will be needed (perhaps because it
is easy for the owner to choose when to use the good with little loss in utility) would be easier to rent
(or lend out). In contrast, goods that have inherently unpredictable usage or goods where there is little
flexibility in when they are used would be difficult to rent out without substantial utility loss to the owner.
Similarly, for goods that are used in numerous small sessions, renting or lending out the good to others
would create high transactions costs. We asked subjects about the predictability and chunkiness of their
usage for the goods and found that these measures strongly covary (with some exceptions, which we will
discuss): that is, the smaller the chunk of typical usage, the more unpredictable is the usage. For example,
respondents rated a hammer as being used in small chunks of time (say, when hanging a picture), and
this usage is unpredictable. In contrast, a tuxedo scores low on both measures—when used it is used for
a substantial amount of time (say, when attending a wedding), and that usage can be predicted far in
advance.
For each good, respondents were asked to rate the unpredictability of usage on a 1-5 scale (1 was
highly predictable and 5 was highly unpredictable) as well as chunkiness (1 was one big chunk— and
5 was low chunkiness—lots of little chunks). We then normalized responses across all goods to create
unpredictability and chunkiness scores to have a meaningful 0. Figure 6 plots the mean unpredictability
score against the mean chunkiness score. It shows a strong relationship between chunkiness and predictability, with two notable outliers: the toothbrush and the generator. A toothbrush is used in small
chunks (2 minutes according to the ADA) and its usage is highly predictable (after every meal, if ADA
prescriptions are followed). The back-up electric generator is the toothbrush’s opposite—power can go
out for days or even weeks during a disaster, and this event is rarely predictable. These common-sense
answers are not particularly illuminating, but they do show subjects were paying attention and offering
reasonable answers.
Examining goods near the origin, we see goods well suited to rental in that they have predictable
usage that occurs in large chunks. Not surprisingly, these are often goods for which conventional rental

27

Predictable usage........Mean unpredictability score......Unpredictable usage

Figure 6: Usage predictability versus chunkiness
1.5
●

back−up electric generator

1.0

cordless power drill
●

hammer

●

●

sewing machine

iPad or tablet

0.5

blender

●

high−end digitial camera

●

●

●

food processor

●

●

high−end audio headphones
●

mountain bike

car

●

0.0

portable air conditioner

●

kitchen timer (or egg timer)

BBQ Grill

●

cat carrier (for transporting cats)

●
●
●

pick−up truck

diamond necklace
●

●

−0.5

kid's bouncy castle

jet ski

a men's suit
●

●

ride−on lawnmower

canoe

●

toothbrush

●

tuxedo

push lawnmower

●

●

●

−1.0

vacation home
−1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Large usage chunks....................Mean chunkiness score...................Small usage chunks
Notes: This figure plots each good’s mean unpredictability score versus that same good’s mean chunkiness score.
These scores are calculated by normalizing the 1-5 scores across all goods and all respondents. A lower chunkiness
score (near the origin) implies that good is characteristically used in large chunks, whereas a higher chunkiness
score indicates the opposite. On the y-axis, goods with a high unpredictability score have unpredictable usage
patterns (i.e., consumers do not know in advance when they will need the good).

28

markets already exist—formal wear (tuxedos), vacation homes, bikes, sporting equipment (canoes and
jet skis for rent at lakes), and so on. As we move a bit further from the origin, we see goods for which there
is not much of a rental market (lawnmowers and jewelry) but which would seem to have the attributes
necessary to support such a market, assuming there are in fact enough non-owners to support it.

5.6 Predictability, chunkiness, and ownership
We now test whether the predictability and chunkiness measures are related to individual ownership.
Table 2 shows that they are, in the expected direction: goods with unpredictable usage that occurs in
small chunks are substantially more likely to be owned. Furthermore, these two measures are not simply
capturing some single latent “rentability” measure, as each seems to have an independent effect on the
probability of ownership.
Table 2: Unpredictability and chunkiness of good usage and their association with good ownership.
Dependent variable:
Item is owned
(1)
Unpredictability Score (US)

(2)

0.139∗∗∗
(0.030)
0.135∗∗∗
(0.025)

Chunkiness Score (CS)
US x CS
Respondent FE
Good FE
Observations
R2

Y
N
489
0.170

Y
N
489
0.169

(3)

(4)

0.095∗∗∗
(0.034)
0.091∗∗∗
(0.029)
−0.009
(0.018)

0.003
(0.034)
−0.018
(0.025)
0.006
(0.018)

Y
N
489
0.191

Y
Y
489
0.500

Notes: This table reports regressions of an indicator for whether the respondent owns a good on that same
respondent’s estimates of the unpredictability and granularity of usage for that good. The two indices are
normalized responses to the 1-5 scale questions on usage chunkiness and unpredictability, pooled over
all respondents and goods. Toothbrushes and backup generators are excluded from the sample. See Appendix A for the actual survey language and responses. In each regression, a respondent-specific fixed effect
is included. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the individual respondent. Significance indicators:
p ≤ 0.05 : ∗, p ≤ 0.01 : ∗∗, and p ≤ .001 : ∗ ∗ ∗.

Column (1) of Table 2 reports an estimate of
Owni g = β0 + β1 U NPREDICTABILITY S COREi g + c i + ǫi ,

(29)

where U NPREDICTABILITY S COREi g is the normalized unpredictability score by respondent i for good g .
The coefficient on the unpredictability score is positive and highly significant. A one standard deviation decrease in predictability increases the probability of ownership by about 14 percentage points. In
Column (2), we instead use the chunkiness measure as the predictor and also find a positive and highly
significant effect of about the same magnitude. In Column (3), we interact the chunkiness and pre29

dictability measures. The effect for each measure is reduced (though a formal hypothesis test would
fail to reject a difference relative to the estimate when each measure appeared alone). Their interaction
term, while negative, is small and far from significant.
One concern with our approach might be that respondents prone to reporting high or low chunkiness and predictability scores might be idiosyncratically more or less likely to own the good. In other
words, the patterns from Columns (1) through (3) might reflect individual differences rather than general attributes about the good. In Column (4), we use the same specification as Column (3) but include
a good-specific effect. With this effect, the coefficients on each regressor end up close to zero, which
supports the notion that the patterns in the previous regressions really are driven by the nature of the
good.

5.7 Aggregate ownership and renting patterns at the level of the good
This paper was motivated in part by the recent flourishing of P2P rental markets. Thus, asking respondents whether they have rented a particular good in a P2P rental market would likely yield few results,
given how new these markets are. However, the existing P2P rental market platforms seem to be focusing on sectors where conventional rental markets already existed (or at least met the same want, say in
the case of Airbnb offering a substitute for hotels). As such, asking respondents if they have ever rented
a good at all might be a reasonable proxy for whether they would eventually rent such a good in a P2P
rental market. For each good, we asked whether the respondent’s household (a) owned the good and (b)
had ever rented the good. As Figure 7 will show, renting and owning are gross substitutes in the data,
when cars are excluded. Cars show a high level of both ownership and rental.
In Figure 7, the fraction owning is plotted on the x-axis and the fraction renting on the y-axis. Both
axes are on a square root scale to better show the data. Some notable goods are labeled—see Appendix B
for the precise by-good fractions for every good.
Unsurprisingly, goods that are nearly universally owned show little renting. There are a number of
goods that show medium ownership levels (e.g., around 50%) and yet zero recorded instances of renting, which could indicate potential P2P rental market candidates. Goods that are used during special
occasions like weddings, celebrations, and vacations show the highest rates of rental and lowest rates of
ownership, e.g., tuxedos, vacation homes, jet ski, tuxedos, canoes, and bouncy castles.
To confirm the visual pattern of renting declining in ownership, Column (1) of Table 3 reports an
estimate of
F RAC R ENT g = β0 + β1 F RAC OWN g + ǫ,

(30)

where F RAC R ENT g is the fraction claiming to have rented good g and F RAC OWN g is the fraction of respondents reporting to own good g . Column (1) reports the estimated regression of this equation with
cars, while in Column (2), cars are excluded. If we exclude cars, there is a strong negative relationship

30

Figure 7: Fraction of respondents reporting having rented a good versus fraction reporting owning that
good
●

car

75%

Fraction Renting

50%

tuxedo
●

25%

jet ski
●
●

pick−up

vacation home

●

●

bouncy castle
10%

suit

●

canoe

food processor

●
●

5%

push lawnmower

back−up gen
necklace
AC

0%
0%

mt. bike

camera

cat carrier

●

●

10%

●

25%

●

●

drill
●

●

egg timer

BBQ

ride−on lawnmowersewing machine headphones

●

5%

iPad

blender

toothbrush
●

50%

●

hammer

●

●

75%

100%

Fraction Owning

Notes: This figure plots the fraction of respondents reporting ever having renting the good in question versus the
fraction reporting owning the good.

Table 3: Fraction of respondents owning a good versus fraction having rented a good
Dependent variable:
Fraction reporting renting the good (F RAC R ENTAL)
(1)
Fraction reporting owning the good
Constant
Sample
Observations
R2

(2)

−0.009
(0.109)
0.081
(0.059)

−0.160∗∗∗
(0.046)
0.115∗∗∗
(0.024)

All Goods
26
0.0003

Cars Excluded
25
0.345

Notes: The unit of observation for the regressions in this table is the individual good. The dependent variable is the fraction of respondents reporting having rented that good, while the independent variable is the
fraction reporting owning that good. Column (1) includes all goods surveyed, while Column (2) excludes
cars. For the full list of goods and the survey language, see Appendix A. Significance indicators: p ≤ 0.05 : ∗,
p ≤ 0.01 : ∗∗, and p ≤ .001 : ∗ ∗ ∗.

31

between owning and renting; a 10% increase in the fraction owning reduces the fraction of households
renting by a little more than 1.5 percentage points.

6 Conclusion
The sharing economy has dramatically impacted several important markets in just a few years, notably
those for ride services and for very short-term apartment rentals. Given the energy and vision of entrepreneurs, new developments in both technology and the effective communication of information,
P2P rental markets have the potential to transform additional markets.
One area where P2P rental markets could have a long-term effect is on the diversity of goods consumed. Consider that in some formulations of the consumer problem, consumers consume some positive amount of every good offered. This is obviously a large departure from empirical reality if we draw
fine-grained distinctions among “goods.” For example, Amazon.com currently lists 6,238 results for
“blender” in the Home & Kitchen category: presumably most households own far fewer than this number, with most owning one or none.19 The reason for this pattern in the language of this model is clear:
a consumer’s α for Blender 2 conditional upon owning Blender 1 is quite low; thus a second blender is
not purchased. However, if a low-BTM rental market existed for both blender types, consumers could
act upon their taste for diversity and use both types without owning both blenders. Even if the blender
example seems implausible, we should consider that very few consumers try to rent the car that they
normally drive in their hometown when on vacation. Presumably, they diversify consumption in these
cases precisely because it is easy to do so.
One long-term reaction to the rise of P2P rental markets is that firms might change the goods that
they offer. As P2P rental markets become commonplace, manufacturers will begin designing products
that cater to this additional purpose. For example, locks on cars and houses that allow remote entry will
be more appealing. The emerging Internet-of-Things will make it easier to identify goods that are not
being used at a moment in time and perhaps facilitate nearly seamless trade. If autonomous vehicles
and drones become commonplace, even the seemingly unavoidable transaction costs associated with
moving goods to where they are needed might be substantially diminished.20 Similarly, technologies
that make it easier to monitor usage (GPS, embedded sensors, streaming video of how they are being
used and so on) should make contracting easier and reduce some of the informational asymmetries that
contribute to transaction costs. As more of economic and social life is computer-mediated, platforms will
use the information gained to verify the identity and reputation of buyers and sellers, further mitigating
both moral hazard and adverse selection.
Our model makes several predictions that are—or should become—testable over time as P2P rental
markets grow. Some obvious candidates include examining whether the emergence of P2P rental markets increases access by non-owners, change ownership decisions, and affects rental rates.
19 As of October 8th, 2014.
20 Thanks to Jonathan Hall for making this point.

32

References
Adomavicius, Gediminas and Alexander Tuzhilin, “Toward the Next Generation of Recommender Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-art and Possible Extensions,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, 2005, 17 (6), 734–749.
Avital, Michel, John M Carroll, Anders Hjalmarsson, Natalia Levina, Arvind Malhotra, and Arun Sundararajan, “The Sharing Economy: Friend or Foe?,” in “Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Information Systems” 2015.
Bakos, J Yannis, “Reducing Buyer Search Costs: Implications for Electronic Marketplaces,” Management
Science, 1997, 43 (12), 1676–1692.
Becker, Gary S, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 1965, 75 (299), 493–517.
Belk, Russell, “You Are What You Can Access: Sharing and Collaborative Consumption Online,” Journal
of Business Research, 2014, 67 (8), 1595–1600.
Benjaafar, Saif, Guangwen Crystal Kong, Xiang Li, and Costas Courcoubetis, “Peer-to-Peer Product
Sharing: Implications for Ownership, Usage and Social Welfare in the Sharing Economy,” Working
Paper, 2015.
Benkler, Yochai, “Sharing Nicely: On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of Sharing as a Modality of
Economic Production,” Yale Law Journal, 2004, pp. 273–358.
Bolton, Gary, Ben Greiner, and Axel Ockenfels, “Engineering Trust: Reciprocity in the Production of
Reputation Information,” Management Science, 2013, 59 (2), 265–285.
Botsman, Rachel and Roo Rogers, What’s Mine is Yours: The Rise of Collaborative Consumption, HarperBusiness, 2010.
Bronnenberg, Bart J, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M Shapiro, “Do Pharmacists Buy
Bayer? Informed Shoppers and the Brand Premium,” Working Paper, 2014.
Byers, John W, Davide Proserpio, and Georgios Zervas, “The Rise of the Sharing Economy: Estimating
the Impact of Airbnb on the Hotel Industry,” Working Paper, 2013.
Cabral, Luis and Ali Hortaçsu, “The Dynamics of Seller Reputation: Evidence from eBay,” The Journal of
Industrial Economics, 2010, 58 (1), 54–78.
Cannon, Sarah and Lawrence H Summers, “How Uber and the Sharing Economy Can Win Over Regulators,” Harvard Business Review, 2014, 13.
Cullen, Zoë and Chiara Farronato, “Outsourcing Tasks Online: Matching Supply and Demand on Peerto-Peer Internet Platforms,” Working Paper, 2014.
33

De los Santos, Babur, Ali Hortaçsu, and Matthijs R Wildenbeest, “Testing Models of Consumer Search
using Data on Web Browsing and Purchasing Behavior,” The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6),
2955–2980.
Dellarocas, Chrysanthos, “The Digitization of Word of Mouth: Promise and Challenges of Online Feedback Mechanisms,” Management Science, 2003, 49 (10), 1407–1424.
Dinerstein, Michael, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan, “Consumer Price Search and
Platform Design in Internet Commerce,” Working Paper, 2014.
Edelman, Benjamin G and Damien Geradin, “Efficiencies and Regulatory Shortcuts: How Should We
Regulate Companies like Airbnb and Uber?,” Working Paper, 2015, (16-026).
Einav, Liran, Chiara Farronato, and Jonathan Levin, “Peer-to-Peer Markets,” Working Paper, 2015.
Eisenmann, Thomas, Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall W Van Alstyne, “Strategies for Two-sided Markets,”
Harvard Business Review, 2006, 84 (10), 92.
Fradkin, Andrey, “Do Online Marketplaces Become More Efficient Over Time?,” Working Paper, 2012.
, “Search Frictions and the Design of Online Marketplaces,” Working Paper, 2013.
, Elena Grewal, Dave Holtz, and Matthew Pearson, “Bias and Reciprocity in Online Reviews: Evidence
From Field Experiments on Airbnb,” in “Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics
and Computation” ACM 2015, pp. 641–641.
Fraiberger, Samuel P. and Arun Sundararajan, “Peer-to-Peer Rental Markets in the Sharing Economy,”
Working Paper, 2015.
Hagiu, Andrei, “Strategic Decisions for Multisided Platforms,” MIT Sloan Management Review, 2014, 55
(2), 71.
and Julian Wright, “Marketplace or Reseller?,” Management Science, 2014, 61 (1), 184–203.
Hall, Jonathan V and Alan B Krueger, “An Analysis of the Labor Market for Uber’s Driver-Partners in the
United States,” Working Paper, 2015.
Hampshire, Robert and Craig Gaites, “Peer-to-Peer Carsharing: Market Analysis and Potential Growth,”
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2011, (2217), 119–126.
Hitsch, Günter J, Ali Hortaçsu, and Dan Ariely, “Matching and Sorting in Online Dating,” The American
Economic Review, 2010, pp. 130–163.
Horton, John J, “Misdirected search effort in a matching market: Causes, consequences and a partial
solution,” in “Proceedings of the fifteenth ACM conference on Economics and computation” ACM
2014, pp. 357–357.
34

, “The Tragedy of Your Upstairs Neighbors: Is the Airbnb Negative Externality Internalized?,” Working
Paper, 2014.
and Joseph M Golden, “Reputation Inflation: Evidence from an Online Labor Market,” 2015.
Hui, Xiang, Maryam Saeedi, Zeqian Shen, and Neel Sundaresan, “From Lemon Markets to Managed
Markets: the Evolution of eBay’s Reputation System,” Working Paper, 2014.
Koopman, Christopher, Matthew D Mitchell, and Adam D Thierer, “The Sharing Economy and Consumer Protection Regulation: The Case for Policy Change,” Working Paper, 2014.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “How Elastic Are Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (4), 1478–1508.
Malhotra, Arvind and Marshall Van Alstyne, “The Dark Side of the Sharing Economy ldots and How to
Lighten It,” Communications of the ACM, 2014, 57 (11), 24–27.
Neeser, Dâvid, Martin Peitz, and Jan Stuhler, “Does Airbnb Hurt Hotel Business: Evidence from the
Nordic Countries,” Working Paper, 2015.
Nosko, Chris and Steven Tadelis, “The Limits of Reputation in Platform Markets: An Empirical Analysis
and Field Experiment,” Working Paper, 2015.
Resnick, Paul and Hal R. Varian, “Recommender Systems,” Communications of the ACM, 1997, 40 (3),
56–58.
and Richard Zeckhauser, “Trust Among Strangers in Internet Transactions: Empirical Analysis of
eBay’s Reputation System,” The Economics of the Internet and E-commerce, 2002, 11 (2), 23–25.
, Ko Kuwabara, Richard Zeckhauser, and Eric Friedman, “Reputation Systems,” Communications of
the ACM, 2000, 43 (12), 45–48.
Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole, “Platform Competition in Two-sided Markets,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2003, pp. 990–1029.
and

, “Two-sided Markets: A Progress Report,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 2006, 37 (3), 645–

667.
Slee, Tom, What’s Yours is Mine: Against the Sharing Economy, OR Books, 2015.
Sundararajan, Arun, “From Zipcar to the Sharing Economy,” Harvard Business Review, 2013.
Varian, Hal R., “Buying, Sharing and Renting Information Goods,” The Journal of Industrial Economics,
2000, 48 (4), 473–488.
35

, “Computer Mediated Transactions,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (2), 1–10.
Wallsten, Scott, “Has Uber Forced Taxi Drivers to Step Up Their Game?,” Working Paper, 2015.
Wilson, Edwin B., “Probable Inference, the Law of Succession, and Statistical Inference,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 1927, 22 (158), 209–212.

36

A Survey Questions
The actual goods were:
• BBQ Grill
• toothbrush
• a men’s suit
• blender
• canoe
• car
• cordless power drill
• hammer
• diamond necklace
• food processor
• hammer
• cat carrier (for transporting cats)
• high-end audio headphones
• high-end digitial [sic] camera
• iPad or tablet
• jet ski
• kid’s boucy [sic] castle
• kitchen timer (or egg timer)
• mountain bike
• pick-up truck
• push lawnmower
• ride-on lawnmower
• tuxedo
37

• vacation home
• back-up electric generator
• portable air conditioner
• sewing machine
• Does your household own a good?
– Yes
– No
• Have you ever lent your good to someone else?
– Yes
– No
– NA - we do not own one.
• Have you ever borrowed a good from someone else?
– Yes
– No
– NA - we own one.
• Have you ever rented a good?
– Yes
– No
– NA - we own one.
• Regardless of whether your household owns a good, if you did own one, how much do you estimate
it would be used by members of your household on average?
– We would not use this at all
– 1 minute a week (about 1 hour a year)
– 5 minutes a week (about 4 hours a year)
– 1/2 an hour a week
– 1 hour a week
– 1/2 an hour a day

38

– 1 hour a day
– 2 hours a day
– 4 hours a day
– 8 hours a day
– 16 hours a day
– 24 hours a day (I would continuously be using this good)
• Regardless of whether you actually own a good, how do you imagine it would be used if it was
owned by your household (on a scale of 1 to 5):
– 1 - Used in one big block of time
– 2
– 3 - Used in a mixture of large and small blocks of time
– 4
– 5 - Used in many small blocks of time
• Regardless of whether you actually own a good, how predictable would your usage of it be if you
did own it:
– 1 - Very predictable—I can plan usage many weeks in advance
– 2
– 3 - Somewhat predictable
– 4
– 5 - Very unpredictable—I would never know exactly when I would need to use it until right
beforehand.
• If you do not own a good, what is the primary reason?
– NA - we own one.
– We wouldn’t use it enough to justify the purchase price
– We would use it, but we simply do not have the money.
– I don’t have the space for this item
• What is your total household income?
– Less than $10,000
– $10,000-$19,999
39

– $20,000-$29,999
– $30,000-$39,999
– $40,000-$49,999
– $50,000-$59,999
– $60,000-$69,999
– $70,000-$79,999
– $80,000-$89,999
– $90,000-$99,999
– $100,000-$149,000
– More than $150,000

B Additional empirical results
Figure 8 shows the fraction of respondents reporting owning various goods, as well as 95% confidence
intervals for that point estimate computing using the Wilson method for a binary proportion. There are
few surprises: nearly everyone owns a toothbrush, a hammer, and a blender; no one reported owning a
jet ski, and only one respondent reported owning a vacation home. Figure 9 shows the fraction of respondents reporting having rented the various goods. Generally, ownership and renting appear to be gross
substitutes, with the notable exception of cars, presumably because people rent cars when traveling.
The mean unpredictability scores by good seem sensible: Figure 10 shows the mean unpredictability
index per good. The most predictable goods are either those associated with planned recreation (e.g.,
vacation home, canoe, jet ski, tuxedo) or predictable chores (e.g., toothbrush, the two kinds of lawnmowers). The most unpredictable goods are associated with either food preparation (e.g., blender, food
processor) or repairs (e.g., hammer, sewing machine, cordless power drill). Back-up electric generator is
a clear (and unsurprising) outlier—you are in a sense always “surprised” when you need to use it.
Figure 11 shows the mean chunkiness index per good. There appears to be some similarity in high
predictable usage, but some goods used in small chunks of time also appear to have highly predictable
usage—namely the toothbrush.

40

h
br us
to o th
mer
ham
er
blend
)
car
timer
Grill
r egg
BBQ
er (o
e n ti m
kitch
blet
o r ta
r
iPad
esso
l
proc
r dril
food
powe
less
cord
uit
era
n's s
l cam
s
a me
igitia
hone
d
end
eadp
cats)
h ig h − d a u d i o h
r ting
en
nspo
a
r
t
h ig h −
r (for
arrie
r
e
cat c
mow
lawn
e
push
achin er
ng m
sewi
nmow
w
on la
ce
r id e −
eckla
n
ond
d ia m
bike
n ta in
mou
o
tuxed
tor
uck
nera
up tr
ric ge
pick−
elect
−up
back
ome
r
tion h onditione
vaca
ir c
ble a
p o r ta
e
stle
cano
cy ca
boun
kid's
i
jet sk
75%

●

50%

25%

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

25%

car
o
tuxed truck
up
pick−
i
jet sk
ome
tion h castle
vaca
cy
boun
kid's
e
er
cano
tor
mow
nera
lawn
ric ge
push
elect
−up
back
h
brus
e
tooth
achin
ng m
ower
sewi
wnm
ioner
on la
ondit
ride−
c
r
i
ble a
)
por ta
ike
b
timer
ntain
r egg
mou
er (o
en tim
kitch
ra
blet
or ta
came
l
a
es
iPad
digiti
phon
end
head
high−
audio
end
high−
mer
r
ham
esso
proc
e
c
a
l
food
neck
ond
ts)
drill
r
diam
ng ca
powe
por ti
less
trans
cord
r (for
arrie
cat c
er
blend
uit
n's s
a me ll
Gri
BBQ

41

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

0%

●
●

0%

●

75%

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

100%

●

●
●

●

●

●

Fraction of respondents

●

●

●

50%

●
●
●
●

●
●

●

Fraction of respondents

Figure 8: Fraction of respondents owning various goods

Figure 9: Fraction of respondents reporting having rented various goods

●

1

●

●

−1

●
●
●

−1.0

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

−0.5

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

)
h
timer
brus
r egg
tooth
er (o
en tim
kitch
er
blend
mer
ham
r
esso
proc
food
es
blet
phon
or ta
head
iPad
audio
end
high−
Grill
drill
s)
BBQ
r
g cat
powe
por tin
less
cord
trans
r (for
arrie
cat c
chine
era
g ma
l cam
sewin
digitia
end
high−
car
uck
er
up tr
dition
pick−
ir con
ble a
por ta
ower
wnm
on la
ride−
er
mow
lawn
push
lace
neck
ond
diam
bike
ntain
mou
i
jet sk
uit
n's s
stle
a me
cy ca
boun
kid's
tor
e
nera
cano
ric ge
elect
−up
me
n ho
back

tio
vaca
o
tuxed

42

●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●

0.0

●
●
●
●
●
●

●

0

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

0.5

●
●
●
●

Mean unpredictability inde

tor
nera
ric ge
elect
−up
l
back
r dril
powe
less
cord
mer
ham
chine
g ma
sewin
blet
or ta
iPad
er
blend
r
esso
era
proc
l cam
food
es
digitia
phon
end
head
high−
)
audio
timer
end
r egg
high−
er (o
en tim
kitch
s)
g cat
Grill
por tin
BBQ
trans
r (for
arrie
cat c
bike
ntain
mou
er
dition
car
ir con
ble a
por ta
uck
up tr
pick−
lace
neck
ond
diam
i
stle
jet sk
cy ca
boun
kid's
uit
n's s
a me
e
cano
ower
wnm
on la
ride−
er
mow
lawn
push
h
brus
tooth
o
tuxed
ome
tion h
vaca
1.5

1.0

●

●

Mean chunkiness score

Figure 10: Mean unpredictability index by good

Figure 11: Mean chunkiness index by good

