NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUCCESSFUL ADJUSTMENT IN A
MULTI-SECTORAL ECONOMY

Joshua Aizenman

Working Paper No. 2202

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1987

I would like to thank Ruth Klinov for discussions that motivated this paper.
All errors, however, are mine. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2202
April 1987

Successful Adjustment in a Multi-Sectoral Economy

ABSTRACT

study analyzes the adjustment to a fiscal reform in a dependent
economy. It evaluates the economic factors that are relevant for making the
choice between a cut in employment versus a cut in wages as a means of
reducing the fiscal wage bill. We demonstrate that In the presence of costly
short-run mobility of labor there is a natural advantage to a wage policy over
employment policy. Fiscal deficits can be dealt with successfully by a wage
policy and with the corresponding adjustment in government demand. These
This

policies may have only marginal consequences on production of traded goods in
the short run in the presence of costs of adjustment. Over time the gain In the
production of traded goods is determined by the credibility of the fiscal reform.
It is shown that the absence of credibility may have major consequences on the

adjustment, because it will depress the magnitude of the private investment
associated with the fiscal reform.
Joshua Aizenman
GSB, University of Chicago
1101 E. 58 st.
Chicago, IL 60637
(312) 702 7260

2

1. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

Countries running non-sustainable fiscal deficits are facing an
important policy choice regarding the proper mix of fiscal reforms. An
Important purpose of these reforms is to reduce the public wage bill. This can

be done by applying a mixture of various policies, each putting different
emphasis on a drop in public employment versus a drop in real wages in the
public sector. Recent experience in various countries (for example Chile, Israel

and Argentina) has demonstrated that indeed countries differ In the
Importance they attach to employment versus wage policies. This observation

is raising Important policy questions regarding the economic factors
determining the desirability of each policy.

The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the economic factors that are
relevant for making the choice between a cut In employment versus a cut in

wages as a mean of reducing the fiscal wage bill. This question Is another

example of the problem of using quantity versus price instruments in the
implementation of policies. We start by reviewing the experience of countries

that have adopted different strategies. In section 2 we construct a simple
model to evaluate the economic factors that are relevant for making the choice
between a cut in employment versus a cut in wages as a means of reducing the
public sector wage bill. We assume that mobility of labor is costly in the short-

run, due to time dependent retooling costs. We demonstrate that there is a
natural advantage to wage policy over employment policy. The key factor
generating this result is that even with flexible wages there may be limits to

the feasible short-run reallocation of labor from the public to the private
sector. Whenever there Is uncertainty regarding the feasible reallocation, a cut

3

in wages cannot generate unemployment, but a policy targeting a drop in
public sector employment may result In unemployment. A wage policy can be

applied to achieve any feasible efficient adjustment in the short-run, whereas
an employment policy can lead to inefficient outcomes. Consequently, there Is a

natural comparative advantage to wage over employment policy. In section 3

we study the role of the credibility of the fiscal reform. It is shown that the
absence of credibility has major consequences on the adjustment, because it

will depress the magnitude of the private investment associated with the
fiscal reform.

It would be useful to start tour analysis by reviewing some recent
examples of fiscal reform, This will allow us to identify several of the factors

that play a role in the adjustment process. We do this by describing the fiscal
reforms in Chile in 1975, and in Israel in 1985. Obviously, any cross country
comparison is relatively crude and in the absence of full decomposition of the

factors accounting for different adjustments one should not derive policy
prescriptions from it1.
The 1975 fiscal reform in Chile can be described as a quantity oriented

policy2. It Involved a major reduction in government employment, by about
100,000 workers (about 2.4% of the total labor force). Interestingly, the real

1. At best, this can be done with the help of a conceptual model that

attempts to explain the adjustment process. In our case this cavity is
magnified by the fact that the fiscal stabilization of 1975 in Chile occurred
simultaneously with a major adverse external real shock (a drop In the price
of copper) whereas the fiscal stabilization of 1985 In Israel occurred against a
background of favorable external shocks (the drop in the price of energy and
the decline of the dollar). Furthermore, the fiscal reform In Israel Is only at its
first stage of Implementation, and we lack the benefit of hindsight.

2. For a useful analysis of the Chilean experience, see Foxley (1982),
Edwards (1984), Corbo (1985), Edwards (1985) and the references there.

4

wage did not drop, and in fact it went up significantly3. The fiscal reform
(with the supplementary policies) was successful in accounting for a drastic
reduction in the fiscal deficit (from about 10.5% in 1974 to about 2.6% In 1975).

It occurred at a time when other structural changes (such as tariffs
liberalization) and external real shocks were affecting the economy. The
combined effects of these shocks on the unemployment was unfavorable, and
Chile experienced a major Increase in open unemployment4. Figure 1 plots the

evolution of public employment (in thousands of workers), real wages and
public sector real wage bill during 1974 and 1978. Note that despite the deep
cut in public sector employment between 1974 and 1978 (by 20%), the public

real wage bill went up by more than 10%. This observation is consistent with
the interpretation that the policy had given greater weight to employment and
a lower weight to wage cuts in the public sector.

The 1985 fiscal stabilization program in Israel has given greater
emphasis to price (wage) policies6. It resulted in a major drop in real wages in
3. By about 6% from 1974 to 1975, and by about 15% from 1975 to 1976
(see Table 3, Edwards (1985)).

4. The unemployment figures are complicated by the presence of
minimum employment programs originated by the public sector. For further
analysis of these issues see Edwards (1984) and Edwards (1985).

5. Total public sector employment in these years was 360 and 293
thousand workers (taken from Foxley (1982), Table 6). Public sector
employment fell nearly 20% between 1974 and 1978. WIth regard to 1973,
public employment dropped 25% and represented a decrease of 100,000
•

workers. The real wage index for 1974 and 1978 was 60, and 83, respectively
(measured relative to 1970, see Edwards (1985) , Table 3). The approximation
for the public sector real wage bill In Figure 1 is obtained by combining the
information regarding real wage and public employment reported above.

6. For recent analysis of the Israeli stabilization see Bruno (1986),
Dornbusch and Fischer (1986), Liviatan (1986) and Blejer and Liviatan (1986).

Figure 1
INDEX AT 1974: 100
140
REAL WAGE INDEX
130

120

PUBLIC REAL WAGE BILL INDEX

110•

100
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT INDEX

1973

1974

1 97 1976

1977

1978 1979 •M

5

the public sector and a smaller reduction in real wages in the business sector.

Figure 2 describes the time path of real wages in the two sectors during the
first phase of the program7. The discrepancy between the wage path in each

sector is related to the key role played by the public sector as a major
employer in Israel, and the fact that a major component of the program has
been an attempt to reduce real wages in the public sector in order to improve
the competitiveness of the business sector (as well as to reduce the fiscal wage
bill)8. The stabilization program has been (so far) successful in the reduction of

the fiscal deficit with only marginal reduction in public employment9.

The above comparison should not be pushed too far (see footnote 1). It
suggests, however, that there is a real policy choice to be made in an attempt to

reduce a fiscal deficit. While in the long-run the distinction between wage
versus employment policies in the fiscal sector may be not relevant, it may

have major consequences regarding the short-run adjustment (and thereby
regarding the attainment of the long—run). To clarify some of these issues it is
constructive to turn to a simplified model of the adjustment process.

7. The base year for the index is 1980. The information is taken from
Bruno (1986), Table 5.

8. For a discussion on the role of the public sector in the Israeli labor
market see Ben-Porath (1986) and Klinov (1986).
9. The stabilization plan also called for a cut in public sector employment
of about 10,000 workers (which is equivalent to less than 1% of the total labor
force). So far there is only limited (and conflicting) information regarding the

implementation of this part of the program. The fiscal deficit (revenue minus
domestic expenditure) has dropped from 8% (in 1984) to 1% (in 1985), and so

far there have been only minor output effects. An open question is the
willingness and the ability of the economic and political system in Israel to
adhere to the new policy.

FIGURE 2

120

110
BUSINESS SECTOR REAL WAGES

100•

90

80
4

6

8

10

12

MONTHS(1985)

2. THE MODEL
In this section we outline the building blocks of the model. These building

blocks contain a specification of the supply of output and the equilibrium in
goods, labor and the capital market. We would like to design a simple model

that will reflect two key characteristics of a dependent economy with an
active public sector. First, in a typical dependent economy the size of the public

sector has a major influence on the price of non-traded goods and wages, and
the public sector is intensive in the provision of non-traded services. Second,
while in the long-run the return on productive capital tends to be tied to world

returns (due to the possibility of capital flight and due to foreign investment),

in the short and intermediate runs fiscal policy has potent impacts on returns
to productive capital.

2.1 THE LONG -RUN EQUILIBRIUM

Consider a two sectorial economy, producing traded and non-traded
goods. The traded sector is capital intensive relative to the non-traded sector.

For simplicity of exposition we assume that production in the non-traded
sector follows a Ricardian technology

(1)

where L is the labor employed in the non-traded sector. Output in the traded
sector is produced according to the following Cobb-Douglas production function:

7

Z(L) (K)

(2)

;

O<<l.

where Z is the output of traded goods1 L is the labor employed In the traded

sector, and K stands for the stock of capital. We normalize the prices of traded
goods to one, and we denote the price on non—traded goods (which is also the
relative price of non-traded to traded goods) by P.

We simplify the exposition by assuming that the only source of demand
for non-traded goods is the government, which spends a constant share g out of
the GNP on non-traded goods10. Thus, the demand for non-traded goods is:

(3)

Nd

g EPN + ZJ/P

where the term in the bracket is the GNP (measured In terms of traded-goods).

The aggregate supply of labor is fixed at L, and equilibrium in the labor market

implies that

(1) L

As

LZ+L

a consequence of the recent experience of various countries with

capital flight, we assume that the private sector can invest abroad in assets

10. This assumption allows us to abstract from considerations related to

the finance of the fiscal activity. Adding a private sector demand for nontraded goods will complicate the analysis without affecting the key results (the
complication stems from the possible linkages between fiscal deficits, capital
Inf lows and the private demand for non-traded goods).

8
of faring a risk-free Interest rate (denominated in terms of traded goods)11.

While country risk considerations may Imply that there is no marginal
investment by foreigners, the assumption regarding the presence of capital
flight implies that domestic residents will invest in domestic productive capital
such as to equate the yield on domestic capital to the external risk free yield:

()
where

p = MPk

p is the exogenously risk-free foreign return, and MPk Is the marginal

product of capital In the traded goods sector.

The long-run equilibrium is characterized by perfect labor mobility and

accumulation of capital to satisfy equation (5). We assume the absence of

systematic risk In the long-run. Notice that equation (1) implies that in a
competitive labor market the wage (W) Is given by

(6) w = P

Competitive equilibrium in the traded-sector is characterized by the

requirement that the rewards of inputs equal the value of the marginal
product:

(i-s) A

(7)

p$*

11.

For a discussion on capital flight In several Latin-American

MPk

countries see Dornbusch (1984).

9

(8) W MP1 .R

where R stands for the capital-labor ratio (R

K/L). The solution of equations

(6) - (8) determInes the long-run values of the wage, the price of non-traded
goods and the capital-labor ratio as a function of the exogenously given return
on foreign investment (pu):

(9) '
where

=

= 5[(i-5)/p]

I/s
=

stands for the long-run value of the relevant variable. Note that the

exogenously given rent on capital determines the long-run capital-labor ratio,

which in turn determines the wage and thereby also the price of non-traded
goods. Consequently, the wage depends negatively on the return on capital
because a higher rent will reduce the capital-labor ratio.

To close the specification of the long-run equilibrium let us determine

the size of each sector. Equations (1)-(i) Imply that

(10) P(E— L)(1—g) = g L(R)

Equation (10) determInes for a given price (P) and capital-labor ratio (R) the

employment level in each sector (and thereby also the production level).
Equation (9) determines the values of P and R as a function of the foreign rate

of return p.

Applying this Information to (10) allows us to solve for the

employment in each sector:

•1 fl.)

(11)

L

L/[l÷ gl{(i-g))]

;

L, Eg/EEi—g)+

gi

A rise in the government share in the GNP (g) or a drop in the labor share in
the production of traded—goods () will increase the non-traded sector.

2.2 SHORT-RUN EQUILIBRIUM

The short-run equilibrium is distinguished from the long-run by two
considerations. First, the capital stock (K) Is exogenously given in the short-

run by past investment. Second, our formulation of the short-run production

function is guided by the notion of the presence of time dependent labor
reallocation costs. These costs may be related to a time consuming retooling
process needed in order to absorb the added labor in the traded sector12, Labor

is fully mobile in the long-run. In the short run, however, mobility of labor is

costly and there are effective limits to the attainable reallocation. A key
feature determining the cost of moving labor is the planning time that has been

available before the move. For simplicity of exposition we consider here the

extreme version of such a framework - the case where the cost of moving
labor today is zero if the reallocation has been anticipated one period ahead, but

is a concave function if the reallocation is unanticipated. A simple way to
capture this notion is by postulating a time dependent production function in
the traded-sector, where in the short-run output is given by

12. NotIce that In the short-run, expansion of the traded-sector will
require a change in the capital-labor ratio, Such a change may involve time
consuming retooling.

11

1(12) Z,

(Lzt) (Kt)

(L - Et1[LJ)
— 11

2

2

where
t; Et1 ELt I

EI[LZtJ

is the output at time t; Lt is the labor employed In activity Z at time

and Et1 EZ I are the expected level of employment and output in

activity Z; where expectations are taken at the previous period (t-1); and 'r is a
measure related to the magnitude of the contemporaneous costs of moving labor,

We assume that an unanticipated reallocation of labor will entail adjustment

costs that are quadratic In the magnitude of the unanticipated percentage
change in employment in sector Z.13 Henceforth we denote EtI(LZtI and
EtIIZt J by 1Lt and 1Z. The formulation of (11) corresponds to the case

where it takes one period to reach the long-run, where the planned and the
actual employment are equal, This formulation can be extended to the case
where adjustment is more gradual.

Suppose that we start from a long-run equilibrium at period t-1, and at
period t there occurs an unanticipated shock affecting wages14. Employment

at time t in the traded sector is determined so as to equate wages to the
marginal product of labor:

13. Notice that .

EtIEZtI is the labor bill in the absence of shocks.

Consequently, 1 defines the magnitude of adjustment costs relative to the labor
bill.

14. As we will demonstrate later, this shock may be the result of an
unanticipated change in fiscal policy (i.e. a change in g).

F2

—i
(13)

Lt -

1—
—

(Kg)

a

2

(_1Lt)
To

simplify exposition it is useful to use lower-case letters to denote the

percentage change in the variable of interest from the Initial long-run
equilibrium. Formally, for a variable V we define

=

by:

'Vt -

Applying this notation we can rewrite the condition for optimal short-run

marginal changes in employment and output in the traded sector as

=

(15)

— w/(i +

1

—

- w/(i + 1 -

A higher cost of labor adjustment (ii) and higher share of capital (1 - ) reduce

the responsiveness of employment and output to changes in real wages.

Note that the RHS of equation (13) corresponds to the marginal product

of labor, thus it must be positive. This requirement sets an upper limit for
the feasible increase in the traded-sector employment in the short run, and
this limit can be shown to depend negatively on the reallocation costs and
positively on the labor share in the traded sector. For large r it can be shown

13

that (13) implies that

<

l/r.

The presence of adjustment costs may have

major implications (I.e., of a first order magnitude) regarding the feasible

adjustment of quantities in the short-run, despite the fact that adjustment
costst may have only marginal (i.e., of a second order magnitude) impact on

profits. To exemplify this point suppose that the labor share is .75, and let
50. For such an economy the maximum feasible increase in the production

of traded-goods in the short run does not exceed 1.5%. This imposes a severe
quantity restriction, despite the fact that the total magnitude of the adjustment
costs do not exceed .75% of the traded-goods output.

The transformation schedule of our economy is characterized In Figure

3. Starting from an initial long-run equilibrium at point B, the given stock of

capital determines the location of the short-run transformation curve (curve
DCBA). At point B the slope of the transformation curve corresponds to the

long-run relative prices (p). Point C corresponds to the maximum attainable

increase in the output of traded-goods in the short-run15. The short-run
transformation schedule is drawn for a given value of the cost of adjustment
('q). A lower adjustment cost is associated with less concavity of the short-run

transformation curve and a shorter flat segment. In the absence of costs of
adjustment we will observe a transformation schedule (like curve D •B A),
where there is no limit to the feasible reallocation of labor in the short-run.

15. The employment in the traded sector at point C corresponds to the
level of labor where the marginal product in sector Z equals zero ( i.e. the L
where the RHS of (13) equals zero).

z

z

L

E_

1/J5

D'

U

+

F

D

N
FIGURE 3

N

14

2.3 ADJUSTMENT TO FISCAL REFORM

Consider an initial long-run equilibrium obtained for a given fiscal
spending g. The characteristics of such an equilibrium are fully determined by

equations (9) and (11). We evaluate in this section the adjustment to an
unanticipated, permanent drop in fiscal activity (i.e. a permanent d g < 0). In

the short-run the economy adjusts by move leftward on the short-run
transformation curve, towards point C. Note that equations (3) and (6) imply

that

(16) Z g/(1-g)

WN

Consequently, for marginal changes we obtain (by logarithmic derivation) that:

(17) (d g)/Eg(i-g)J +

w+

Applying to (17) equations (4), (11), (14) and (15) we can derive the short-run

changes in wages and relative prices:

(18) wp

(dg)

+ I(l—g){(T+i)g +

The drop in the government GNP share will release labor from the non-traded

sector, causing a drop in wages and in the price of non-traded goods. The wage

drop is larger for higher adjustment costs and for a lower share of labor in the

15

production of traded-goods16. In terms of FIgure 3, we will move to a new
short-run equilibrium at point S.
The adjustment to point S corresponds to the case of a marginal drop in

fiscal activity. A drastic reduction in g will lead to an equilibrium that
approaches point C. This will correspond to the case where the drop in fiscal
activity is substantial enough to approach the short-run employment capacity
in the traded-sector. Note that equation (16) implies that

(l6)

W

g z/[N(1-g)]

This result implies that a drastic drop in fiscal demand will necessitate a

corresponding drastic cut In wages. As g -,

we will approach point C, and

0

equilibrium In the labor market requires W -'

0.

The drastic drop in wages is

needed to preserve full employment17.

In the presence of a minimum wage or any type of wage rigidity we will

find that a drastic drop in the fiscal demand will lead us to a point like 5', and
will be associated with unemployment18. For example, if Wm is the minimum

wage, let Sm be the point on the short-run transformation curve where the
minimum wage is binding and let

be the fiscal demand that brings us to

that point. Any further drop in g below will move us horizontally leftward,
to a point like S'.

16. Formally, equation (18) implies that sign d w/ d r Sign
the limit of 11 - co d

w

d

(Z0.

g, and in

9/ 1(i—g)gl.

17. In terms of equation (16') as g -'
point C (i.e., (Z. N) -'

d

0

the production will approach

N0), where (Z, N) is the vector of output at point C ).

18. See Brecher (1974) for an analysis of the minimum wage in a model
where all goods are traded.

16

The short-run equilibrium is associated with an increase in rents above

the external return. Equations (7), (14) and (18) imply that the change in

domestic rents (denoted by p) is proportional to the drop in government
demand:

(19) dIogpz1_w/(1+ 1-)
(-

d

9)

(I—g){(r+i)g +

The

increase in the rental income will generate investment in the traded

sector, shifting the production frontier outward. The new long-run
equilibrium will be obtained at a point like L

, corresponding

to a higher

production of traded-goods and lower production of non-traded. At the new

equilibrium prices, wages and capital intensity will return to the level
specified in equation (9). Note that we can apply equation (17) for the case

where w 0 to derive the long-run changes in the production of the tradedgoods. Applying (4) and (11) to (17) we infer that

Zi

k

(-1g)
I

(1 -

g) gJ[1—g]

(20)
n

-

(i-g)/g

(-

d
—

g)

gj g

The drop in the production of non-traded goods is proportional to the drop in
the fiscal demand. The proportionality factor depends negatively on the labor

'7
share in the traded sector. We observe a magnification effect in that the
percentage adjustment of traded output exceeds the percentage change in the

government share in the economy. The straight line LB (Figure 3) traces the
locus of the long-run equilibrium points obtained for various levels of fiscal
demand (g). Applying equations (1)-(2) to (9) we can infer that this locus Is a
straight line, whose slope is

The exact location of the long-run equilibrium

is dictated by the fiscal demand, and a lower g shifts the equilibrium
upwards19.

19. Line LB is also the capital Rybczynski line. Note that a rise in g will
move the economy inward on the south-east extension of LB.

18

2.4 SOME POLICY IMPLICATIONS

This discussion may have an important bearing regarding the choice of

quantity versus wage policies by the fiscal authorities in an attempt to reduce
the fiscal wage bill. Suppose that the government wishes to reduce the public
sector wage bill as part of a fiscal reform program designed to reduce the fiscal

deficit. One possible approach is for the fiscal authorities to initiate a wage
policy: to determine a lower wage target and to adjust the fiscal activity (as
summarized by the GNP share g) and employment in the public sector to the
wage target. An alternative approach is an employment policy: to determine a
lower employment target in the public sector, to fire the excess labor (relative

to the employment target) and to adjust the fiscal activity g to the new

employment target. Let us apply our framework to contrast these two
approaches.

If wages are flexible, a drop in the wage initiated by the government
will move us towards point C, but no matter what the magnitude of the drop

we will not reach unemployment equilibrium. On the other hand, an active

policy initiating a drop in employment In the public sector may lead to
unemployment equilibrium at a point like S". For example, if the employment
target in the public sector Is below N0, we will end up with very low wages

and output at point S " This observation is relevant especially in cases where
we lack full information regarding the location of point C. Obviously, with full

information regarding point C no policy maker will choose an employment
target below N0. In the absence of full Information a wage policy Is superior ——

with a wage policy we cannot go wrong, because at worst we will end up
approaching point C. With an employment policy a bad choice of employment
cut will lead the economy to an inefficient short-run equilibrium (like S

2.5 AN EXAMPLE
To exemplify our discussion consider an economy characterized by the
following information:

L

1

. g = .25

a

.75 .

.1

The long-run equilibrium of our economy can be solved by applying
equations (1), (2) and (9), to yield:
= .31

a

.69 .

3.39

a

= 1.02 .

= 2.31

a

.94.

Starting from the initial long-run equilibrium, suppose that there is an
unanticipated, permanent drop in fiscal demand, reducing the GNP share of the
government from .25 to .2. The new long-run equilibrium is characterized by

fI25. C'.75 •3.39."I.02.'2.5l .'1.02.

20. This implication applies also for the case where there is a minimum

wage or wage rigidities. The only modification is that the rigidity places a
lower-bound on the wage instrument.

20

The long-run adjustment to a drop of 5% in the GNP share of the government
will increase output in the traded sector by 8 % and will require investment of
16 % of the GNP.

We turn now to an evaluation of the short-run adjustment. Figure 4
plots the dependency of the adjustment of wages and traded output on the
magnitude of the adjustment costs (ri). In the absence of adjustment costs a
drop of 5% in the GNP share of the government will reduce the wage (and the
price of non-traded goods) by 2% and the traded sector output will increase by

6%. Larger values of the adjustment cost will increase the drop in wages and

will reduce output changes. If i

10

,

wages

(and the price of non-traded

goods) will drop by 20% and output of traded goods will increase only by 1.5%.

Our previous discussion and the present example suggest that fiscal

deficits can be dealt with successfully by wage policies and by the
corresponding adjustment in the government demand. These policies may have

only marginal consequences on production of traded goods in the short run in

the presence of high costs of adjustment. Over time we will observe two
factors that will operate in favor of expansion of the traded sector. First, time

will allow a successful reallocation of labor from the public to the private
sector for a given stock of capital. In terms of Figure 4 this is equivalent to a

drop in i, moving the economy leftward. This adjustment will be reflected in a

gradual rise in wages and a corresponding expansion in the production of
traded goods. In terms of Figure 3, a drop in the adjustment costs is associated

with the flattening of the transformation curve, allowing the attainment of a

point like I.

The second adjustment will take place in the presence of

investment attributed to the increase in rents resultant from the drop in
wages. This process is time consuming, and is conditional on the credibility of

I.,,

z

-I

C
(#1

0

-J

CR

p.3

P

Z

0
-Jo

0
0

00
00

CHANGE OF TRADED OUTPUT N

Z CHANGE OF WAGE

rn

C

fl

21

the fiscal reform. It will lead us over time to the long-run equilibrium,
towards point L21.

3. ADJUSTMENT TO FISCAL REFORM IN THE ABSENCE OF
CREDIBILITY

The previous discussion assumed that the reduction in the fiscal demand

was viewed as permanent. This observation has a key importance for the
behavior of domestic investors because they are looking forward in their
investment decisions. As is evident from (19), the returns on productive capital

are tied directly to the fiscal policy. Consequently, the fiscal reform's lack of

credibility will be reflected directly in lower investment and in capital flight

(relative to the case of a credible fiscal reform). Thus, it is constructive to
conclude our discussion with an analysis of the importance of credibility in the
adjustment process.

To demonstrate this point we turn now to the case where we start from

an initial long-run equilibrium at t-1, and at time t an unanticipated fiscal
reform occurs (i.e.

g < 0 at time t). Suppose that following the fiscal reform

the private sector attaches only a probability J' to the sustainability of the

fiscal reform for the long-run (I.e. ' is the probability that the drop in

demand by d g is permanent, and l-' is the probability that the drop in
demand is transitory). In such an environment the investment decision will

internalize this uncertainty via the requirement that the expected yield on
21. One advantage of a wage policy may be in avoiding some of the
unemployment during the transition. The lower unemployment may generate a

positive externality by increasing the credibility of the fiscal stabilization,
thereby encouraging private investment.

22

investment in the traded sector equals the risk-free foreign yield (equation

(5)). Applying equation 12 we can infer that equilibrium in the labor market

requires
k

t+i

(21)

-Iz,t+i

w,1

11+ i where lower-case letters measure the percentage change of the relevant

variable relative to the initial long-run equilibrium at time t-1. Note that at
time t+1 the stock of capital is given at the new level, thus we can apply the
logic of our discussion regarding the short-run (section 2) to derive a condition
for equilibrium in the goods market, Applying equations (11), (12) and (16) we
can reduce this condition to

(22)

Because

d g1/Eg(1—g)] =

-

—

at time t+1 the stock of capital is given, equations (21) and (22) can be

solved simultaneously to determine the wage and employment at time t +1. The
employment in the traded sector can be shown to be

d 1/Eg(1-g)1 + k+,(1- $ - i/{q
(23) i

1/(ii+

-

)

+

+

1

-

23

Traded sector employment depends positively on the fiscal contraction. In the

absence of short-run adjustment costs traded sector employment will go up
with the accumulation of capital. Equation (12) implies that the change in the
return to capital is given by

(2)
Notice

d log p1 =

— kt+1]

I

that it is endogenously determined by the realized employment at time

t+1 as given by equation (23). The employment, in turn , Is determined by the

realized fiscal shock, Thus, equations (23) and (24) determine the return at
time t÷ 1 as determined by past Investment and the realized fiscal reform. The

investment decision at time t is forward-looking, and Is calculated to equate
the expected yield to the risk—free return . I.e., kt+1 is chosen such
that Et(log Pj1 I = 0, where Et is the expectation operator, conditional on the

information of time t. Applying this criterion to our case we infer from
equations (23) and (24) that optimal investment at time t is given by

(25)

k

(-g)
I

(i - g) 9111—91

alternatively, applying equation (20) we Infer that

(25)

k

IJIk

24

where '

is the change in the stock of capital that will take place with complete

credibility (given by equation 20). The credibility level has a major
consequence on the long-run adjustment. At the extreme case, where the
private sector views the fiscal reform as non-credible and transitory (i.e. 4

0), no new private Investment will occur, and the short-run equilibrium at
time t+1 will occur on the same short—run transformation curve as at time t
(curve DCBA, Figure 3). A more credible regime (i.e a positive value of 'J') will

be associated with positive investment, implying that the equilibrium at time
t +1

will occur on curve EF, whose location is determined by the degree of

credibility. A more credible regime will be associated with a greater outward
shift of EF. At the limit of full credibility we will observe equilibrium at point

L, where E' F' is the short-run transformation schedule associated with it.
This discussion may have pessimistic implications regarding the success

of a competitive equilibrium in generating sufficient new private investment.

In the absence of full credibility we will observe a smaller investment.
Furthermore, adjustment may be time consuming because the private sector
will update its adjustment strategy according to a learning process regarding
the credibility of the new regime. The absence of full credibility of stabilization

programs may in fact be a common feature and not an exception. This
observation stems from the fact that economies that are in need of stabilization

have been brought to that need by policies that in most circumstances do not
reflect credible and responsible policy making. Thus, the private sector may be

fully rational in attaching initially low credibility to the stabilization scheme.

If credibility is the binding constraint, there may be a potential role for

subsidizing private investment, where the subsidy can be viewed as
investment in reputation undertaken by the public sector.

25

REFERENCES

Ben-Porat, Yoram. "The Entwined Growth of Population and Product: 1922 1982,"

appeared In Ben-Porat, Yoram (ed.) The Economy of

Israel, Harvard Press, 1986.
Blejer Mario I. and Nissan Liviatan. "Stabilization Strategies in Argentina and
Israel, 1985-1986," manuscript, IMF Fiscal Affairs Department,
1986.

Brecher,R. "Minimum Wage Rates and the Pure Theory of International
Trade," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88, 1974.
Bruno, Michael. "Generating A Sharp Disinflation: Israel 1985," NBER Working
Paper No. 1822, 1986.
Corbo, Vittorlo. 'The Use of the Exchange Rate For stabilization Purpose, The
Ca5e of Chile," manuscript, The World Bank, 1985.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. "External Debt, Budget Deficits and Disequilibrium
Exchange rates," NBER Working Paper No. 1336, 1984.

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer. "Stopping Hyperinflations, Past and
Present," NBER Working Paper No. 1810, 1986.

Edwards, Cox Alejandra. "Three Essays on Labor Markets in Developing
Countries," Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1984.

Edwards, Sebastian. "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten
Years of Chile's Experiment with Free-Market Policies, 1973-

1983," Economic Development and Cultural Change 34,
1985.

Foxley, Alejandro. "Towards A Free Market Economy, Chile 1974-1979,"
Journal of Development Economics 10, 1982.

Klinov Ruth. "Changes in the Industrial Structure," appeared in Ben-Porat,
Yoram (ed.) The Economy of Israel, Harvard Press, 1986.

