                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW DOES ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE AFFECT TEEN FERTILITY AND HIGH
 SCHOOL DROPOUT RATES? EVIDENCE FROM SCHOOL-BASED HEALTH CENTERS

                                         Michael F. Lovenheim
                                            Randall Reback
                                           Leigh Wedenoja

                                          Working Paper 22030
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w22030


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2016




We would like to thank the National Alliance on School-based Health Care for allowing us access
to their data and for their assistance in using the data. We thank Will White, Nicolas Ziebarth, Samuel
Kleiner, Janet Currie, Phil Levine and Anjali Adukia for helpful discussions, as well as seminar participants
at the CESifo conference on economics of education, the NBER Summer Institute Children's Working
Group, the New York Federal Reserve Bank Economics of Education Seminar, University of Chicago,
Michigan State University, New York University, Bocconi University, University of Wisconsin, University
of Oklahoma, and the Association for Education Finance and Policy Annual Meeting. We also gratefully
acknowledge funding from the Department of Policy Analysis and Management at Cornell University
for this project The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Michael F. Lovenheim, Randall Reback, and Leigh Wedenoja. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does Access to Health Care Affect Teen Fertility and High School Dropout Rates? Evidence
from School-based Health Centers
Michael F. Lovenheim, Randall Reback, and Leigh Wedenoja
NBER Working Paper No. 22030
February 2016
JEL No. H75,I14,I21,J13

                                              ABSTRACT

Children from low-income families face persistent barriers to accessing high-quality health care services.
Previous research studies have examined the importance of expanding children's health insurance coverage,
but there is little prior evidence concerning the impacts of directly expanding primary health care access
to this population. We address this gap in the literature by exploring whether teenagers' access to primary
health care influences their fertility and educational attainment. We study how the significant expansion
of school-based health centers (SBHCs) in the United States since the early 1990's has affected teen
fertility and high school dropout rates. Our results indicate that school-based health centers have a
negative effect on teen birth rates: adding services equivalent to the average SBHC reduces the 15-18
year old birth rate by 5%. The effects are largest among younger teens and among African Americans
and Hispanics. However, primary care health services do not reduce high school dropout rates by very
much despite the sizable reductions in teen birth rates


Michael F. Lovenheim                                 Leigh Wedenoja
Department of Policy Analysis                        Department of Economics
  and Management                                     Uris Hall
Cornell University                                   Ithaca, NY 15853
102 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall                       lrw55@cornell.edu
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu

Randall Reback
Dept. of Economics
Barnard College, Columbia University
3009 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6598
rreback@barnard.edu
1     Introduction

Access to aﬀordable health care for low-income Americans has become a preeminent policy
issue in the U.S. The massive expansions of Medicaid and the State Children’s Health Insurance
Program that occurred over the past several decades have caused the gap in health insurance
coverage between children from low-income and high-income families to all but disappear. Yet,
health care access for children depends both on the aﬀordability of care and on convenient
availability of eﬀective health care. Despite the elimination of the health insurance coverage
gap, low-income families still face considerably higher costs of accessing high-quality health
care services that drive disparities in the quality of care across the socioeconomic distribution
(Smedley, Stith and Nelson 2003; Andrulis 1998). This quality gap can be attributed in part to
supply-side factors, such as medical practices choosing not to accept Medicaid insurance and
the reluctance of many doctors to locate their practices in low-income urban or rural areas. The
gap also may be due to demand-side factors, such as low-income adults lacking information on
appropriate health care providers or ﬁnding it diﬃcult to take time away from hourly-paid jobs
in order to accompany their children to these providers.
    Medicaid eligibility leads to better health (Currie and Gruber, 1996a; Finkelstein et al., 2012;
Kaestner, Joyce and Racine 2001; Currie, Decker and Lin 2008), more stable household ﬁnances
(Gross and Notowidigdo, 2011) and higher educational attainment and earnings (Cohodes et al.
forthcoming; Brown, Kowalski and Lurie 2014). However, inadequate access to primary care
facilities and doctors among low-income families may preclude them from realizing these beneﬁts
of health insurance, which can render the roughly $86 billion the U.S. spends on Medicaid for
children less eﬀective. Given the large and persistent disparities across the socioeconomic
distribution in academic achievement, health care access, and health status,1 understanding
how primary care health care services aﬀect important life outcomes among youth is of high
policy relevance.
    In this paper, we explore whether expanding teenagers’s access to health care inﬂuences their
fertility rates and their educational attainment. We estimate the eﬀects of providing primary
care health services to teens through school-based health centers (SBHCs), which are health
   1 For example, see Currie, Decker and Lin (2008), Adler and Rehkopf (2008), Case, Lubotsky and Paxson (2002), Cunha et al.

(2006), Conti, Heckman and Urzua (2010), and Todd and Wolpin (2007).



                                                             1
clinics located in a school or on school grounds. While they vary in size and scope, virtually all
SBHCs provide basic preventative health services to students, and many of them also provide
reproductive health services and contraception. SBHCs target underserved communities by
predominantly locating in schools in low-income urban and rural areas. They therefore can
reduce the costs of obtaining health care services for children from low-income families. Par-
ticularly for reproductive health among teenagers, these SBHCs may be extremely eﬀective at
increasing health care utilization because they reduce any reliance on parents to bring teenage
students to the doctor. Currently, there are over 2,000 SBHCs in the US, and their prevalence
has increased markedly over the past 25 years (see Figure 1). Although these centers are an
increasingly important provider of primary care health services to youth in low-income areas,
little is known about how they aﬀect student health and education.
   Our analysis makes two contributions to the literature. First, we present new evidence on
the eﬀect of primary health care services delivered through schools on teen birth rates. Whether
a teenager gives birth is a critical health outcome that can have long-run consequences for the
individual. Teen fertility rates in the U.S. are very high relative to similarly-industrialized
nations but also have declined substantially in the last 25 years (Kearney and Levine 2012).2
Currently, there is very little understanding of which policies are eﬀective in reducing teen
births. Providing health care services to teens, and in particular easy-to-access contraception
through health centers in schools, may be an eﬀective policy tool with which to lower teen birth
rates. This paper is the ﬁrst in the literature to estimate the causal eﬀect of such primary care
services on teen fertility.3
   Second, our paper is the ﬁrst to examine how primary health care services aﬀect the educa-
tional attainment of children from low-income families. Providing access to primary health care
services could increase educational attainment through any eﬀect on child health as well as on
family ﬁnances. A sizable amount of work has demonstrated that poor health or adverse health
events among children are associated with worse long-run outcomes (e.g., Currie et al. 2010;
   2 Kearney and Levine (2014) ﬁnd evidence that the MTV show 16 and Pregnant explains about one third of the decline in teen

births that occurred between 2009 and 2010. Due to the timing of when this show began, they are unable to examine the causes
surrounding the large drop in teen fertility between 1990 and 2009, which is the period on which our study focuses.
   3 Much prior research has examined the eﬀect of the diﬀusion of the birth control pill in the 1960s and 1970s on fertility

decisions and life outcomes of somewhat older women (Goldin and Katz 2002; Bailey 2006, 2010; Ananat and Hungerman 2012).
This literature does not analyze the eﬀect of access to contraception among teens on fertility nor does it examine the eﬃcacy of
providing contraceptive services through schools, which is what we focus on in this analysis.




                                                               2
Case, Fertig and Paxson 2005; Case, Lubotsky and Paxson 2002). Studies have found positive
eﬀects from speciﬁc types of child health interventions, such as hookworm eradication (Bleak-
ley 2007), malaria eradication (Bleakley 2010) and school-based deworming drug interventions
(Miguel and Kremer 2004). Several papers also have explored the ‘fetal origins’ hypothesis and
have found evidence that pre-natal health care and health outcomes aﬀect subsequent academic
performance and success (e.g., Almond and Currie 2011; Figlio et al. 2014). Yet, we are un-
aware of prior research that credibly estimates the causal eﬀect of comprehensive health services
for school-age children on their educational attainment in an industrialized country setting.
   A major hurdle in estimating the eﬀect of health care services on fertility and education
that has impeded prior research is that access to such services is not exogenously assigned:
unobserved factors correlated with the quality of health care service availability are likely to
be correlated with underlying fertility and education outcomes. We overcome this problem by
exploiting the timing of expansions of school-based health centers in diﬀerent school districts
in the U.S. We obtained data from surveys of SBHCs conducted by the National Alliance on
School-Based Health Care in 1998, 2001, 2004, 2007 and 2011. Centers are followed longitudi-
nally, and in addition to being able to link them to the districts they serve, we have information
on when each center opened, its size in terms of students served, hours open, staﬃng hours,
and the speciﬁc health services it provides to students. We focus on centers that serve high
school students, and overall we observe 2,586 centers during our analysis period.
   To identify the eﬀect of SBHCs on teen fertility rates and high school dropout rates, we
combine the NASBHC survey data with county-level information on births as well as district-
level information on high school dropout rates. For births, we use U.S. vital statistics data for
which the smallest level of geographic identiﬁcation is the county. Our main analysis focuses on
births among 15-18 year old women, as they are most likely to have been recently enrolled in
high school.4 We measure treatment by whether there is any SBHC open in the county or school
district as well as by treatment intensity using the primary care staﬀ hours per week and total
medical staﬀ hours per week oﬀered by all SBHCs in the county or district. These measures
provide a comprehensive depiction of the medical services oﬀered to students. As discussed
further below, the process of opening an SBHC is typically initiated by hospital administrators
  4 We   refer to birth rates among women aged 15-18 as “teen birth rates” throughout this analysis.



                                                                3
who may then spend several years searching for a school to partner with, securing funding,
and renovating a space to meet health clinic regulations. The timing of center entry varies
signiﬁcantly across counties and school districts as a result.
   There are three potential threats to identiﬁcation of the causal eﬀects of SBHC services
on teen fertility and dropout rates. First, the timing of center entry might be endogenous.
In theory, this could bias estimates in either direction; centers might be opening when local
oﬃcials are relatively resourceful, or when they are worried about unusually high rates of teen
pregnancy or high school dropouts. Event study analyses provide extensive evidence that
the timing of the initial center entering in a county or school district is not endogenous with
respect to pre-treatment trends in our outcomes of interest. We therefore exploit the variation
in timing across counties and school districts in initial center entry to identify how SBHC
services aﬀect teen outcomes. Second, yearly service level variation after initial entry might be
endogenous. Event study analyses suggest this is indeed the case: services hours are targeted to
areas that are experiencing higher birth rates, especially right after an initial center opens. We
address this issue by estimating an instrumental variables model that uses information about
the ﬁrst center opening in a district/county to predict future service level variation in that
district/county. Third, there might be omitted variables, contemporaneous policies or shocks
aﬀecting outcomes in the low-income communities where SBHCs locate. All of our analyses
control for state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, so state-level policy changes and state-level shocks are not
a concern. Robustness checks add controls for various types of year-speciﬁc income categories;
these robustness checks conﬁrm that the main results are not inﬂuenced by omitted variables
diﬀerentially aﬀecting low-income populations. Falsiﬁcation tests also indicate that coincidental
policies or shocks are not a source of concern: we do not see fertility eﬀects for women in their
early 20s when health centers opened in local high schools, and we do not ﬁnd any relationship
between SBHCs and per pupil expenditures in schools.
   Our ﬁndings suggest that SBHCs reduce teen fertility, with relatively large reductions among
younger teens, African American teens, and Hispanic teens. Our baseline estimates show that
center entry in a county reduces the teen birth rate by 1.3 per 1,000, which is a 3.0% reduction
relative to the baseline birth rate. Just using the existence of a center in a county ignores



                                                4
potentially-important service diﬀerences across centers. Our preferred estimates examine the
eﬀects of changing the primary care or total medical staﬀ hours oﬀered by SBHCs; to facilitate
interpretation, we scale the treatment eﬀects to reﬂect the impact of adding services equivalent
to an average-sized SBHC. These results indicate that service changes equivalent to opening an
average-sized center lead to a 2.4%-2.7% reduction in births per 1,000 women aged 15-18. The
IV results are larger: in our preferred model an average-sized center reduces teen birth rates by
over 5%. We prefer the IV estimates because they address the endogeneity concerns related to
SBHC service level variation as well as any attenuation bias from measurement error. Further
analysis provides suggestive evidence concerning which types of services are most important
for reducing teen fertility. The largest eﬀects come from the subset of SBHCs that oﬀer on-site
prescriptions of hormone-based contraceptives. Providing teenage girls with access to hormone-
based contraceptives, with reduced parental involvement, might be an eﬀective way to reduce
teen births.
   Despite the eﬀectiveness of SBHCs in reducing teen pregnancies, we ﬁnd no evidence that
they substantially reduce high school dropout rates. We measure high school dropout rates
using reported high school diplomas awarded at the district level and U.S. Census and American
Community Survey (ACS) data. Our estimates are universally small in magnitude, vary in sign
across speciﬁcations, and are only rarely statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. Even for
the largest of these point estimates, we can rule out at the 5% level that increasing primary care
service hours equivalent to an average-sized SBHC would reduce high school dropout rates by
more than 1.0 percent. The high school years might be too late in a child’s life to substantially
alter the likelihood of high school completion via improved access to primary health care.
   Our most economically signiﬁcant ﬁnding is that school-based health centers produce large
declines in teen childbearing. There is much policy interest in reducing teen birth rates in
the U.S. due to their high levels and the potentially high private and social costs associated
with teen births (Kearney and Levine, 2012). At least for this outcome, these centers are quite
eﬀective at altering teen health. That they do not translate into changes in high school dropout
rates underscores the importance of more research examining the role of health care services
for school-age children in determining educational attainment.



                                                5
2     School-based Health Centers

School-based health centers (SBHCs) are health clinics that are located inside speciﬁc schools
or elsewhere on the school’s property.5 They are funded by various combinations of state
and federal grants, in-kind donations by hospitals, donations from private foundations, and
reimbursements from Medicaid and private insurance companies. School districts themselves
typically do not provide direct ﬁnancial support to SBHCs, other than providing space for
them on school grounds. While SBHCs have been in existence since the 1930s, a surge in
SBHC openings during the 1990’s coincided with many states increasing revenues available to
SBHCs using newly-available funds from tobacco company lawsuit settlements, cigarette taxes,
and Maternal-and-Child-Health block grants from the federal government. Figure 1 shows the
distribution of opening years for SBHCs in our data. Almost 83% of these SBHCs opened after
1989, with over 38% opening after 1997. Figure 2 shows the number of SBHCs in our data in
each state relative to the size of the school-aged population in 2011. SBHCs are located in all
but nine (mostly small) states. An eclectic mix of states such as Delaware, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, New Mexico, Oregon, and West Virginia have relatively large numbers of SBHCs
per high school-aged child.
    While cross-state variation in funding policies inﬂuenced the growth of SBHCs, our method-
ological approach is to exploit within-state variation in the timing of SBHC entry. SBHCs
provide services for two main types of students: urban students in school districts serving
low-income populations and rural students. As of school year 2010-2011, 54% of the centers
were located in urban schools, with 28% located in rural schools and 18% in more suburban
areas. Sixty-three percent of the students exposed to a school-based health center are of either
African American or Hispanic descent.6 Across similar communities in the same state, the
provision of SBHCs may vary depending on relationships between school principals and local
health administrators. While the speciﬁc requirements diﬀer by state, typically it takes several
steps to open the SBHC: 1) conduct a needs assessment to determine lack of access to health
   5 These are distinguished from community health centers that began opening in the mid-1960s to provided care to low-income

communities as part of President Johnson’s war on poverty. Bailey and Goodman-Bacon (2015) exploit the timing of the opening
of these centers and show they had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on mortality rates of people over 50 years old. Relative to these centers,
school-based health centers are focused on a much younger population with diﬀerent health needs, and their prevalence is much
more recent than general community health care centers. However, both types of centers are focused on bettering the provision of
health care services to low-income communities.
   6 Appendix Table A-1 shows characteristics of counties and school districts with and without a SBHC by 2011.




                                                               6
care among students, 2) build a partnership between a school and the local health organization
(e.g., hospital, non-proﬁt health clinic), 3) generate a funding plan, 4) ﬁnd appropriate space
in the school, 5) obtain approval from the state/local government, 6) develop a staﬃng plan
that includes mechanisms for coordinating services across agencies, and 7) modify the space in
the school so that it meets code for health clinics and has proper equipment. The impetus to
open a center in a speciﬁc location can come from local health oﬃcials, school administrators,
or community leaders. States typically require that an application for a new center is sent
directly from the health organization that would operate the center, along with appropriate
sign-oﬀ from the school district that would host the center. Given the bureaucratic and organi-
zational hurdles associated with opening a center, it usually takes several years between initial
conception and a center opening. The unpredictability of both the location and timing of center
openings provides the variation we need to estimate our models, and we conduct several tests
to explore whether this variation is exogenous.
   The focus of SBHCs is on providing primary care services for student populations. The
majority of centers are attached to high schools, but many centers also provide services for
students outside of the school to which they are attached: only 38% of centers report that use
is restricted to students in the school. About a quarter of the SBHCs allow for families of the
student to use the services, and 25% also allow use by school personnel. Almost 35% of the
centers also report that they serve students from other schools. In some cases, the services
provided are free to students. However, most centers operate more like traditional clinics and
charge patients for services rendered. Due to the location of SBHCs, most students exposed by
these centers are Medicaid-eligible, though, so these fees are unlikely to pose a large constraint
to access. This feature of SBHCs highlights the fact that the treatment we examine is mostly
due to health care provision, not due to health insurance access per se.
   All centers provide primary care services, but the exact mix of services varies across centers.
The distribution of primary care services is shown in Panel A of Figure 3. About 85% of
centers also provide some form of reproductive health service. Panel B of Figure 3 shows the
distribution of reproductive health services other than contraception provided by SBHCs in
2007-2008. Mostly, these services include testing for sexually transmitted infections, preventive



                                                  7
care such as gynecological exams, PAP tests and prenatal care, as well as both abstinence and
birth control counseling. Almost 40% of centers also are allowed to either prescribe or dispense
contraceptives of some form directly, but many of the remainder refer students to other providers
for contraception. Table 1 shows detailed information about the types of contraceptive services
SBHCs oﬀer. Over 37% either can dispense or prescribe the birth control pill, and another
30% can refer patients to other doctors for a prescription. Condoms are dispensed at over 30%
of centers, and emergency contraception or plan B also is available either directly or through
referral at the majority of SBHCs. Table 1 highlights that a large proportion of SBHCs provide
signiﬁcant contraceptive services but that there is considerable heterogeneity across centers
in the types of contraceptives to which they give student access and the method by which
students can access contraceptives. Because of the location of these centers, they may provide
particularly important access to contraceptive services for female students who do not need to
be taken to them by parents or guardians.7
    In addition to primary care and reproductive health services, many school-based health cen-
ters have mental health and dental services. Eighty-four percent of centers provide oral health
education, and 57% have dental screenings. Only about 20% conduct dental examinations, but
the majority are able to refer students to dentists if they require dental services. Over 70% of
health centers also have mental health providers on staﬀ, with the remainder typically providing
referrals through the primary care doctors for students who need mental health services.
    Overall, SBHCs give students access to primary care doctors and nurses as well as more
specialized medical services depending on the center. Since most centers can refer patients to
more specialized doctors, the increased access to primary care services that SBHCs represent is
likely to increase health care options substantially for students who are served by these centers.
The focus of this paper is on evaluating whether this increased access to health care aﬀects
teen birth rates and high school dropout rates. The main mechanisms through which these
centers could impact student educational attainment are twofold. First, access to health care
services could lead directly to better student health outcomes. To the extent that health enters
positively in the production function for educational achievement, these health increases could
    7 Currently, 26 states allow all minors over 12 to consent to birth control without their parents’ approval. Another 20 states

allow minors to consent under certain circumstances, such as being deemed “mature” or having a health issue. The remaining four
states have no statutes regarding minor access to birth control.



                                                                8
drive better educational outcomes. A potential concern with this mechanism is that teens may
be quite healthy. If high school students do not require much access to health care, then SBHCs
will have little impact on them, at least in the short-run.
   Despite the fact that high school corresponds with a relatively healthy part of the lifecycle,
there is evidence that a substantial fraction of teens have health problems that would beneﬁt
from medical interventions. Figure 4 shows tabulations from the 2011 Youth Risk Behavior
Surveillance System (YRBSS), which is a nationally-representative health survey conducted by
the CDC that focuses on students in high school. As the ﬁgure demonstrates, the incidence
of mental health issues and the prevalence of sexual activity amongst high school students is
high. For example, almost 30% of students report feeling sad or hopeless, over 15% report
considering suicide, and about 7% have attempted suicide. Almost 60% of these students have
had sex, and many have done so without a condom or without any birth control. Furthermore,
a non-trivial proportion of the sample reports being a victim of physical violence, and incidence
rates of asthma and obesity are also high. Figure 4 shows racial/ethnic diﬀerences in these
health outcomes as well, with black and Hispanic students reporting outcomes consistent with
lower health levels and more risky behaviors. As discussed above, most health centers oﬀer
reproductive services that include birth control as well as pregnancy and STI testing. In
addition, most oﬀer mental health services. The tabulations in Figure 4 are suggestive that
such services would be of value to many high school students.
   There is further evidence of unmet health care needs among lower-SES high school students.
In a review of the public health literature, Flores (2010) reports that the preponderance of
work points to large disparities in adolescent health outcomes and health care access across
the socioeconomic spectrum. Harris et al. (2006) show that about 25% of black and Hispanic
adolescents report needing medical attention but not receiving it, as compared to about 18%
for whites. About 7-10% of these adolescents also report being in poor health. Hence, there is
ample evidence that teens in the U.S. have health outcomes and unmet health care needs that
could lead SBHCs to have a substantial positive impact on their health and on their subsequent
educational attainment.
   Access to aﬀordable primary health care can also reduce the household’s exposure to ﬁ-



                                                9
nancial risk from an adverse health event (Gross and Notowidigdo, 2011; Leininger, Levy and
Schanzenbach, 2009; Finkelstein et al. 2012). Receipt of primary care services may make stu-
dents healthier and allow them to address health problems before they worsen and cost more
to treat. This eﬀect of primary care service provision thus could better the ﬁnancial position
of households, which can lead to higher student academic attainment.8
   Despite the rise in SBHC prevalence in the US over the past several decades, there is no
nationally-representative study of these centers using methods that can plausibly identify their
causal eﬀects on health and education. Several prior analyses have examined the relationship
between SBHCs and student health and educational achievement, and they typically show a
positive relationship between SBHCs and these outcomes (Kerns et al. 2011; Walker et al.,
2010; Geierstanger et al., 2004; Kisker and Brown, 1996). However, these studies have several
serious shortcomings that we seek to address in this paper. First, all previous analyses have
focused on identifying the eﬀect of one SBHC or of several in a particular city or school district.
No study of which we are aware has estimated SBHC impacts on health and academic outcomes
for the entire United States. Results from the current literature thus are hard to generalize to
larger state or national populations. Second, the previous work in this area largely has been
cross-sectional in nature, either comparing outcomes across students who do and do not use
the SBHC within a school or comparing student outcomes across schools with and without a
health center. It is unlikely the set of control variables in the data sets used are suﬃcient to
control for selection across schools or into SBHC use within a school. Thus, using cross-sectional
methods in this context makes it very diﬃcult to identify the causal eﬀect of SBHCs on student
educational attainment.
   One recent study of SBHCs in New York City instead identiﬁes the eﬀects of SBHCs by exam-
ining longitudinal changes in academic performance among students who enrolled in elementary
and middle schools shortly before and shortly after those schools added SBHCs (Reback and
Cox 2016). New York is one of the only states in the country where SBHCs are restricted
by law to only serve the students enrolled in the hosting school. They ﬁnd evidence that the
addition of SBHCs to elementary or middle schools increases students’ scores on standardized
tests in math and language arts. Their ﬁndings suggest that the health beneﬁts from SBHCs
  8 See   Michelmore (2013) and Dahl and Lochner (2012) for evidence on the eﬀect of family income on student academic attainment.



                                                                10
could increase educational attainment, particularly if positive eﬀects on middle school students
do not fade during high school. Our work complements this analysis by examining the impacts
of SBHCs serving high school students, by examining teen fertility, by providing both short
term and longer term estimates, and by providing estimates for the entire US.



3     Data

The data for this analysis come from four sources: 1) National Alliance on School-based Health
Care National Census of School-based Health Centers, 2) Live birth data from the U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention National Vital Statistics System, 3) National Center for
Education Statistics (NCES) data on high school diplomas awarded and enrollment, and 4)
U.S. Census and American Community Survey data on school district dropout rates. Below,
we discuss each of these data sources in turn.


3.1     NASBHC Census of School-based Health Centers

Beginning in fall 1998, the National Alliance on School-based Health Care began surveying
school-based health centers about their locations, staﬃng levels, services provided, usage and
the timing of when they ﬁrst opened. They repeated their survey in fall 2001, 2004, 2007 and
2011. The survey is designed to be a census in the sense that all centers known to NASBHC are
contacted, but there is considerable non-response. In the 1998 survey, 70% of centers contacted
responded, and the response rates were 85%, 78%, 64% and 77% in 2001, 2004, 2007 and 2011
surveys, respectively.9 Across all surveys, we observe 2,586 centers serving high school students
in 566 school districts throughout the United States. This number of centers is larger than the
total number of centers that exists in any one year, which is due to center closures over time.
    Each NASBHC survey contains detailed information on center location (e.g., zip code),
services, utilization, days and hours open, what populations the center serves, and staﬃng
hours for both primary care and total medical staﬀ. Primary care staﬀ includes physicians and
nurse practitioners only. Total medical staﬀ hours include mental health, dental care, nurse and
   9 Much of this non-response is actually due to center closures. Although NASBHC attempts to purge their roles of closed centers,

which centers close is diﬃcult to observe. Thus, the response rates among currently active centers is likely to be signiﬁcantly higher
than what is reported here.




                                                                 11
physicians’ assistant hours in addition to primary care. Thus, for survey respondents, we have
comprehensive information on the level and types of services the center provides for students.
   We link centers over time across the diﬀerent surveys to obtain a panel of SBHCs. The
center identiﬁcation codes NASBHC used changed over time, so that a unique id does not exist
for each center. Instead, we match centers over time by linking them to the school districts in
which they are located. Matching centers to school districts is complicated by the way centers
report the schools that they serve. Since the survey question is open-ended, many centers give
responses such as “all schools in district” or “only our schools” without naming the district
or individual schools. Instead of relying directly on school names for the match, we use the
geographic information about the center that was provided in the 1998, 2007 and 2011 waves.
Centers in these waves were matched to school districts based either on their zip code or on their
city and state. A school district was considered a match if it was the only district that shared
this geographic information. Centers that could not be linked to school districts in this way,
either because the geographic information applied to more than one district or the survey was
missing information, were hand-matched to districts by using the NCES online school search
tool. Centers were then matched to each other over time using the name of the center, the school
in which the center is located, the schools the center serves, and the opening year. A center was
matched across time if the name of the center and state were the same or the school location,
name, and state were the same. Due to changes in reported names or school location, many
centers had to be hand-matched across waves. It is important to highlight that the aggregation
to the school district level means that errors made in matching speciﬁc centers to each other
over time will not aﬀect our results as long as we correctly link centers to school districts. Given
the data limitations in the NASBHC data, using school-district level aggregations likely leads
to less measurement error than if we had attempted to match each center to a speciﬁc school.
   One of the drawbacks of our data is that we observe service and staﬃng levels only for the
years in which the surveys were completed. However, for all but 51 centers (or 1.9% of the total
centers observed), the opening date is contained in the survey.10 These center opening dates
allow us to use outcome data from before 1998. As Figure 1 demonstrates, 62% of the centers
in our data were opened prior to 1998, so the use of these earlier data increases the amount of
 10 We   drop these 51 centers from our analysis, since we have no way of knowing when they ﬁrst opened.



                                                               12
treatment variation considerably. For observations prior to 1998, we assume each SBHC has the
service level equal to the ﬁrst time we observe the center in the data. We linearly interpolate
center service levels between surveys as well. Furthermore, we assume a center closed when we
no longer observe it in our data.11


3.2     Vital Statistics Birth Data

Data on all live births in the US come from the birth certiﬁcate ﬁles of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention National Vital Statistics Data.12 For each birth, we observe the race
and ethnicity of the mother as well as her age. For mothers who live in counties with more than
100,000 residents, we also observe the county of birth. Recall from Section 2 that SBHCs are
concentrated in urban and rural areas. The fact that geographic identiﬁers only are available
for large counties means that our birth analysis is most relevant for the urban school-based
health centers. The birth and SBHC data are merged based on the county of the SBHC. To
the extent that school districts split county lines, we assign each center to the county in which
it is located.
    The vital statistics data give us information on all live births in 524 counties in the US from
1990 through 2012. Beginning the analysis in 1990 captures 86% of the SBHC opening variation
in our data; we are loathe to extend the analysis sample back farther given that the ﬁrst year
we observe SBHC characteristics is in 1998. We construct “teen” birth rates – births per 1,000
women aged 15-18 – in each county and month.13 To account for the timing diﬀerences between
conception and birth, we link all births at the month-year level to the school year in which the
conception took place assuming a 9 month gestation time. We then aggregate births to the
school year-county level to construct a birth rate for each county and school year.
  11 The way we identify center closings likely confounds closure and survey non-response for centers that respond to the survey in

an earlier year but not subsequently. However, this method will bias our estimates towards zero to the extent that some centers
we code as closing are still providing services to students. Furthermore, our instrumental variables strategy should account for any
measurement error induced by center closures and non-response, as the instruments we use are unlikely to be related to closure or
non-response.
  12 These data are available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data access/Vitalstatsonline.htm.
  13 For the remainder of the analysis, we refer to the birth rate among 15-18 year old women as the ”teen birth rate.”




                                                                13
3.3        Common Core of Data High School Diploma Data

Since 1998, the National Center of Education Statistics has collected information on the number
of high school diplomas awarded in each school district. These data are reported as part
of the Common Core of Data (CCD).14 We use these reports, combined with grade-speciﬁc
enrollments, to construct a measure of high school dropout rates. Speciﬁcally, we estimate the
dropout rate for a given grade as 1 −                 Diplomast
                                                     Enrollmentt−g
                                                                   ,   where g∈ [0, 1, 2]. For example, when g=2,
this formula yields the 10th grade dropout rate. In particular, it is the proportion of 10th graders
in the district from two years ago that do not receive a high school diploma this year. Similarly,
we calculate the 11th and 12th grade dropout rate using once-lagged enrollment of 11th graders
and year t enrollment of 12th graders. We calculate these rates for each school district in the
US, from 1998-2010.15
    Heckman and LaFontaine (2010) and Mishel and Roy (2006) provide detailed discussions of
the problems arising from using the CCD diploma data to calculate graduation rates.16 The
biggest problem with these data is associated with the use of 9th grade enrollments, as there is
a substantial amount of grade retention in 9th grade. This grade retention is more prevalent for
low-SES students as well, and it leads one to understate graduation rates, especially for minority
students. Heckman and LaFontaine (2010) show that when one uses 8th grade enrollments
instead, this bias is reduced considerably. We instead ignore 9th grade enrollment and focus
on enrollment in higher grades that are less problematic. To the extent that SBHCs aﬀect the
likelihood of being held back in 9th grade, we thus will miss some of the ways in which these
centers inﬂuence students’ paths through high school. However, our estimate should not be
seriously aﬀected by the retention rate problems that come with using 9th grade enrollment
data.
    The CCD diploma data cannot distinguish between actual dropout rate changes and changes
in the timing of degree receipt and student transferring behavior. Thus, this dropout rate will
predominantly measure “on time” high school graduation for those in each grade cohort net
of transfer. If there is a net loss of the 10th -12th grade cohorts due to transferring out of the
  14 The  CCD diploma data are available at http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/drpagency.asp.
  15 Because  diploma data are from the spring of each year and the SBHC surveys are in the fall, we lag all graduation rates by one
year to align them with the SBHC service data.
  16 See also the comprehensive review of U.S. high school graduation rates in Murnane (2013).




                                                                14
school district, however, this measure will show an increase in dropout rates. For transferring to
create a bias in our estimates, it would have to be correlated with SBHC entry/exit and service
changes. While possible, we do not believe such eﬀects would be large. The complications
induced by these data are balanced by the fact that they are yearly, allowing us to exploit more
within-district variation in SBHC services. Table 2 presents descriptive statistics of dropout
rates calculated using these data.


3.4   US Census and ACS Data

We supplement our graduation analysis with 1990 and 2000 Census data as well as with the
2005-2011 American Community Survey. Using these data, we calculate for each school district
the proportion of 14-17 year olds living in the school district who are not enrolled in school
and who do not have a high school degree. This is the 14-17 year old dropout rate. The
18-19 dropout rate is calculated similarly using those aged 18-19. These data provide several
advantages over the diploma data. First, they allow us to distinguish between males and
females. Given our focus on teen fertility rates and the fact that males are more at risk of
dropping out, it is useful to examine dropout eﬀects by gender. Second, high school degrees in
the Census/ACS include GEDs while the diploma data do not. Even though the returns to a
GED are lower than the returns to a traditional high school diploma (Heckman and LaFontaine
2006), it is important to distinguish between any shifts across degree types versus any change
in overall degree attainment. To the extent that the Census/ACS and CCD graduation rate
estimates yield similar results, it suggests that our estimates are not being driven by changes in
the proportion of students receiving a GED. A drawback of these data is that we only observe
each school district a maximum of 4 times: in 1990, 2000, 2005-2007 and 2008-2011. But,
combined with the diploma results, this analysis provides a more complete picture of the eﬀect
of SBHCs on high school completion. Because the ACS data are for a period of 3 years, we
use the average SBHC service level over those 3 years for each school district when we analyze
these data. Descriptive statistics of the dropout rates in the Census and ACS are shown in
Table 2.




                                               15
4     Empirical Methodology

Our methodological approach to overcoming the inherent endogeneity between health care ac-
cess, health and educational attainment is to use the variation in student exposure to health
care services that is driven by school-based health center openings and the scope of the ser-
vices provided. Our baseline model is a straightforward diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences design that
uses variation only from the initial center entry in an area. We compare changes in birth or
graduation outcomes in areas that receive their ﬁrst center relative to areas that do not receive
their ﬁrst center in that year. Due to data limitations, our birth rate analysis and completion
rate analysis occur at diﬀerent levels of aggregation. In the birth data, the county is the most
disaggregated level of geography available, so this part of the analysis is done at the county
level.17 In particular, we estimate models of the following form:


                                  Ycst = β0 + β1 SBHCct + γc + δst + ϵcst ,                                                 (1)


where Ycst is the birth rate per thousand women aged 15-18 in county c in year t,18 γ is a set of
county ﬁxed eﬀects, and δ is a set of state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects that control for any state-level
unobserved shocks in each year as well as state-year level policies (such as Medicaid). The
variable SBHC is an indicator variable equal to 1 if there is a school-based health center in the
county and is zero otherwise. Thus, the variable of interest in equation (1) is β1 , which shows
the eﬀect on the birth rate of a SBHC entering the county.
    The county ﬁxed eﬀects control for any ﬁxed diﬀerences across counties in birth rates that are
correlated with SBHC treatment. The identifying variation for β1 comes only from diﬀerences
in the timing of the ﬁrst center opening across counties. Identiﬁcation of β1 thus rests on
several assumptions that are common in diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analyses. The ﬁrst is that
the decision to open a center is uncorrelated with trends in teen birth rates. Put diﬀerently,
counties in which a SBHC will open in the near future should have the same outcome trends
as those that will not experience an initial opening in the near future. Of particular concern is
whether centers are put into schools where the teen birth rate is declining. If so, equation (1)
  17 One beneﬁt of using aggregated data is that our estimates account for both the direct eﬀect of SBHCs on teen pregnancy and

the indirect eﬀects coming through peer inﬂuences that Yakusheva and Fletcher (2015) show are important.
  18 We also have estimated models that use the log of the birth rate. These estimates are very similar to those shown below and

available from the authors upon request.


                                                              16
will not be able to distinguish treatment eﬀects from diﬀerential secular relative trends. We
do not believe, however, that this concern is very relevant in this context. It is far more likely
that SBHCs are targeted toward schools that have declining health outcomes. As discussed in
Section 2, the timing of when centers open is likely to be related to lack of health care access
among students, the desire and ability of a principal or administrator to partner with a local
health care provider, space in the school, and demand among the community for expanding
health care access for low-income kids. Many of these factors may be related to underlying
trends in health or educational attainment, but the sign of any resulting bias would be towards
zero.19 We test directly for whether center entry is related to pre-SBHC birth rate trends with
the following “event study” speciﬁcation:

                                                 ≥11
                                                 ∑
                             Ycst = ϕ +                 ατ I(t − t0 = τ )ct + γc + δst + ϵcst .                                (2)
                                               τ =≤−6


In equation (2), I(t − t0 = τ ) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the observation is τ years
away from the ﬁrst SBHC opening in the county and is equal to zero otherwise. These variables
are zero for counties that have no health centers in the time period of our analysis. This event
study model allows us to both test for pre-treatment trends by examining α−5 − α−1 and to
test for time-varying treatment eﬀects (given by α0 − α10 ) that might be missed in equation
(1). We focus on the event window from relative year -5 to 10 as outside that window we have
fewer observations with which to identify each relative time parameter. We group together
observations with event time less than -5 and observations with event time greater than 10 in
order to avoid altering the analysis sample. The model includes all “never-treated” counties as
well, which constitute the implicit control group.
    Another identiﬁcation concern with diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analyses is that secular shocks
or unobserved policies that correlate with the timing of the treatment can bias the results.
Such shocks are unlikely to be a factor in this analysis, however. Since the timing of the
treatment varies across counties, it is doubtful secular shocks exist that are highly correlated
with the timing of SBHC entry. That it takes several years for centers to open from when
  19 We also note that if the timing of center openings were related to unobserved trends, our birth rate and dropout rate estimates

should be biased in the same direction. That we ﬁnd no eﬀect on high school dropout rates but a large negative eﬀect on teen
fertility rates argues against such selection.




                                                                17
they are initially conceived also makes it unlikely that they are systematically correlated with
county-level shocks. As well, the use of state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects helps control for any state-
level policies or shocks that could be correlated with the timing of treatment. Nonetheless,
it could be the case that policies disproportionately impacting low-income communities (such
as welfare reform and EITC expansions) are passed in similar time periods to when centers
entered. In Section 5.1.2, we show our estimates are robust to controlling for separate time
eﬀects for low-income counties and to allowing for diﬀerent state-year ﬁxed eﬀects by whether
the county median income in 1990 is below that of the median county in the state. We also
conduct falsiﬁcation tests using birth rates among women in their twenties that conﬁrm that the
birth eﬀects are isolated to high-school-aged women. The results of these falsiﬁcation tests are
inconsistent with the idea that important alternative policies or secular trends were correlated
with the rollout of SBHCs.
   The coeﬃcient β1 in equation (1) yields the average eﬀect of center entry. This treatment
speciﬁcation omits a large amount of heterogeneity across centers, though, in the amount and
type of services oﬀered. From a policy perspective, we are interested more in the services oﬀered
through the centers than the centers per se. We therefore estimate versions of equation (1) that
replace SBHCct with Service Hours ct , which are measures of the amount of services provided
by each center relative to the underlying size of the student population. Speciﬁcally, we focus
on two diﬀerent service measures: Primary Care Staﬀ Hours per week and Total Medical Staﬀ
Hours per week. These services are set to zero prior to an SBHC opening. The Total Medical
Staﬀ Hours diﬀer from Primary Care Hours due to hours from mental health staﬀ, dental staﬀ,
physician’s assistants and nurses. In Appendix Table A-2, we also show estimates that use Days
per Week or Hours per Week as the service measures. As Primary Care Staﬀ and Total Medical
Staﬀ Hours are the most comprehensive measures of the medical services provided by school-
based health centers, they are our preferred treatment variables. Means of these treatment
measures are shown in Table 2.
   Throughout the analysis, the SBHC service variables are constructed by ﬁrst summing the
total amount of each service measure for each county or school district and year. For example,
we calculate the total number of medical staﬀ service hours in the county and year across all



                                               18
centers in the county. We then divide by the total high-school-aged population in the county.20
This provides a measure of the hours of SBHC medical services per high-school-aged student
in the county. Finally, we re-scale the measure to be representative of a typical center by
multiplying by 1000, which is the approximate average size of a high school in our sample.
The method is identical for our school district level regressions, where we sum over districts
rather than counties. Using the primary care or medical staﬀ hours as our treatment measures,
β1 is interpreted as the eﬀect on the birth rate of SBHCs increasing their service levels by an
additional hour. When multiplied by the average SBHC service level, this estimate shows the
eﬀect of a service increase equivalent to one more average-sized center opening. We focus on
this parameter for policy purposes.
   Variation in primary care and medical staﬀ hours comes from two diﬀerent sources: 1)
openings/closings of SBHCs with diﬀerent service levels and 2) changes in service levels among
open centers from year to year. In addition to the identiﬁcation assumptions discussed above,
we now require that decisions about the amount of services each center oﬀers are uncorrelated
with pre-treatment trends in teen birth rates. If service levels rise in areas that were already
beginning to experience rising or falling teen birth rates, then our estimates of β1 will be biased.
   We address these core identiﬁcation concerns in several ways. First, we estimate event study
models that test for selection on trends as a function of initial service level variation:

                                      ≥11
                                      ∑
                  Ycst = ϕ +                 ατ Service Hours ct0 ∗ I(t − t0 = τ ) + γc + δst + ϵcst .   (3)
                                    τ =≤−6


The Service Hours variable in equation (3) is set to the ﬁrst observed service level in that
county. That is, we set it equal to the service level observed when τ =0, denoted t0 . This
model thus tests for selection related to initial service levels as well as time-varying treatment
eﬀects by initial service levels. We also estimate a version of this model in which we allow
Service Hours to vary over time after initial entry, similar to how it is speciﬁed in equation (1).
Comparing the post-entry estimates across these two versions of this model provides evidence
on whether post-entry variation in service levels is exogenous.
   Second, in order to account for the potential endogeneity of year-to-year service level varia-
 20 Our   high-school-aged population count includes individuals between the ages of 15 and 19.




                                                                19
tion, we employ an instrumental variables strategy. We instrument Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
and Total Medical Staﬀ Hours with an indicator for whether there is a center in the county
and with a quadratic trend in the time since ﬁrst center entry. This quadratic time trend is set
to zero prior to the ﬁrst center entering a county. As long as center entry is uncorrelated with
pre-entry trends in birth rates, this instrument is valid. Thus, equation (2) is a direct test of
the validity of this IV approach. Critically, because the instruments do not contain variation in
service levels after the initial center is opened, they will account for any endogeneity in equation
(1) in year-to-year service levels.
   Our analysis of high school dropout rates takes a very similar form as our birth rate models.
The main diﬀerence between the two is that, for high school dropout rates, we observe outcomes
at the school district level, rather than at the county level. We estimate the following models:


            Ydst = β0 + β1 SBHCdt + γd + δst + ϵdst                                             (4)
                            ≥11
                            ∑
            Ydst = ϕ +              ατ I(t − t0 = τ )dt + γd + δst + ϵdst                       (5)
                           τ =≤−6
                            ≥11
                            ∑
            Ydst = ϕ +              ατ Service Hours dt0 ∗ I(t − t0 = τ ) + γd + δst + ϵdst .   (6)
                           τ =≤−6


In equations (4)-(6), we now include district, rather than county, ﬁxed eﬀects. The assumptions
underlying the identiﬁcation of the treatment parameters in equations (4)-(6) are essentially
identical to those for equations (1)-(3), except instead of there being no diﬀerential county-level
relative trends, here there must be no diﬀerential district-level trends. Equations (5) and (6)
allow us to test for such trends as well as for time-varying treatment eﬀects. We also estimate
instrumental variables models akin to those at the county level to account for any endogeneity
associated with yearly variation in SBHC service levels in our dropout analysis.
   A ﬁnal potential methodological issue is the presence of measurement error in our service
hours treatment measures. One source of measurement error is the fact that, while the NASBHC
National Census is designed to cover all health centers, there is not complete coverage in every
year. The use of multiple years of data combined with information on the date of opening of
the centers should mitigate this problem. But, it is possible there are health centers we do not
observe in our data and some we code as closing when they still exist. To the extent that some


                                                    20
districts and counties are more heavily treated than our data show, this should attenuate our
OLS estimates. The instrumental variables model estimates should avoid similar attenuation,
however, because the instruments are unlikely to be correlated with center closure or with
survey non-response.
    A second source of measurement error is that prior to 1998, the ﬁrst year of NASBHC data,
we cannot observe changes in the level of services provided. For all centers opened before
1998, we use the ﬁrst observed service levels (typically from the 1998 survey). This could
produce further measurement error in the Service Hours variables. Finally, aggregation to the
county and school district levels could produce measurement error because many students in
each county and district do not have centers in their own school buildings. Some aggregation
would be appropriate even if it were not necessitated by the data, because 62% of centers
are open not only for students in the hosting schools but also for other community residents.
Furthermore, SBHCs are concentrated amongst the lowest-SES schools in counties and districts,
which also are schools in which teen pregnancy and dropout rates are most prevalent.21 This
argument supports our contention that the aggregated data can provide informative estimates
of the relationship between school-based health centers, teen childbearing, and educational
attainment.


5       Results

5.1     Birth Results

5.1.1    Main Estimates


Table 3 presents the baseline estimates of the eﬀect of school-based health centers on teen birth
rates. Each cell in the table is from a separate regression, and all standard errors are clustered
at the county level. In the ﬁrst column, we show OLS estimates of β1 from equation (1). The
top row shows results using an indicator for the presence of any center in a county as the
treatment measure. When the ﬁrst SBHC enters a county, the teen birth rate declines by 1.3
per 1000, which represents a 3.0% percent decline. The remaining rows show estimates using
  21 We also note that it would be exceedingly diﬃcult to match schools to speciﬁc centers. The school codes for centers are not

consistently present in the data, and many centers have administrative oﬃces that occasionally answer the surveys. In some years
the administrative oﬃces answer the surveys and in some years the centers themselves do. Aggregating to service levels at higher
geographic levels sidesteps this problem.


                                                              21
Primary Care Staﬀ Hours and Medical Staﬀ Hours as the treatment measures. Across these two
treatment variables, the table shows a consistent negative relationship between SBHC service
levels and teen birth rates. Ten additional primary care staﬀ hours or medical staﬀ hours per
week decreases teen births by 2.18 or 1.08 per 1,000 respectively. A useful way to interpret
these estimates is to calculate their implications for the eﬀect of opening an average-sized center.
To calculate such an eﬀect, we multiply the estimates by the average amount of services each
center supplies (shown in Table 2) and then divide by the average birth rate for this group.
The estimates suggest that adding an average-sized center in a county would reduce birth rates
by 2.4 or 2.7%. The magnitude of these estimates is similar to, if somewhat smaller than, the
6.8% decline in birth rates among 18-19 year olds following Medicaid family planning waiver
expansions reported in Kearney and Levine (2009).
    A central concern with the type of diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis we employ is that centers
may be targeted at areas based on preexisting trends. Figure 5 shows the estimates of α from
equation (2). We have excluded relative year -1 such that all estimates are relative to this year.
The points in the ﬁgure show the point estimates of α, while the lines extending from each
point show bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals that we calculated using standard errors
that are clustered at the county level. There is no evidence of negative pre-treatment trends in
birth rates. The pre-treatment trend line is ﬂat, especially within 5 years of center entry, and
the pre-treatment coeﬃcients are jointly insigniﬁcant (p-value of 0.56). These results suggest
that center entry is exogenous with respect to teen birth rate trends.
    The second pattern evident in Figure 5 is that the long-run eﬀects of SBHCs are much larger
than the short-run eﬀect. These are at least three potential explanations for these rising eﬀects.
First, repeated exposure during all four years of high school should produce larger eﬀects for
students than exposure for a smaller number of years. Second, centers may take time to ingrain
themselves in the community. Third, many counties initially opening a center later expand their
services and have subsequent center openings. Controlling for state-by-year eﬀects, we ﬁnd that
county-level service hours hit their peak 5 years after the ﬁrst center opens and district-level
service hours hit their peak 8 years after the ﬁrst center opens.22
  22 These tabulations come from event study analyses of how service levels vary after initial center entry. Appendix Table A-6

shows similar estimates that impose a quadratic time trend. While service levels grow modestly in the several years following initial
center entry, the majority of the service level variation is driven by the timing of ﬁrst entry.



                                                                 22
    While the timing of center openings is exogenous with respect to pre-existing teen fertility
rate trends, the amount of services they oﬀer are correlated with these trends. Both initial
service levels and post-entry service level variation appear to be related to pre-entry fertility
trends (as displayed in Appendix Figure A-1).23 More services appear to be targeted towards
areas experiencing increasing teen fertility rates, which attenuates the OLS estimates that use
service hours as the treatment measure. To account for the endogeneity of service levels, we
instrument for Primary Care Staﬀ Hours or Medical Staﬀ Hours with the timing of the ﬁrst
center opening. Our instrumental variables are an indicator variable for whether a center has
opened and quadratic time trends for the number of years since that ﬁrst center opened. The
results from these IV models are shown in column (ii) of Table 3. The instruments are strong,
with ﬁrst-stage F-statistics above 50.24 The estimates in column (ii) are considerably larger in
absolute value than the OLS estimates and are statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at
the 5% level. The larger estimates are due to the fact that the instruments account for the
targeting of services based on teen fertility rate trends. In our IV models, opening an average-
sized center reduces teen birth rates by over 5%. On the whole, the results in Table 3 tell a
consistent story that opening an SBHC in a county has a sizable negative eﬀect on teen birth
rates on the order of 3-5 percent.
    At which age are teens’ fertility rates most aﬀected by SBCHs? In theory, SBHCs may
aﬀect both younger and older teens. On the younger end, middle school students might also
be able to visit centers. On the older end, the impact of centers on sexual behavior and
use of contraception may persist beyond a woman’s time in high school. Table 4 presents
estimates by age, including 19 year olds and those under 15. For each age, we show estimates
using the same models and treatment measures as shown in Table 3. A consistent pattern of
results emerges in Table 4: health care services from SBHCs reduce teen birth rates among
teens of all ages, with the largest proportional eﬀects coming from the youngest teens. For
example, in our 2SLS models predicting primary care hours, an average-sized SBHC reduces
births among girls 14 and under by 15.2%, among 15-year olds by 12.0% and among 16-year
  23 Panels A and B of Figure A-1 presents evidence that counties with higher initial hours of service have rising birth rates, although

the estimates are not jointly signiﬁcant. The increase in birth rates continues for the ﬁrst year after the center has opened. In
Panels C and D, we hold service hours constant at their initial levels both pre- and post-initial entry and show a steady decline in
birth rates after the ﬁrst center opens. Taken together, these results suggests that the counties continuing to experience relatively
high birth rates tend to increase their centers’ service hours the most.
  24 First-stage coeﬃcients are shown in Appendix Table A-6.




                                                                  23
olds by 9.6%. Among teens aged 17 or 18, the estimated eﬀects are less than 6%. Across model
speciﬁcations, the estimates for 19 year olds are much smaller and often are not statistically
signiﬁcant; this is sensible, because many of these women are no longer enrolled in high school
and may thus have far less access to SBHCs. Proportionally larger eﬀects for younger women
is an important ﬁnding, because the private and social costs of teen fertility may be highest
for the youngest mothers. That SBHCs have such a large eﬀect on young teen births suggests
they are most successful at reducing fertility among the population that is of highest concern
among policymakers.
    SBHCs diﬀer in the types of contraceptive services they oﬀer. About 65% of centers oﬀer
some type of birth control, either directly or through referral (see Table 1). In Table 5, we
show estimates of equation (1) that allow the eﬀect of Primary Care Staﬀ Hours and Medical
Staﬀ Hours to diﬀer by the type of contraceptive services oﬀered by the clinic. We split centers
into four groups that together encompass the entire range of birth control oﬀerings in US SB-
HCs: centers that prescribe hormone-based contraceptives on-site,25 centers that refer patients
for hormone-based birth control but do not oﬀer condoms on-site, centers that refer patients
for hormone-based birth control and oﬀer condoms on-site, and centers that do not oﬀer any
contraceptive services. Each column in Table 5 comes from a separate regression. The results
are broadly consistent with SBHC services most aﬀecting teen birth rates in centers that can
prescribe hormone-based birth control, but the estimates are somewhat imprecise and the dif-
ferences in slopes are not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels. As shown in Figure 3,
many of the centers that do not oﬀer contraception do oﬀer other family planning services, such
as pregnancy tests, tests for sexually transmitted infections, abstinence counseling, and general
health advice that would come with a primary care visit. Table 5 reveals that our results are
not driven by condom distribution, which is consistent with theoretical and empirical research
arguing that distributing condoms may not reduce (and might increase) teen birth rates (Buck-
les and Hungerman 2014; Arcidiacono, Khwaja and Ouyang 2012). The results suggest that
providing female teenages with easier access to hormone-based contraception, access that does
not require them to go through their parents, may substantially decrease teen fertility rates.
  25 Hormone-based contraceptives include birth control pills, Depo-Provera, implants, inter-uterine devices (IUDs), the patch, and

the NuvaRing. We code centers as oﬀering hormone-based contraceptives if they report oﬀering birth control pills or report oﬀering
more than one other form of hormone-based contraception.



                                                                24
SBHCs might also reduce rates of sexually transmitted diseases.26
    School-based health centers may have a larger eﬀect on African American and Hispanic
students than on white students because these centers are targeted at low-income populations.
Furthermore, African American and Hispanic teen birth rates are much higher than those of
whites, which makes these groups particularly important to study. In Table 6, we show OLS
and IV estimates of the eﬀect of SBHCs on teen fertility rates by race/ethnicity. As in Table 3,
we also calculate percent eﬀects of opening an average-sized center in order to compare more
easily across speciﬁcations. There is no evidence that opening a SBHC reduces teen birth rates
among whites. The estimates are universally small and are not statistically diﬀerent from zero.
This non-result is likely driven by the fact that our treatment is at the county level, and white
students in treated counties are far more likely to be in wealthier areas that do not have a
center. Thus, within a treated county, whites are less likely to be actually exposed to a center
than black and Hispanic students. As a result, SBHCs have a much larger impact on birth rates
among black and Hispanic teens. In the 2SLS models, adding an average-sized SBHC reduces
both black and Hispanic teen birth rates by about 8%. Although the Hispanic estimates are
imprecise, these results demonstrate that school health centers aﬀect teen births most among
racial and ethnic minorities who are more likely to live in low income areas that have such
centers.


5.1.2    Robustness Checks


As discussed in Section 4, one of the central identiﬁcation assumptions underlying our approach
is that there are no secular trends or shocks that align with the rollout of SBHCs across areas.
Of particular concern is whether federal or state governments passed policies disproportionately
aﬀecting cities with higher concentrations of low-income residents during the same time period
when many SBHCs opened. Many centers opened in the mid-1990s (Figure 1), a time period
in which welfare programs were reformed, the EITC was expanded, and many states were
  26 We estimated state-level models of how SBHC services aﬀect STD rates among teens using data from the U.S. Center for

Disease Control, which are shown in Appendix Table A-5. Unlike birth data, data by age group for STDs are available at the state
level and not the county level (county level data are not disaggregated by age). We regressed rates of three STDS - gonorrhea,
chlamydia, and syphilis – among 15-19 year olds on the number of hours of primary care and total medical staﬀ services provided
by school-based health centers in that state, in models controlling for state ﬁxed eﬀects and year eﬀects. Although most of the
estimates are not statistically diﬀerent from zero, they all point to sizable declines in STD rates among teens when SBHC services
in the state rise. While the need to aggregate to the state level leaves us with too little power to draw deﬁnitive conclusions, these
results are suggestive of positive sexual health beneﬁts of SBHCs in addition to lower teen birth rates.




                                                                 25
expanding public health insurance programs. The state-year ﬁxed eﬀects should account for
these policy changes if they aﬀected teen birth rates in all counties similarly in a state and
year. But these policies disproportionately aﬀected low-income communities, so they may
have disproportionately aﬀected teen birth rates in these communities. Table 7 shows several
robustness checks to compare with the results from Table 3. Columns (i) and (ii) of Table
7 reveal that the results are robust to controlling for state-year-median income ﬁxed eﬀects
by allowing the state-year ﬁxed eﬀects to diﬀer based on whether a given county’s median
income in 1990 was in the bottom half of all counties in that state. Columns (iii) and (iv) of
Table 7 show that the results are also robust to controlling for both state-year ﬁxed eﬀects and
diﬀerential year ﬁxed eﬀects among the bottom 20% of counties in the US according to 1990
median earnings. The estimates in columns (i) through (iv) are similar to those in Table 3,
with somewhat larger estimates for the IV models. Table 7 thus suggests that our main results
are not upwardly biased by state or national policies aimed at lower-income communities.
   Next, we relax the linear functional form assumption between SBHC service levels and
outcomes. We do this by controlling separately for SBHC services and for the existence of a
center in the county rather than just the interaction of these two measures. This is a more
ﬂexible way to model the treatment, and the estimates in column (v) of Table 7 show that this
leads to a slightly larger percentage eﬀect of SBHCs on teen fertility. If anything, the functional
form embedded in our baseline estimates leads to somewhat conservative estimates.
   Another check for the existence of secular trends or shocks that can bias our estimates is to
examine whether the short run eﬀects of SBHCs are limited to teen women. If older women also
experience declines in birth rates when SBHCs enter, this could be evidence that the emergence
of these centers is correlated with other factors aﬀecting fertility rates for women of all ages.
This falsiﬁcation test is complicated by the fact that many older women were treated by SBHCs
when they were younger and by the fact that many centers are open to the community at large.
We examine birth rates among women aged 20-24 and aged 25-29, and we restrict the sample
to counties that did not have a center when women in these age ranges were of high school age.
We also restrict our sample to states in which fewer than half of SBHCs report that they serve
non-students. Table 8 shows these results; for both age groups, there is no evidence of a decline



                                                26
in births associated with SBHC entry. Indeed, birth rates among 25-29 year olds increased
slightly in counties with greater intensity of services from SBHCs. These results are not simply
due to the change in sample: column (iii) repeats the analysis on the same sample for 15-18
year olds. The results in column (iii) are similar to those shown in column (i) of Table 3. That
the fertility eﬀects of SBHCs are isolated to those who are of high school age strongly supports
our identiﬁcation strategy.


5.2        High School Dropout Results

The results presented above suggest that school-based clinics promote better health outcomes
among the teens exposed to them, at least in terms of birth rates. A question of high impor-
tance is whether the changes in teen health caused by these centers, in terms of pregnancy as
well as other health outcomes, aﬀect educational attainment. For students in the low-income
areas targeted by SBHCs, high school completion is a very important measure of educational
attainment, and it thus is the focus of our analysis. In Table 9, we present the ﬁrst evidence in
the literature on the eﬀect of providing primary care services to low-income school-age children
on high school dropout rates. Due to serial correlation of errors within districts over time, all
estimates are accompanied by standard errors that are clustered at the school district level
throughout the dropout rate analysis.
    The estimates in Table 9 are in percent terms, such that a coeﬃcient of 1 would mean that
a 1 hour increase in SBHC services would increase dropout rates by 1 percent (rather than
by 100% if the dependent variable was in percentage terms). Across all models and treatment
measures, there is little evidence that SBHCs or SBHC services aﬀect high school dropout
rates.27 Roughly half of the estimates are positive, and only one of the estimates is statistically
signiﬁcant at even the 10% level. Furthermore, the estimates are precise: the 95% conﬁdence
intervals show we can rule out declines in dropout rates from an average-sized center of more
than -0.5% for 10th grade, -1.0% for 11th grade, and -0.7% for 12th grade.28
    Figure 6 shows the event study estimates from equation (5) for 10th , 11th and 12th grade
  27 SeeAppendix Table A-6 for ﬁrst-stage IV estimates.
  28 Similarto Table 5, we have estimated dropout models that examine heterogeneous SBHC eﬀects by birth control services
oﬀered. These are shown in Appendix Table A-3 and do not point to any dropout rate eﬀects in centers that oﬀer access to certain
types of contraception. We also have examined eﬀects of service hours among centers that oﬀer mental health services. We ﬁnd no
evidence of a dropout rate eﬀect among centers that oﬀer such services. These results are available from the authors upon request.




                                                               27
dropout rates. Estimates of equation (6) using Medical Staﬀ Hours and Primary Care Staﬀ
Hours are shown in Appendix Figures A-2 through A-4. These ﬁgures show that the null
ﬁnding in Table 9 does not mask important heterogeneity in long-run eﬀects or selection on
pre-treatment trends. Recall that our dropout rate sample begins in 1998, and as a result we
have much fewer observations pre-dating center openings. Thus, the standard error bounds in
the pre-treatment period are relatively large. Still, there is little evidence of diﬀerential trends
prior to center entry, and there is no evidence of a dropout eﬀect post-entry either in the short
or long run.
   Dropout rate estimates using Census/ACS data are shown in Table 10.29 Similar to Table
9, we fail to see statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects of SBHCs on high school dropout rates. The one
exception is for women aged 18-19. When we use Primary Care and Medical Staﬀ Hours as the
treatment measure, there are small, negative eﬀects of an average-sized SBHC on the dropout
rate. However, these estimated eﬀects are no more than one quarter of a percent, are not robust
to using a center indicator as the treatment measure, and are not statistically signiﬁcant at the
5% level. Thus, we view these estimates as being consistent with at most a very small impact
of SBHCs on female high school dropout rates.
   Our ﬁndings relate to a large literature examining the causal eﬀect of teen childbearing on
educational outcomes. While there is a robust positive correlation in most data sets between
teen pregnancy and the likelihood of dropping out of high school, obtaining credible causal
evidence of this link has proven diﬃcult. The diﬃculty in establishing causality in this context is
that it is very hard to generate variation in teen pregnancy rates that is driven by factors that do
not aﬀect schooling decisions as well. The literature on this subject, while large, is quite mixed.
Ribar (1994) uses age at menarche, OB-GYN availability and state abortion rates as instruments
and ﬁnds no eﬀect of teen childbearing on high school completion. Hotz, McElroy and Sanders
(2005) use natural experiments driven by miscarriages to generate plausibly exogenous variation
in teen births. They ﬁnd a small negative eﬀect of teen childbearing on high school completion.
Fletcher and Wolfe (2009) and Ashcraft, Fernandez-Val and Lang (2013), however, argue that
miscarriages are not exogenous events; they report modest negative eﬀects of adjusted teen birth
eﬀects on high school completion. More closely related to this study, Klepinger, Lundberg and
 29 The   limited number of observations per district preclude us from estimating IV models with these data.



                                                                28
Plotnick (1999) use state-level variation in family planning and abortion services/policies as
instruments for teen childbearing. They report that a teen giving birth reduces her educational
attainment by 2.5 years. Finally, there are several studies that use sibling ﬁxed eﬀects as
well as matching estimators to identify the eﬀect of teen childbearing. While the sibling ﬁxed
eﬀects analyses come to very mixed conclusions (Ribar, 1999; Holmlund, 2005; Geronimus and
Korenman, 1992), the results from the matching literature point more consistently to a negative
eﬀect of teen fertility on educational outcomes (Levine and Painter, 2003; Sanders, Smith and
Zhang, 2008). Our estimates, however, suggest that the teen birth rate declines as well as the
other health beneﬁts teens receive as a result of these centers do not substantially aﬀect their
likelihood of completing high school.
    One explanation for the lack of an eﬀect on dropout rates in the presence of a teen birth eﬀect
could be that the birth estimates only use data from large counties. To explore this potential
explanation, in Appendix Table A-4 we estimate dropout rate models using the CCD diploma
data in which we use only the counties included in the birth rate analysis. The results are
extremely similar to baseline and show no eﬀect of SBHC services on high school completion.
Thus, the diﬀerence between the birth and dropout ﬁndings is not due to the diﬀerences in the
samples used.30
    Another alternative explanation for the lack of a dropout rate eﬀect is that SBHCs lead
to a reduction in school resources that counteract any health eﬀects. These centers are not
ﬁnanced by the school, and they do not use school resources aside from the space that they are
allocated. However, it still is possible that SBHCs use other school resources in a manner that
might inﬂuence our dropout rate estimates, or SBHC entry could be correlated with unobserved
trends in school resources. In Table 11, we examine whether SBHC service variation is correlated
with school expenditures using data from the 1998-2011 Common Core of Data. We see that
there is no relationship between SBHC services and per-student expenditures: the coeﬃcients
are small, precisely estimated and are not statistically diﬀerent from zero at even the 10% level.
These results suggest that there are no expenditure changes correlated with SBHC entry or
service level variation that could bias the results and conclusions of our analysis.
  30 In results available upon request, we also have estimated dropout rate models aggregated to the county-year level rather than

the district-year level. The estimates are very similar to those shown in Table 9.




                                                               29
6    Conclusion

Disparities in health care access, health and educational attainment are large in the United
States, and policies to help close these gaps have received much policy attention. In this paper,
we study school-based health centers that provide primary health care services to students and
families living in under-served communities. Despite the rapid growth of SBHCs in the US over
the past two decades, the eﬀect of these centers on health and educational attainment has not
been studied previously in a manner that allows one to overcome the endogeneity problems
related to center placement and use decisions. Using detailed data from repeated surveys of
SBHCs conducted by the National Alliance on School-based Health Care, we construct district-
and county-level measures of SBHC services over time and employ diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences and
instrumental variables techniques to identify the causal eﬀect of these center services on teen
fertility rates and on high school dropout rates.
    We present two broad ﬁndings from our empirical analysis. First, we show the SBHCs have
negative eﬀects on fertility rates among teenage girls. Adding a center with the average amount
of SBHC services leads to a decrease in the 15-18 year old birth rate of about 5% relative to
the baseline fertility rate. These eﬀects are larger for younger teens, and they are concentrated
among African American and Hispanic teens who are most likely to be exposed to a center.
Second, despite the large eﬀect of SBHCs on teen fertility, we ﬁnd no substantial eﬀect on high
school dropout rates.
    There are several implications of our results that are important for public policy. One central
message of our ﬁndings is that SBHCs are a useful tool to reduce teen birth rates in the US,
which are among the highest in the industrialized world (Kearney and Levine 2012). Another
important implication of our results is that the provision of low-cost and convenient primary
care services through schools has at most a small eﬀect on students’ decisions to drop out of
high school. This is not to suggest that providing such services does not improve these students’
lives, but it does suggest that any positive health beneﬁts of this care do not immediately yield
greater educational investment. High school health interventions may come too late to inﬂuence
high school completion; it is possible that expanding health care services to these children when
they were younger would have produced greater eﬀects on high school completion rates. Our


                                                30
work highlights the importance of further study of the linkages between health care access,
health outcomes and educational investment decisions to determine whether there are aspects
of health care provision that could support educational investment among students from low-
income backgrounds.




                                            31
References
[1] Adler, Nancy E. and David H. Rehkopf. 2008. “U.S. Disparities in Health: Descriptions, Causes, and Mech-
    anisms.” Annual Review of Public Health 29: 235–252.

[2] Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011. “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis.” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 25(3): 153-172.

[3] Ananat, Elizabeth Oltmans and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2012. “The Power of the Pill for the Next Generation:
    Oral Contraception’s Eﬀects on Fertility, Abortion, and Maternal and Child Characteristics.” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 94(1): 37–51.

[4] Andrulis, Dennis P. 1998. “Access to Care Is the Centerpiece in the Elimination of Socioeconomic Disparities
    in Health.” Annals of Internal Medicine 129(5): 412-416.

[5] Arcidiacono, Peter, Ahmed Khwaja, and Lijing Ouyang. 2012. “Habit Persistence and Teen Sex: Could
    Increased Access to Contraception Have Unintended Consequences for Teen Pregnancies?.” Journal of Busi-
    ness and Economic Statistics 30(2): 312-325.
[6] Aschraft, Adam, Ivan Fernandez-Val and Kevin Lang. 2013. “The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing:
    Consistent Estimates When Abortion Makes Miscarriage Non-random.” The Economic Journal 123(571):
    875-905.

[7] Bailey, Martha J. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women’s Life
    Cycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1): 289–320.

[8] Bailey, Martha J. 2010. ““Momma’s Got the Pill”: How Anthony Comstock and Griswold v. Connecticut
    Shaped US Childbearing.” American Economic Review 100(1): 98-129.

[9] Bailey, Martha J. and Andrew Goodman-Bacon. 2015. “The War on Povertys Experiment in Public Medicine:
    The Impact of Community Health Centers on the Mortality of Older Americans.” American Economic Review
    105(3): 1067-1104.
[10] Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the American
    South.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 73117.
[11] Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010. “Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A retrospective Analysis of Childhood Expo-
    sure.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(2): 145.
[12] Brown, David, Amanda E. Kowalski, and Ithai Lurie. 2014. “Medicaid as an Investment in Chil-
    dren: What is the Long-Term Impact on Tax Receipts?” Yale University Working Paper, available at
    http://www.econ.yale.edu/ ak669/medicaid.latest.draft.pdf, last accessed 10/7/2014.
[13] Buckles, Kasey and Daniel Hungerman. 2014. “Estimating the Incidental Fertility Eﬀects of School Condom
    Distribution Programs.” Mimeo.
[14] Case, Ann, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. “Economic Status and Health in Childhood:
    The Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review 92(5): 1308–1334.
[15] Case, Anne, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson. 2005. “The Lasting Impact of Childhood Health and
    Circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics 24(2): 365-389.
[16] Cohodes, Sarah, Daniel Grossman, Samuel Kleiner, and Michael F. Lovenheim. Forthcoming. “The Eﬀect
    of Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance Expansions.” Journal of
    Human Resources.

[17] Conti, Gabriella, James Heckman and Sergio Urzua. 2010. “The Education-Health Gradient.” American
    Economic Review 100(2): 234–238.

[18] Cuhna, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy Masterov. 2006. “Interpreting the Evidence
    on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 1, ed. Eric Hanushek and
    Finis Welch, 697-812. Amsterdam: Elsevier.



                                                      32
[19] Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
    Child Health.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 431–466.
[20] Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker and Wanchuan Lin. 2008. “Has Public Health Insurance For Older Children
    Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes?” Journal of Health Economics 27(6): 1567–
    1581.
[21] Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner. 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement: Evidence
    from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic Review 102(5): 1927–1956.
[22] Figlio, David, Guryan, Jonathan, Karbownik, Krzysztof, and Jeﬀrey Roth. 2014. “The Eﬀects of Poor
    Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development.” American Economic Review 104(12): 3921-55.
[23] Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P. Newhouse,
    Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker and Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. “The Oregon Health Insurance
    Experiment: Evidence from the First Year.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3): 1057–1106.
[24] Fletcher, Jason M. and Barbara L. Wolfe. 2009. “Education and Labor Market Consequences of Teenage
    Childbearing: Evidence Using the Timing of Pregnancy Outcomes and Community Fixed Eﬀects.” Journal
    of Human Resources 44(2): 303–325.
[25] Flores, Glenn. 2010. “Technical ReportRacial and Ethnic Disparities in the Health and Health Care of
    Children.” Pediatrics 125(4): e979–e1020.
[26] Gross, Tal and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2011. “Health Insurance and the Consumer Bankruptcy Decision:
    Evidence from Expansions of Medicaid.” Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8): 767–778.
[27] Geierstanger, Sara Peterson, Gorette Amaral, Mona Mansour, and Susan Russell Walters. 2004. “School-
    Based Health Centers and Academic Performance: Research, Challenges, and Recommendations.” Journal
    of School Health 74(9): 347-352.
[28] Geronimus, Arlene T. and Sanders Korenman. 1992. “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teen Childbear-
    ing Reconsidered.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(4): 1187–1214.
[29] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Womens
    Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 110(4): 730–770.
[30] Harris, Kathleen Mullan, Penny Gordon-Larsen, Kim Chantala, and J. Richard Udry. 2006. “Longitudinal
    Trends in Race/Ethnic Disparities in Leading Health Indicators From Adolescence to Young Adulthood.”
    Archives of Pediatric Adolescent Medicine 160: 74–81.
[31] Heckman, James J. and Paul A. LaFontaine. 2006. “Bias-corrected Estimates of GED Returns.” Journal
    of Labor Economics 24(3): 661–700.
[32] Heckman, James J. and Paul A. LaFontaine. 2010. “The American High School Graduation Rate: Trends
    and Levels.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(2): 244–262.
[33] Holmlund, Helena. 2005. “Estimating Long-Term Consequences of Teenage Childbearing: An Examination
    of the Siblings Approach.” Journal of Human Resources 40(3): 716–743.
[34] Hotz, Joseph V., Susan William McElroy and Seth G. Sanders. 2005. “Teenage Childbearing and Its Life
    Cycle Consequences: Exploiting a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources 40(3): 683–715.
[35] Kaestner, Robert, T. Joyce and A. Racine. 2001. “Medicaid Eligibility and the Incidence of Ambulatory
    Care Sensitive Hospitalizations for Children.” Social Science and Medicine 52(2): 305-313.
[36] Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. 2009. “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and Sexual Behavior.”
    The Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 137-151.
[37] Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. 2012. “Why is the Teen Birth Rate in the United States So High
    and Why Does It Matter?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(2): 141-166.
[38] Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. 2014. “Media Inﬂuences on Social Outcomes: The Impact of
    MTV’s 16 and Pregnant on Teen Childbearing.”NBER Working Paper No. 19795.

                                                       33
[39] Kearns, Suzanne E.U., Michael D. Pullmann, Sarah Cusworth Walker, Aaron R. Lyons, T.J. Cosgrove, and
    Eric J. Bruns. 2011. “Adolescent Use of School-Based Health Centers and High School Dropout.” Archives
    of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 165(7): 617-623.
[40] Kisker, Ellen E. and Randall S. Brown. 1996. “Do School-Based Health Centers Improve Adolescents’
    Access to Health Care, Health Status, and Risk-Taking Behavior?” Journal of Adolescent Health 18(5):
    335-343.

[41] Klepinger, Daniel, Shelly Lundberg and Robert Plotnick. 1999. “How Does Adolescent Fertility Aﬀect the
    Human Capital and Wages of Young Women?” Journal of Human Resources 34(3): 421-448.

[42] Leininger, Lindsey, Helen Levy and Diane Schanzenbach. 2009. “Consequences of SCHIP Expansions for
    Household Well-Being.” Forum for Health Economics & Policy (Frontiers in Health Policy Research) 13(1),
    Article 3.

[43] Levine, David I. and Gary Painter. 2003. “The Schooling Costs of Teenage Out-of-Wedlock Childbear-
    ing: Analysis with a Within-school Propensity-score-matching Estimator.” The Review of Economics and
    Statistics 85(4): 884–900.
[44] Martin, Joyce A., Brady E. Hamilton, Stephanie J. Ventura, Michelle JK Osterman, and T. J. Mathews.
    2013. “Births: Final Data for 2011.” National Vital Statistics Report 62, no. 1: 1-90.
[45] Michelmore, Katherine. 2013. “The Eﬀect of Income on Educational Attainment: Evidence from State
    Earned Income Tax Credit Expansions.” Mimeo.
[46] Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the
    Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica 72(1): 159-217.
[47] Mishel, Lawrence and Joydeep Roy. 2006. Rethinking High School Graduation Rates and Trends. Washing-
    ton, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute.
[48] Murnane, Richard J. 2013. “U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations.” Journal of
    Economic Literature 51(2): 370–422.
[49] Reback, Randall and Tamara Lalovic Cox. 2016. “Where Health Policy Meets Education Policy: School-
    based Health Centers in New York City.” Mimeo.
[50] Ribar, David C. 1994. “Teenage Fertility and High School Completion.” Review of Economics and Statistics
    76(3): 413–424.
[51] Ribar, David C. 1999. “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Young Women’s Childbearing: Reconciling
    Disparate Evidence.” Journal of Population Economics 12(4): 547–565.
[52] Sanders, Seth, Jeﬀrey Smith and Ye Zhang. 2008. “Teenage Childbearing and Maternal Schooling Out-
    comes: Evidence from Matching.” University of Michigan Working Paper.

[53] Smedley, Brian D., Adrienne Y. Stith, and Alan R. Nelson. 2003. Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial
    and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

[54] Todd, Petra E. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2007. “The Production of Cognitive Achievement in Children:
    Home, School, and Racial Test Score Gaps.” Journal of Human Capital 1(1): 91–136.

[55] Walker, Sarah Cusworth, Suzanne E.U. Kerns, Aaron R. Lyon, Eric J. Bruns, and T.J. Cosgrove. 2010.
    “Impact of School-Based Health Center Use on Academic Outcomes.” Journal of Adolescent Health 46:
    251-257.
[56] Yakusheva, Olga and Jason Fletcher. 2015. “Learning from Teen Childbearing Experiences of Close Friends:
    Evidence using Miscarriages as a Natural Experiment.” Review of Economics and Statistics 97(1): 29-43.




                                                     34
                                                   Figure 1: Distribution of SBHC Opening Years




                        150       250
                                  200
                    Number
                  100             50
                                  0

                                                   1975
                                                   1976
                                                   1977
                                                   1978
                                                   1979
                                                   1980
                                                   1981
                                                   1982
                                                   1983
                                                   1984
                                                   1985
                                                   1986
                                                   1987
                                                   1988
                                                   1989
                                                   1990
                                                   1991
                                                   1992
                                                   1993
                                                   1994
                                                   1995
                                                   1996
                                                   1997
                                                   1998
                                                   1999
                                                   2000
                                                   2001
                                                   2002
                                                   2003
                                                   2004
                                                   2005
                                                   2006
                                                   2007
                                                   2008
                                                   2009
                                                   2010
                                                   2011
                                                                    SBHC Opening Year

Source: NASBHC School-based Health Center Census, 1998-2011. The ﬁgure includes only centers that serve high school
students.




      Figure 2: Distribution of SBHCs per 10,000 High School Students Across States
                                  4
                  Centers Per 10,000 HS Students
                   1           2  0      3

                                                     al
                                                    ak
                                                    az
                                                    ar
                                                    ca
                                                    co
                                                     ct
                                                   de
                                                    dc
                                                      fl
                                                   ga
                                                      il
                                                     in
                                                     ia
                                                    ks
                                                    ky
                                                     la
                                                   me
                                                   md
                                                   ma
                                                    mi
                                                   mn
                                                   ms
                                                   mo
                                                   ne
                                                    nv
                                                     nj
                                                   nm
                                                    ny
                                                    nc
                                                   oh
                                                    or
                                                   pa
                                                      ri
                                                    sc
                                                    sd
                                                    tn
                                                     tx
                                                    ut
                                                    va
                                                   wa
                                                   wv




                                                                          State

Source: NASBHC School-based Health Center Census, 2011. The ﬁgure includes only centers that serve high school students.
States without SBHCs (HI, ID, MT, ND, NH, SD, VT, WI, WY) are omitted from the ﬁgure.




                                                                        35
Figure 3: Primary Care and Non-Contraceptive Reproductive Health Services Provided by SB-
          HCs

                                                                         Panel A: SBHC Primary
                                                                             Care Services
                                     Acute Illness Treatment
                                      Anticipatory Guidance
                                          Asthma Treatment
                                 Behavioral Risk Assessment
                                   Chronic Illness Treatment
                         Comprehensive Health Assessments
                         Dispense Medications for Center Use
                         Dispense Medications for Home Use
                                               Immunizations
                                                  Infant Care
                                                   Lab Tests
                                        Nutrition Counseling
                                                Prescriptions
                            Psych. Development Assessment
                                                   Screening
                                            Sports Physicals

                                                                0         20        40        60    80   100
                                                                                         Percent


                                                              Panel B: SBHC Reproductive
                                                                    Health Services
                               Abstincence Counseling
                              Birth Control Counseling
                                  Chlamydia Screening
                        Follow−up Contraceptive Users
                                 Gynecological Exams
                                HIV Testing (OraQuick)
                                     HIV Testing (Oral)
                                   HIV Testing (Serum)
                                 HIV/AIDS Counseling
                                            PAP Tests
                                    Pregnancy Testing
                                        Prenantal Care
                         STD Diagnosis and Treatment
                         Sexual Orientation Counseling

                                                          0         20         40        60        80    100
                                                                                    Percent

  Source:    These ﬁgures are reproduced from the 2007-2008 School-based Health Centers National Census an-
  nual report, available at http://www.sbh4all.org/atf/cf/%7Bcd9949f2-2761-42fb-bc7a-cee165c701d9%7D/NASBHC%202007-
  08%20CENSUS%20REPORT%20FINAL.PDF. The reproductive care service tabulations show the percent providing each
  service on-site and the percent providing referrals for each service.




                                                                36
       Figure 4: Health Outcomes Among High-School-Aged Students, 2011 YRBSS

                                           Feel Sad/Hopeless                                                     Considered Suicide




                               40




                                                                                             20
                               30




                                                                                             15
                     Percent




                                                                                   Percent
                      20




                                                                                    10
                               10




                                                                                             5
                               0




                                                                                             0
                                    All    Black           Hispanic   White                       All             Black         Hispanic      White


                                           Attempted Suicide                                            Physically Hurt by Boyfriend/Girlfriend




                                                                                             15
                               8
                               6




                                                                                             10
                     Percent




                                                                                   Percent
                      4




                                                                                             5
                               2
                               0




                                                                                             0


                                    All    Black           Hispanic   White                       All             Black         Hispanic      White


                                                   Raped                                                                  Had Sex
                               10




                                                                                             80
                               8




                                                                                             60
                           6
                     Percent




                                                                                   Percent
                                                                                    40
                               4




                                                                                             20
                               2
                               0




                                                                                             0




                                    All    Black           Hispanic   White                       All             Black         Hispanic      White


                                          No Condom Last Sex                                                  No Birth Control Last Sex
                               60




                                                                                             20
                                                                                             15
                               40
                     Percent




                                                                                   Percent
                                                                                   10
                               20




                                                                                             5
                               0




                                                                                             0




                                    All    Black           Hispanic   White                       All             Black         Hispanic      White


                                                   Obese                                                                  Asthma
                               15




                                                                                             15
                               10




                                                                                             10
                     Percent




                                                                                   Percent
                               5




                                                                                             5
                               0




                                                                                             0




                                    All    Black           Hispanic   White                       All             Black         Hispanic      White



Source: 2011 Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS).




                                                                              37
Figure 5: Event Study Estimates of the Eﬀect of SBHC Entry on Teen Birth Rates (per 1000
          women)


                                6

                                4

                                2
        Birth Rate per 1000




                                0

                              −2

                              −4

                              −6

                              −8

                              −10
                                    <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                              8    9    10 >10
                                                  Years Relative to First Center Opening

  Authors’ estimates of equation (2) as described in the text. The dependent variable is 15-18 year old birth rates per 1000.
  Each point shows the coeﬃcient estimate on the service measure or center indicator interacted with the relative time to the
  ﬁrst center opening in the county. All estimates include county and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted
  by the high school aged population in the county. The lines extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence
  intervals that are calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates
  are relative to this year.




                                                                 38
Figure 6: Event Study Estimates of the Eﬀect of SBHC Entry on High School Dropout Rates (in
          Percent) – Diploma Data

                                                                              Panel A: 10th Grade Dropout Rate

                                                         2

                                                         1




                            Dropout Rate (in Percent)
                                                         0

                                                        −1

                                                        −2

                                                        −3

                                                        −4

                                                        −5
                                                             <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                     8   9   10 >10
                                                                           Years Relative to First Center Opening


                                                                              Panel B: 11th Grade Dropout Rate
                                                         6


                                                         4
                            Dropout Rate (in Percent)




                                                         2


                                                         0


                                                        −2


                                                        −4


                                                        −6
                                                             <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                     8   9   10 >10
                                                                           Years Relative to First Center Opening


                                                                              Panel C: 12th Grade Dropout Rate


                                                         3

                                                         2
                            Dropout Rate (in Percent)




                                                         1

                                                         0

                                                        −1

                                                        −2

                                                        −3

                                                        −4

                                                        −5
                                                             <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                     8   9   10 >10
                                                                           Years Relative to First Center Opening

  Authors’ estimates of equation (5) as described in the text. Each point shows the coeﬃcient estimate on the total medical
  staﬀ hours service measure interacted with the relative time to the ﬁrst center opening in the school district. All estimates
  include school district and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by the high school aged population in
  the school district. The lines extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals that are calculated
  using standard errors clustered at the school district level. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are relative to this year.


                                                                                          39
Table 1: Percent of Health Centers Providing Diﬀerent Contraceptive Ser-
         vices

                                     Prescribed & Dispensed   Prescribed   Referrals      No
 Contraception Type                          On Site           On Site      Only       Provision
 Condoms                                       31.7              N/R        N/R          68.3
 Birth Control Pills                           22.1              15.5        29.9        32.5
 Birth Control Shot (Depo-Provera)             25.7               7.7        32.1        34.6
 Implant                                       4.9                6.6        47.1        41.5
 IUD                                           4.3                6.6        49.6        39.5
 Patch                                         14.6              12.5        34.9        38.0
 Ring (NuvaRing)                               16.5              12.2        33.5        37.9
 Emergency Contraception                       20.0              11.0        30.2        38.8

 Any Hormone Contraception                    26.9               9.2         28.2        35.7
 Any Contraception                            31.7               6.6         26.4        35.3
  Source: 2011 National Alliance on School-based Health Care census data. Hormone contraception
  includes all listed methods except condoms and emergency contraception. “N/R”=not relevant for
  that category.




                                              40
          Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Analysis Variables

Variable                                                                  Mean       SD
Treatment Measures
Center Indicator                                                          0.174     0.379

Primary   Care   Staﬀ Hours per Week                                      0.876    4.970
Primary   Care   Staﬀ Hours per Week (in districts with any center)       4.881    10.761
Primary   Care   Hours with Hormones Prescribed On Site                   2.054    7.442
Primary   Care   Hours with Hormones Referred, No Condoms                 2.019    7.059
Primary   Care   Hours with Hormones Referred & Condoms Dispensed         0.136    1.389
Primary   Care   Hours with No Birth Control Services                     0.665    3.289

Medical   Staﬀ   Hours   per Week                                        1.910     10.363
Medical   Staﬀ   Hours   per Week (in districts with any center)         10.987    22.762
Medical   Staﬀ   Hours   with Hormones Prescribed On Site                4.790     16.241
Medical   Staﬀ   Hours   with Hormones Referred, No Condoms              4.149     14.504
Medical   Staﬀ   Hours   with Hormones Referred & Condoms Dispensed      0.466     3.956
Medical   Staﬀ   Hours   with No Birth Control Services                  1.569     7.170

Outcome Measures
Birth Rate per 1,000 Women Aged 15-18                                     44.28     21.60
10th Grade Dropout Rate (%)                                               22.39     12.18
11th Grade Dropout Rate (%)                                               15.43      9.79
12th Grade Dropout Rate (%)                                                9.28      8.75
14-17 Dropout Rate (%)                                                    10.08     20.59
Female 14-17 Dropout Rate (%)                                              9.98     20.73
Male 14-17 Dropout Rate (%)                                               10.16     20.66
18-19 Dropout Rate (%)                                                    15.50      8.20
Female 18-19 Dropout Rate (%)                                             14.81      7.34
Male 18-19 Dropout Rate (%)                                               15.82      7.34
 Sources: School-based health center service data come from the 1998-2011 National Al-
 liance on School-based Health Care census data. Birth rates are calculated from US vital
 statistics data from 1990-2012. The 10th through 12th grade dropout rates are calculated
 from National Center for Education Statistics Common Core of Data on school enroll-
 ments and high school diplomas awarded from 1998-2011. The male and female dropout
 rates come from the 1990 and 2000 US Census as well as the 2005-2011 American Com-
 munity Survey. Means of treatment variables use the diploma data sample. All service
 hours are per 1,000 high school aged student in the school district. The “in districts with
 any center” tabulations showing mean service hours per 1,000 high school aged students
 among schools districts with any center. Birth control service level means include only
 those schools districts with any center. All tabulations are school district level means,
 except for the birth variables which are county level means.




                                            41
Table 3: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services
         on Teen Birth Rates per 1000
         Women

                                  OLS         2SLS
                                   (i)         (ii)
 Treatment Measure
                                -1.333∗∗
 Center Indicator
                                (0.474)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -3.0%

                                -0.218∗     -0.492∗∗
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.115)     (0.176)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -2.4%       -5.4%

                                -0.108∗∗    -0.228∗∗
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.046)     (0.079)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -2.7%       -5.7%

 First-stage F-Stat (Primary Care)            51.34
 First-stage F-Stat (Medical Staﬀ)            53.93
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (1) as de-
  scribed in the text. The dependent variable is 15-
  18 year old birth rates per 1000. Each cell comes
  from a separate regression. In column (ii), Primary
  Care Staﬀ Hours and Medical Staﬀ Hours are in-
  strumented with an indicator for whether there is
  a center in the county as well as a quadratic in the
  number of years since a center was ﬁrst opened in
  the county (set equal to zero in the years prior to a
  center ﬁrst opening). All estimates include county
  and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions
  are weighted by the high school aged population in
  the county. Percent eﬀects for the Center Indica-
  tor results are calculated by dividing the coeﬃcient
  by the mean birth rate. The percent eﬀects for
  the staﬀ hours estimates show the percent eﬀect
  relative to the mean for a center with the aver-
  age number of primary care or medical staﬀ hours.
  Standard errors clustered at the county level are
  in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5%
  level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                         42
Table 4: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on Teen Birth Rates per 1000 Women,
         by Age

                                                           Mother’s Age
                                  ≤14          15           16        17           18           19
                                  (i)          (ii)        (iii)     (iv)          (v)         (vi)
 OLS
                                -0.082∗∗     -0.842∗∗    -1.229∗∗    -0.938∗    -1.836∗∗    -1.101∗∗
 Center Indicator
                                (0.025)      (0.258)     (0.409)     (0.504)    (0.595)     (0.560)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -8.9%        -7.0%       -4.8%       -2.2%      -2.8%       -1.3%

 OLS
                                -0.016∗∗     -0.129∗∗    -0.201∗∗    -0.222∗    -0.257∗∗    -0.194
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.007)      (0.052)     (0.119)     (0.113)    (0.131)     (0.128)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -8.6%        -5.3%       -3.8%       -2.5%      -1.9%       -1.1%

 2SLS
                                -0.029∗∗     -0.296∗∗    -0.506∗∗    -0.285     -0.684∗∗    -0.374
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.008)      (0.091)     (0.142)     (0.184)    (0.259)     (0.257)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center     -15.2%       -12.0%       -9.6%       -3.2%      -5.2%       -2.1%

 OLS
                                -0.008∗∗     -0.055∗∗    -0.097∗∗    -0.106∗∗   -0.128∗∗    -0.070
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.003)      (0.022)     (0.041)     (0.049)    (0.058)     (0.074)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -9.1%        -5.0%       -4.1%       -2.7%      -2.2%       -0.9%

 2SLS
                                -0.013∗∗     -0.132∗∗    -0.230∗∗    -0.136∗    -0.319∗∗    -0.186
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.004)      (0.041)     (0.064)     (0.083)    (0.116)     (0.115)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center     -15.0%       -12.1%       -9.8%       -3.5%      -5.4%       -2.4%

 Mean Birth Rate                  0.93        11.98       25.85       43.41       64.57       86.31
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (1) as described in the text. Each cell comes from a separate
  regression. The Center Indicator IV estimates instrument Primary Care Staﬀ Hours or Medical
  Staﬀ Hours with an indicator for whether there is a center in the county as well as a quadratic in
  the number of years since a center was ﬁrst opened in the county (set equal to zero in the years
  prior to a center ﬁrst opening). All estimates include county and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and
  the regressions are weighted by the high school aged population in the county. Percent eﬀects for
  the Center Indicator results are calculated by dividing the coeﬃcient by the mean birth rate for
  that age group. The percent eﬀects for the staﬀ hours estimates show the percent eﬀect relative to
  the mean for a center with the average number of primary care or medical staﬀ hours. Standard
  errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and
  * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                                                 43
Table 5: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on Teen
         Birth Rates per 1000 Women, by Birth
         Control Services

                                     Primary Care       Medical
 Service Measure:
                                      Staﬀ Hours      Staﬀ Hours
 Birth Control Services                    (i)            (ii)
                                     -0.628∗∗         -0.239∗
 Hormones Prescribed On Site
                                     (0.271)          (0.134)
                                     -0.244           -0.144
 Hormones Referred, No Condoms
                                     (0.161)          (0.093)
 Hormones Referred &                 -0.221           -0.108
 Condoms Dispensed                   (0.551)          (0.113)
                                     -0.567           -0.238∗∗
 No Birth Control Services
                                     (0.363)          (0.079)
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (1) as described in the
  text. The dependent variable is 15-18 year old birth rates per
  1000. Each column comes from a separate regression. The birth
  control service measures include the number of service hours of
  each type in centers with the given birth control policy. The
  birth control policy groups are exhaustive and mutually exclusive.
  All estimates include county and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and
  the regressions are weighted by the high school aged population
  in the county. Standard errors clustered at the county level are
  in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and *
  indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                               44
Table 6: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on Teen Birth Rates per 1000
         Women, by Race/Ethnicity

                                            OLS                               2SLS
 Race/Ethnicity:                White      Black     Hispanic     White      Black      Hispanic
                                 (i)        (ii)       (iii)       (iv)       (v)         (vi)
 Treatment Measure
                                0.138     -1.400∗    -3.204∗
 Center Indicator
                               (0.244)    (0.828)    (1.757)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      0.7%      -2.4%      -4.7%

                                0.006     -0.157     -0.677∗     -0.026     -0.928∗∗    -1.113
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                               (0.052)    (0.157)    (0.373)     (0.096)    (0.375)     (0.773)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      0.2%      -1.3%      -4.8%       -0.6%      -7.9%       -7.9%

                                0.004     -0.120∗    -0.410∗∗    -0.011     -0.408∗∗    -0.532
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                               (0.019)    (0.067)    (0.170)     (0.043)    (0.168)     (0.347)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      0.2%      -2.3%      -6.6%       -0.6%      -7.8%       -8.5%

 Mean Birth Rate                19.60      57.66       68.35      19.60       57.66       68.35
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (1). The dependent variable is 15-18 year old birth
  rates per 1000. Each cell comes from a separate regression. In columns (iv)-(vi), Primary
  Care Staﬀ Hours and Medical Staﬀ Hours are instrumented with an indicator for whether
  there is a center in the county as well as a quadratic in the number of years since a center was
  ﬁrst opened in the county (set equal to zero in the years prior to a center ﬁrst opening). All
  estimates include county and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by
  the high school aged population in the county. Percent eﬀects for the Center Indicator results
  are calculated by dividing the coeﬃcient by the mean birth rate for the age and racial/ethnic
  group. The percent eﬀects for the staﬀ hours estimates show the percent eﬀect relative to the
  mean for a center with the average number of primary care or medical staﬀ hours. Standard
  errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level
  and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                                               45
Table 7: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on Teen Birth Rates – Ro-
         bustness Checks

                                     State-Year-            Year-Bottom          Allowing
                                  Median Income             20% Income           for Level
                                    Fixed Eﬀects            Fixed Eﬀects           Shifts
                                  OLS          IV         OLS         IV           OLS
 Treatment Measure                 (i)        (ii)        (iii)      (iv)           (v)
                                -1.238∗∗                -1.280∗∗
 Center Indicator
                                (0.478)                 (0.492)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -2.8%                   -2.9%

                                -0.216∗∗    -0.648∗∗    -0.193∗     -0.506∗∗     -0.121
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.107)     (0.174)     (0.105)     (0.173)      (0.118)
                                                                                 -1.120∗∗
 Center Indicator
                                                                                 (0.535)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -2.4%       -7.1%       -2.2%        -5.6%       -4.0%

                                -0.110∗∗    -0.288∗∗    -0.097∗∗    -0.234∗∗     -0.060
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.042)     (0.077)     (0.040)     (0.078)      (0.052)
                                                                                 -1.089∗∗
 Center Indicator
                                                                                 (0.529)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -2.7%       -7.1%       -2.5%        -5.8%       -4.0%

 First-stage F-Stat (Primary Care)            50.45                   52.09
 First-stage F-Stat (Medical Staﬀ)            52.64                   54.81
  Notes: Authors’ estimation as described in the text. The dependent variable is 15-18
  year old birth rates per 1000. Center Indicator is an indicator variable equal to 1 if any
  school-based health center exists in the county. All results contain county ﬁxed eﬀects.
  Estimates in columns (i) and (ii) include state-year-median income ﬁxed eﬀects, where
  median income is an indicator for whether the 1990 median household income in the
  county is above the median household income in the state in 1990. Estimates in
  columns (iii) and (iv) include state-year ﬁxed eﬀects and year ﬁxed eﬀects interacted
  with an indicator for the county being in the bottom 20% of median household income
  in 1990. Estimates in column (v) contain state-year ﬁxed eﬀects. Regressions are
  weighted by the high school aged population in the county. Standard errors clustered
  at the county level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and *
  indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                                           46
Table 8: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on Birth
         Rates Among Older Women Without
         Access to a SBHC

                                       Mother’s Age
                              20-24       25-29       15-18
 Treatment Measure             (i)         (ii)        (iii)
                              0.421     -0.067      -1.674∗
 Center Indicator
                             (1.130)    (0.770)    (0.906)

                              0.101      0.399∗∗    -0.454∗∗
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                             (0.128)    (0.115)     (0.178)

                              0.023      0.138∗∗    -0.123∗
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                             (0.059)    (0.059)     (0.075)

 Mean Birth Rate              100.58     114.19       44.28
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (1) as described in
  the text. Each cell comes from a separate regression. The
  sample consists of states in which less than half of cen-
  ters report they are accessible to those who do not attend
  the school in which they are located and are restricted to
  counties in which there were no centers when the women
  in each age group were of high school age. All estimates
  include county and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the re-
  gressions are weighted by the high school aged population
  in the county. Standard errors clustered at the county level
  are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level
  and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                            47
Table 9: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on High School Dropout Rates
         (in Percent) – Diploma Data

                                           OLS                             2SLS
 Grade:                          10th      11th       12th      10th       11th       12th
                                  (i)       (ii)      (iii)     (iv)        (v)       (vi)
 Treatment Measure
                                0.576      0.014      0.600
 Center Indicator
                               (0.426)    (0.529)    (0.442)

                               -0.006     -0.023     -0.003     0.064     -0.024     0.154∗
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                               (0.012)    (0.020)    (0.013)   (0.086)    (0.097)   (0.091)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center     -0.03%     -0.13%     -0.01%     0.31%     -0.12%     0.75%

                               -0.005     -0.010     -0.003     0.042     -0.003     0.068
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                               (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.006)   (0.042)    (0.048)   (0.042)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center     -0.02%     -0.05%     -0.01%     0.20%     -0.02%     0.33%

 First-stage F-Stat (Primary Care)                                         44.18
 First-stage F-Stat (Medical Staﬀ)                                         45.51
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (4) using NCES CCD high school diploma data
  from 1998-2010. Each cell comes from a separate regression. In columns (iv)-(vi), Primary
  Care Staﬀ Hours and Medical Staﬀ Hours are instrumented with an indicator for whether
  there is a center in the school district as well as a quadratic in the number of years since
  a center was ﬁrst opened in the school district (set equal to zero in the years prior to a
  center ﬁrst opening). The 10th grade dropout rate is calculated as 1 minus the ratio of
  diplomas awarded in year t and the 10th grade enrollment in year t − 2. The 11th grade
  dropout rate equals 1 minus the ratio of diplomas awarded in year t and the 11th grade
  enrollment in year t − 1, and the 12th grade dropout rate is calculated as 1 minus the
  ratio of diplomas awarded in year t and the 12th grade enrollment in year t. All estimates
  include school district and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by
  the high school aged population in the school district. The percent eﬀects for the staﬀ
  hours estimates show the percent eﬀect for a center with the average number of primary
  care or medical staﬀ hours. Standard errors clustered at the school district level are in
  parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the
  10% level.




                                            48
Table 10: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on High School Dropout
          Rates (in Percent) – Census/ACS Data

                                      14-17 Year Olds                  18-19 Year Olds
                                  All     Female     Male         All      Female     Male
 Treatment Measure                (i)       (ii)      (iii)       (iv)       (v)       (vi)
                                -0.124    -0.123    -0.141       0.484      0.234     0.682
 Center Indicator
                                (0.148) (0.169)     (0.155)     (0.503) (0.610)      (0.555)

                                -0.005     -0.002     -0.007    -0.011     -0.052∗     0.013
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.020)    (0.028)    (0.024)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -0.02%     -0.01%     -0.03%    -0.05%     -0.25%      0.06%

                                -0.002     -0.001     -0.003    -0.002     -0.025∗     0.018
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                                (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.010)    (0.015)    (0.012)
 % Eﬀect of Average Center      -0.01%     -0.01%     -0.01%    -0.01%     -0.12%      0.04%
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (4) using 1990 and 2000 Census data as well as 2005-
  2011 ACS data. Each cell comes from a separate regression. The dropout rates measure
  the proportion of each age group living in the district that does not report attending
  school and that does not have a high school degree. All estimates include school district
  and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by the high school aged
  population in the school district. The percent eﬀects for the staﬀ hours estimates show
  the percent eﬀect for a center with the average number of primary care or medical staﬀ
  hours. Standard errors clustered at the school district level are in parentheses: ** indicates
  signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                      Table 11: The Relationship Be-
                                tween SBHC Services
                                and Per-Student Expen-
                                ditures

                                                     Log Per Student
                       Treatment Measure               Expenditures
                                                     -0.003
                       Center Indicator
                                                     (0.006)

                                                      0.0005
                       Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                                                     (0.0003)

                                                      0.0002
                       Medical Staﬀ Hours
                                                     (0.0001)
                         Notes: Authors’ estimation as described in
                         the text using data from the 1998-2011 Com-
                         mon Core of Data. All estimates include
                         school district and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects.
                         Regressions are weighted by the high school
                         aged population in the school district. Stan-
                         dard errors clustered at the school district
                         level are in parentheses: ** indicates signif-
                         icance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁ-
                         cance at the 10% level.




                                             49
Figure A-1: Event Study Estimates of the Eﬀect of SBHC Services on Teen Birth Rates (per
            1000 women)

                                                   Panel A: Primary Care Hours                                                                            Panel B: Medical Staff Hours
                             1                                                                                                 .6

                             .8

                             .6                                                                                                .4

                             .4
      Birth Rate per 1000




                                                                                                        Birth Rate per 1000
                                                                                                                               .2
                             .2

                             0
                                                                                                                               0
                            −.2

                            −.4
                                                                                                                              −.2
                            −.6

                            −.8
                                                                                                                              −.4
                            −1
                                  <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10                                    <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                       8    9   10 >10
                                               Years Relative to First Center Opening                                                             Years Relative to First Center Opening


                                      Panel C: Primary Care Hours in First Center at Opening                                                    Panel D: Total Medical Hours in First Center at Opening
                             1                                                                                                         .4

                             .8                                                                                                        .3
                             .6                                                                                                        .2
                             .4
      Birth Rate per 1000




                                                                                                        Birth Rate per 1000


                                                                                                                                       .1
                             .2
                                                                                                                                        0
                             0
                                                                                                                                      −.1
                            −.2
                                                                                                                                      −.2
                            −.4

                            −.6                                                                                                       −.3

                            −.8                                                                                                       −.4

                            −1
                                  <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10                                            <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10
                                               Years Relative to First Center Opening                                                                    Years Relative to First Center Opening


  Authors’ estimates of equation (3) as described in the text. The dependent variable in each panel is 15-18 year old birth rates
  per 1000. Each point shows the coeﬃcient estimate on the service measure interacted with the relative time to the ﬁrst center
  opening in the county. All estimates include county and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by the high
  school aged population in the county. The lines extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals
  that are calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are relative
  to this year.




                                                                                                   50
Figure A-2: Event Study Estimates of the Eﬀect of SBHC Primary Care and Medical Staﬀ Ser-
            vices on 10th Grade High School Dropout Rates (in Percent) – Diploma Data

                                                          Panel A: Primary Care Hours                                                                               Panel B: Medical Staff Hours
                                                                                                                                            .12
                                    .2
                                                                                                                                             .1
                                   .15                                                                                                      .08
      Dropout Rate (in Percent)




                                                                                                               Dropout Rate (in Percent)
                                    .1                                                                                                      .06
                                                                                                                                            .04
                                   .05
                                                                                                                                            .02
                                    0                                                                                                        0

                                  −.05                                                                                                     −.02
                                                                                                                                           −.04
                                   −.1
                                                                                                                                           −.06
                                  −.15
                                                                                                                                           −.08
                                   −.2                                                                                                      −.1
                                         <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10                                            <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10
                                                      Years Relative to First Center Opening                                                                    Years Relative to First Center Opening


                                             Panel C: Primary Care Hours in First Center at Opening                                                     Panel D: Medical Staff Hours in First Center at Opening
                                   .3                                                                                                       .15


                                                                                                                                              .1
                                   .2
      Dropout Rate (in Percent)




                                                                                                               Dropout Rate (in Percent)

                                                                                                                                            .05
                                   .1

                                                                                                                                              0
                                    0
                                                                                                                                           −.05

                                  −.1
                                                                                                                                            −.1

                                  −.2
                                                                                                                                           −.15


                                  −.3                                                                                                       −.2
                                         <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10                                            <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                   9 10 >10
                                                      Years Relative to First Center Opening                                                                    Years Relative to First Center Opening


  Authors’ estimates of equation (6) as described in the text. Each point shows the coeﬃcient estimate on the service hours
  measure interacted with the relative time to the ﬁrst center opening in the school district. All estimates include school district
  and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by the high school aged population in the school district. The
  lines extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals that are calculated using standard errors
  clustered at the school district level. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are relative to this year.




                                                                                                          51
Figure A-3: Event Study Estimates of the Eﬀect of SBHC Primary Care and Medical Staﬀ Ser-
            vices on 11th Grade High School Dropout Rates (in Percent) – Diploma Data

                                                              Panel A: Primary Care Hours                                                                                    Panel B: Medical Staff Hours
                                   .25                                                                                                                .1
                                                                                                                                                     .08
                                    .2
                                                                                                                                                     .06
      Dropout Rate (in Percent)




                                                                                                                        Dropout Rate (in Percent)
                                   .15                                                                                                               .04
                                                                                                                                                     .02
                                    .1
                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                    −.02
                                   .05
                                                                                                                                                    −.04
                                    0                                                                                                               −.06
                                                                                                                                                    −.08
                                  −.05
                                                                                                                                                     −.1
                                   −.1                                                                                                              −.12
                                         <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                     8     9   10 >10                                            <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10
                                                       Years Relative to First Center Opening                                                                            Years Relative to First Center Opening


                                                    Panel C: Primary Care Hours in First Center at Opening                                                       Panel D: Medical Staff Hours in First Center at Opening
                                           .4                                                                                                          .2

                                           .3                                                                                                        .15
      Dropout Rate (in Percent)




                                                                                                                        Dropout Rate (in Percent)

                                           .2                                                                                                          .1

                                           .1                                                                                                        .05

                                            0                                                                                                          0

                                          −.1                                                                                                       −.05

                                          −.2                                                                                                        −.1

                                          −.3                                                                                                       −.15

                                          −.4                                                                                                        −.2
                                                <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10                                              <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                   9 10 >10
                                                             Years Relative to First Center Opening                                                                      Years Relative to First Center Opening


  Authors’ estimates of equation (6) as described in the text. Each point shows the coeﬃcient estimate on the service hours
  measure interacted with the relative time to the ﬁrst center opening in the school district. All estimates include school district
  and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by the high school aged population in the school district. The
  lines extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals that are calculated using standard errors
  clustered at the school district level. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are relative to this year.




                                                                                                                   52
Figure A-4: Event Study Estimates of the Eﬀect of SBHC Primary Care and Medical Staﬀ Ser-
            vices on 12th Grade High School Dropout Rates (in Percent) – Diploma Data

                                                          Panel A: Primary Care Hours                                                                               Panel B: Medical Staff Hours
                                    .2                                                                                                      .15

                                   .15
                                                                                                                                             .1
      Dropout Rate (in Percent)




                                                                                                               Dropout Rate (in Percent)
                                    .1
                                                                                                                                            .05
                                   .05

                                    0                                                                                                        0

                                  −.05
                                                                                                                                           −.05
                                   −.1
                                                                                                                                            −.1
                                  −.15

                                   −.2                                                                                                     −.15
                                         <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10                                            <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10
                                                      Years Relative to First Center Opening                                                                    Years Relative to First Center Opening


                                             Panel C: Primary Care Hours in First Center at Opening                                                     Panel D: Medical Staff Hours in First Center at Opening
                                   .25                                                                                                      .15

                                    .2
                                                                                                                                              .1
                                   .15
      Dropout Rate (in Percent)




                                                                                                               Dropout Rate (in Percent)


                                    .1                                                                                                      .05

                                   .05
                                                                                                                                              0
                                    0
                                                                                                                                           −.05
                                  −.05

                                   −.1                                                                                                      −.1
                                  −.15
                                                                                                                                           −.15
                                   −.2

                                  −.25                                                                                                      −.2
                                         <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                  9 10 >10                                            <−5 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                   9 10 >10
                                                      Years Relative to First Center Opening                                                                    Years Relative to First Center Opening


  Authors’ estimates of equation (6) as described in the text. Each point shows the coeﬃcient estimate on the service hours
  measure interacted with the relative time to the ﬁrst center opening in the school district. All estimates include school district
  and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by the high school aged population in the school district. The
  lines extending from each point show the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals that are calculated using standard errors
  clustered at the school district level. Relative year -1 is omitted, so all estimates are relative to this year.




                                                                                                          53
Table A-1: 1990 Census Characteristics of Counties and School Districts by
           Treatment Status

                                           Counties                          School Districts
 Variable                        Ever Treated Never Treated          Ever Treated Never Treated
 Median Rent                        466.49          429.43              401.09            370.35
 Median Home Price                 102146           79490               78517             69882
 Median HH Income                   31454           30946               26342             28363
 Median Family Income               37057           36196               30950             32879
 % Housing Occupied                  90.64          91.30                87.70             87.23
 % Urban                             81.38          72.00                62.83             37.39
 % Below Poverty                     12.71          11.31                17.23             13.93
 % w/ Public Assistance              7.39            6.07                 9.67             7.13
 % Inc. from Public Assistance       1.39            0.77                 1.41             1.00
 % w/ Wage Income                    78.13          78.87                78.07             79.36
 % Unemployed                        4.10            3.60                 5.18             4.05
 % Not in Labor Force                34.07          33.86                37.34             36.93
 % Male                              48.58          48.91                48.78             49.21
 % Black                             11.79           8.85                11.93             4.71
 % Hispanic                          9.23            4.05                11.52             4.42
 % Asian                             2.55            1.36                 1.81             0.80
 % Other Race                        1.06            0.63                 1.90             1.74
 % Under 6 Years Old                 8.84            8.83                 7.52             7.08
 % 6-19 Years Old                    19.54          20.26                22.18             22.55
 % 20-34 Years Old                   25.34          24.94                24.20             21.42
 % 35-64 Years Old                   33.96          33.88                33.28             34.65
 % Institutionalized                 1.32            1.32                 1.24             1.07
 % No HS Degree                      22.90          22.31                28.55             25.98
 % Some College                      27.95          28.03                24.33             24.10
 % BA+                               19.81          17.84                15.31             14.42
 % Married w/ Kids                   25.94          28.50
 % Single w/ Kids                    8.12            7.14
  Sources: 1990 Census Summary File 3 (counties) and School District Tabulation data. All tabulations
  use only the counties and school districts in the respective analysis sample.




                                                54
Table A-2: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services
           on Teen Birth and HS Dropout
           Rates Using Alternative Service
           Measures

      Panel A: Births per 1,000
             Aged 15-18
 Treatment Measure              (i)
                             -1.256∗
 Days Open per Week
                            (0.742)
                             -0.529∗∗
 Hours Open per Week
                            (0.167 )

          Panel B: High School Dropout Rate
                            10th      11th           12th
                           Grade      Grade         Grade
 Treatment Measure           (i)       (ii)           (iii)
                          -0.038     -0.219∗        -0.142
 Days Open per Week
                          (0.084)    (0.127)        (0.103)
                          -0.003     -0.033         -0.011
 Hours Open per Week
                          (0.016)    (0.020)        (0.018)

 Average Days per Week                   0.553
 Average Hours per Week                  3.596
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equations (1) and (4) as
  described in the text. Each cell comes from a separate
  regression. All estimates in Panel A include county and
  state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects and all estimates in Panel B in-
  clude school district and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects. The
  10th grade dropout rate is calculated as 1 minus the ratio
  of diplomas awarded in year t and the 10th grade enroll-
  ment in year t − 2. The 11th grade dropout rate equals 1
  minus the ratio of diplomas awarded in year t and the 11th
  grade enrollment in year t−1, and the 12th grade dropout
  rate is calculated as 1 minus the ratio of diplomas awarded
  in year t and the 12th grade enrollment in year t. Regres-
  sions are weighted by the high school aged population in
  the county (Panel A) or school district (Panel B). Stan-
  dard errors clustered at the county (Panel A) or school
  district (Panel B) level are in parentheses: ** indicates
  signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at
  the 10% level.




                            55
Table A-3: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on High School Dropout Rates
           (in Percent) – Diploma Data, by Birth Control Services

                                             Primary Care                       Medical
                                              Staﬀ Hours                      Staﬀ Hours
 Grade:                               10th       11th     12th       10th        11th       12th
                                       (i)        (ii)    (iii)      (iv)         (v)       (vi)
 Birth Control Services
                                     -0.014     -0.004     0.001    -0.008     -0.002       0.001
 Hormones Prescribed On Site
                                     (0.012)    (0.014)   (0.014)   (0.006)    (0.007)     (0.007)
                                     -0.0001    -0.050    -0.015    -0.001     -0.019      -0.008
 Hormones Referred, No Condoms
                                     (0.001)    (0.041)   (0.025)   (0.010)    (0.016)     (0.011)
 Hormones Referred &                  0.079      0.089     0.034     0.027     -0.029      -0.043
 Condoms Dispensed                   (0.063)    (0.064)   (0.057)   (0.021)    (0.064)     (0.047)
                                     -0.001     -0.024     0.018    -0.014     -0.014       0.007
 No Birth Control Services
                                     (0.031)    (0.032)   (0.031)   (0.017)    (0.017)     (0.015)
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (4) as described in the text. Each column comes from
  a separate regression. The birth control service measures include the number of service hours
  of each type in centers with the given birth control policy. The birth control policy groups are
  exhaustive and mutually exclusive. The 10th grade dropout rate is calculated as 1 minus the
  ratio of diplomas awarded in year t and the 10th grade enrollment in year t − 2. The 11th
  grade dropout rate equals 1 minus the ratio of diplomas awarded in year t and the 11th grade
  enrollment in year t − 1, and the 12th grade dropout rate is calculated as 1 minus the ratio of
  diplomas awarded in year t and the 12th grade enrollment in year t. All estimates include school
  district and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by the high school aged
  population in the school district. Standard errors clustered at the school district level are in
  parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10%
  level.




                                               56
Table A-4: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on
           High School Dropout Rates (in
           Percent) – Diploma Data Using
           Large Counties

 Grade:                         10th     11th       12th
                                 (i)      (ii)      (iii)
 Treatment Measure
                              0.546      0.153      0.642
 Center Indicator
                             (0.492)    (0.483)    (0.392)
                             -0.004     -0.032     -0.010
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                             (0.011)    (0.021)    (0.013)
                             -0.004     -0.012∗    -0.005
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                             (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equation (4) using NCES
  CCD high school diploma data from 1998-2010. The sam-
  ple is comprised of the large counties that constitute the
  birth rate analysis sample. Each cell comes from a sep-
  arate regression. The 10th grade dropout rate is calcu-
  lated as 1 minus the ratio of diplomas awarded in year t
  and the 10th grade enrollment in year t − 2. The 11th
  grade dropout rate equals 1 minus the ratio of diplomas
  awarded in year t and the 11th grade enrollment in year
  t − 1, and the 12th grade dropout rate is calculated as
  1 minus the ratio of diplomas awarded in year t and the
  12th grade enrollment in year t. All estimates include
  school district and state-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects, and the re-
  gressions are weighted by the high school aged popula-
  tion in the school district. Standard errors clustered at
  the school district level are in parentheses: ** indicates
  signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance
  at the 10% level.




                           57
Table A-5: The Eﬀect of SBHC Services on STD
           Rates per 1000 15-19 Year Olds

                 Panel A: Baseline Estimates
                            STDs      Chlamydia        Gonorrhea
 Treatment Measure           (i)          (ii)             (iii)
                           -0.187     -0.102           -0.102
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                           (0.135) (0.111)             (0.046)
                           -0.048     -0.021           -0.080
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                           (0.044) (0.039)             (0.067)

      Panel B: Controlling for Chlamydia and Gonorrhea
                Rates Among 25-29 Year Olds
                              STDs   Chlamydia Gonorrhea
 Treatment Measure             (i)       (ii)         (iii)
                             -0.187  -0.105       -0.077∗∗
 Primary Care Staﬀ Hours
                             (0.179) (0.147)      (0.034)
                             -0.047  -0.019       -0.026∗∗
 Medical Staﬀ Hours
                             (0.052) (0.043)      (0.010)
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of a version of equation (1) aggregated
  to the state-year level. Each cell comes from a separate regres-
  sion. All estimates include state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. STD
  data are for years 1998-2011 and include chlamydia, gonorrhea
  and syphilis in column (i). Standard errors clustered at the state
  level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level
  and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                               58
Table A-6: First-Stage Estimates                from     Instrumental
           Variables Models

                                 Birth Rates            Dropout Rates
 Service                     Primary    Medical      Primary    Medical
 Measure:                      Care       Staﬀ         Care       Staﬀ
                              2.657∗∗    5.843∗∗      4.919∗∗   10.684∗∗
 Center Indicator
                             (0.221)    (0.474)      (0.441)    (0.933)
                              0.033     -0.026        0.253∗∗    0.289∗∗
 Time Since First Entry
                             (0.034)    (0.083)      (0.066)    (0.120)
                             -0.0003     0.004       -0.002     -0.001
 (Time Since First Entry)2
                             (0.002)    (0.005)      (0.002)    (0.003)
  Notes: Authors’ estimates of equations (1) and (4) as described in the
  text. All estimates include county/school district and state-by-year ﬁxed
  eﬀects, and the regressions are weighted by the high school aged pop-
  ulation in the county/school district. Standard errors clustered at the
  county/school district level are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance
  at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.




                                   59
