NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANK QUALITY, JUDICIAL EFFICIENCY AND BORROWER RUNS:
LOAN REPAYMENT DELAYS IN ITALY
Fabio Schiantarelli
Massimiliano Stacchini
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 22034
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22034

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily represent
those of the institutions with which they are affiliated, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We are grateful to Massimiliano Affinito, Giorgio Albareto, Alberto Alesina,
Francesco Columba, Riccardo De Bonis, Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti, Francesco Giavazzi,
Francesco Manaresi, Alfonso Rosolia and seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, Bocconi
University, Boston College, University of Chicago, Georgia Tech, the University of Illinois at
Champaign-Urbana, Notre Dame, Nova School of Business, the Bank of Portugal, SAIF,
Tsinghua University and the University of Western Ontario for helpful comments. We also thank
Ana Lariau Bolentini and Danilo Liberati for the helpful research assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Fabio Schiantarelli, Massimiliano Stacchini, and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Quality, Judicial Efficiency and Borrower Runs: Loan Repayment Delays in Italy
Fabio Schiantarelli, Massimiliano Stacchini, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 22034
February 2016, Revised August 2016
JEL No. G02
ABSTRACT
Exposure to liquidity risk makes banks vulnerable to runs from both depositors and from
wholesale, short-term investors. This paper shows empirically that banks are also vulnerable to
run-like behavior from borrowers who delay their loan repayments (default). Firms in Italy
defaulted more against banks with high levels of past losses. We control for borrower
fundamentals with firm-quarter fixed effects; thus, identification comes from a firm's choice to
default against one bank versus another, depending upon their health. This `selective' default
increases where legal enforcement is weak. Poor enforcement thus can create a systematic loan
risk by encouraging borrowers to default en masse once the continuation value of their bank
relationships comes into doubt.
Fabio Schiantarelli
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and IZA
schianta@bc.edu
Massimiliano Stacchini
Bank of Italy
via Nazionale 91, 00184
Roma, Italy
massimiliano.stacchini@bancaditalia.it

Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

Bank Quality, Judicial Eciency and Borrower Runs:
Loan Repayment Delays in Italy
∗

†

‡

Fabio Schiantarelli, Massimiliano Stacchini, Philip E. Strahan

August 2016

Abstract
Exposure to liquidity risk makes banks vulnerable to runs from both depositors
and from wholesale, short-term investors. This paper shows empirically that banks are
also vulnerable to run-like behavior from borrowers who delay their loan repayments
(default). Firms in Italy defaulted more against banks with high levels of past losses. We
control for borrower fundamentals with rm-quarter xed eects; thus, identication
comes from a rm's choice to default against one bank versus another, depending upon
their health. This `selective' default increases where legal enforcement is weak. Poor
enforcement thus can create a systematic loan risk by encouraging borrowers to default
en masse once the continuation value of their bank relationships comes into doubt.

1

Introduction1

Under the traditional view of Diamond and Dybvig [1983], provision of liquidity insurance to
households and rms exposes banks to the risk of a destructive run: depositors may demand
∗

Boston College and IZA

†

Bank of Italy

‡

Boston College & NBER

1 The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily represent those
of the institutions with which they are aliated. We are grateful to Massimiliano Anito, Giorgio Albareto,
Alberto Alesina, Francesco Columba, Riccardo De Bonis, Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti, Francesco Giavazzi,
Francesco Manaresi, Alfonso Rosolia and seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, Bocconi University,
Boston College, University of Chicago, Georgia Tech, the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, Notre
Dame, Nova School of Business, the Bank of Portugal, SAIF, Tsinghua University and the University of
Western Ontario for helpful comments.

We also thank Ana Lariau Bolentini and Danilo Liberati for the

helpful research assistance.

1

cash solely because they expect others to do the same. In the aftermath of the nancial and
sovereign debt crises, these old-style depositor runs have been the exception rather than the
rule.

2

But even in these modern crises, we have seen panic-motivated instances of drying up

of wholesale, short-term debt markets, and increases in collateral demands in asset-backed
commercial paper and repo markets.

3

These episodes, often called `runs on the shadow

banking system in the US', create similar pressures on banks as traditional depositor runs,
making it hard for them to fund new loans and raising the likelihood that re sales of old
ones can cause insolvency. Similar liquidity pressures from the asset-side of banking emerged
following the collapse of Lehman, as rms drew down credit lines at banks perceived to be
4

more likely to restrict access to future liquidity.

Both the traditional literature as well as recent studies of nancial crises emphasize
liquidity as the key risk that makes banks uniquely vulnerable. This framework rationalizes
a host of government interventions such as deposit insurance schemes and lenders of last
resort, as well as necessary but potentially distortive regulations on bank risk taking, capital
structure and liquidity exposure (e.g. Basel I, II and III).
In this paper, we show that banks face a second source of vulnerability, one stemming
from borrowers rather than from demanders of liquidity. Using data from Italy leading up
to and following the Euro crisis, we provide evidence that bank instability can stem from
credit risk. The link between credit risk and bank stability is well known: history tells us
that waves of bank failures are often traceable to borrower losses and declines in the value
5

of loans.

However, we highlight a new channel through which credit risk enhances bank

fragility. We show that borrowers selectively default against banks already weakened by past
bad loans; borrowers thus seem to default because they observe other borrowers doing so.

2 Exceptions include the withdrawals of deposits from Northern Rock at the beginning of the nancial
crisis, and the more recent withdrawals of deposits from Greek banks during the negotiations with their
creditors.

3 See Freixas, Laeven, and Peydro [2015] and Gorton and Metrick [2012].

4 See Ivashina and Scharfstein [2010], Cornett et al. [2011], and Ippolito et al. [2015].
5 The principles for appropriate management of credit risk are also a long-lasting topic of debate for
regulators (e.g Basel I, II, III).

2

Our results emphasize the importance of legal enforcement in mitigating this problem, as
the magnitude of these `borrower runs' increases in areas of Italy where legal disputes take
6

longer to resolve.

Our data allow us to capture a rm's decision to delay repayments of term loans as well
as draw-downs of lines of credit in excess of the maximum borrowing limit at the level of
the bank-borrower. Obviously, there can be multiple causes for a delay in loan repayments,
ranging from rm nancial distress to strategic considerations by rms about how such
behavior may aect their ongoing or future relationship with lenders. With regard to the
latter, a rm will be trading o the short-term gain of keeping control of nancial resources
(i.e.

by not paying now), against the potential future loss of impairing their relationship

with the current lender(s) or with potential future lender(s). The balance of this tradeo
may depend on the nancial health of the lender, on the bargaining power of the borrower,
and on the institutional environment that aects the ex post ability to recover collateral or
otherwise force repayment through the judicial process. Everything else equal, one would
expect a rm to be more likely to delay re-payment to weaker banks because the expected
value of the continuation of the relationship is smaller. Firms with greater bargaining power
- which we proxy by rm size - also ought to be more willing to default when lenders are
weak, either because lenders will be reluctant to cut o a large customer or because large
rms have better ability to switch lenders. Finally, rms will be more willing to delay loan
repayment the harder it is for lenders to recover their interests through the courts.
Our evidence supports these predictions. We exploit a unique data set, the Italian Credit
Register, that contains detailed information on all bank loans above 30,000 Euros given to
rms. The data include information on repayment delays and the degree of impairment of
loans, including those that fall short of being formally classied as bad by the bank. The
solvency of Italian rms and the quality of loans has been strongly aected by the double

6 In fact, reform of the Italian legal system has been a focus of recent eorts to help stimulate better
economic performance.

The Wall Street Journal reports that, The snail's pace of Italy's courts throws

sand into the wheels of the economy in myriad ways. Banks struggle to resolve bad loans because bringing
deadbeat debtors to court takes by far the longest in Europe. [Zempano, 2014]

3

dip recession following the global nancial crisis of 2007-08 and the sovereign debt crisis of
2010-11.

7

We match these data to individual balance sheets of banks reported to the Bank of
Italy, which is in charge of nancial supervision, as well as with borrower balance-sheet
data collected by the Balance Sheet Register (these data have been provided by lenders for
information-sharing purposes since 1983). The data can also be matched to measures of local
judicial (in)eciency in recovering the collateralized assets estimated by an index based on
8

Italian Ministry of Justice data.

While civil law and procedures are formally the same

across the national territory in Italy, the real-world eectiveness of the court system varies
widely, depending upon local jurisdictional court proceedings (Carmignani and Giacomelli,
2009; Giacomelli and Menon, 2013). We exploit this regional and sub-regional variation to
test for the importance of legal enforcement on default behavior.
As in other studies, we exploit the fact that many Italian rms borrow from multiple
banks. This feature allows us to introduce rm-specic, time-varying eects to fully absorb
rm-level fundamentals that may determine the decision to delay loan repayment.

Our

identication thus comes solely from variation in bank characteristics, characteristics of the
bank-rm relationship, and, importantly, on the eciency of the court system.
words, we test how the

same rm

behaves with respect to

In other

dierent banks, depending upon

the strength of the bank's balance sheet, the local judicial environment, and the nature of
the past bank-rm relationship.
The results suggest that bank balance sheet strength - particularly past bad loans play an important role in determining the probability of a delay in loan repayment.

In

our basic specication, the stock of past bad loans increases the probability of borrower
default. The result implies that, on average, banks with weaker balance sheets due to past
(and non-collectable) bad loans experience more future defaults (in the form of temporary

7 In seven years, manufacturing rms lost 17% of its productive capacity and net job destruction reached
almost one million.

8 The data are downloadable from the web page of the Italian Ministry of Justice.

//reportistica.dgstat.giustizia.it/

4

See

https:

delays in repayment, many of which ultimately become permanently impaired).

That is,

we observe borrowers running on weak banks. The results hold when we allow the eect to
dier according to rm size: in this case the (absolute) value of the coecient increases in
rm size, suggesting that larger rms, presumably the ones with greater bargaining power,
tend to be those most likely to delay payment.
When we allow the degree of local judicial eciency to interact with bank health (its
direct eect is absorbed by the xed eects), we nd that the impact of bad loans becomes
signicantly larger where the courts are less ecient.

This makes sense because a lower

probability of recovery of principal interest through weak courts reduces the cost to borrowers
of delaying repayments. In fact, we nd

no eect

of past bad loans on current default in

provinces where legal enforcement is strong. Thus, our results suggest that `borrower runs'
only occur when two conditions hold simultaneously: rst, the lender itself is weakened from
past losses and thus less able to commit to extending future credit; second, the lender's
ability to enforce contracts ex post is also weak due to poor legal enforcement. In our last
set of tests, we stratify rms by risk to test whether or not the behavior we document truly
reects strategic default. Are distressed borrowers merely selecting which banks to pay by
allocating a xed but limited cash-ow budget across lenders?

Or, are borrowers paying

less than they otherwise would because lenders are weak? In fact, we show that even the
safest rms exhibit this behavior. Even rms that could pay - those with high credit quality
- sometimes choose not to pay because of the conuence of weak banks and weak legal
enforcement.
Our result suggests a strong policy implication:

improving banks' ex post ability to

enforce contracts in court removes the possibility of a potential bad equilibrium in which
the aggregate level of default is higher than would otherwise occur due to rms defaulting
strategically. The result supports recent eorts on legal reform, which have been driven by
the scale of bad loans in Italy.
about

In December of 2015, for example, bad loans summed to

¿200 billion, a large gure that represents approximately 11.0% of the total amount
5

of loans given (18% including other troubled loans not written o ).

Unlike other recent

banking problems, where losses were concentrated in real estate or sovereign debt exposure,
close to 80% of these bad debts came from bank lending to non-nancial businesses, which is
the focus of our tests. Concern over declines in credit quality has prompted recent reforms
aimed at streamlining insolvency proceedings and speeding the process by which lenders can
repossess collateral on defaulted loans. According to our paper, legal reforms to improve the
eciency of the courts, and in particular to speed up the judicial or extrajudicial recovery
of collateral, oer the potential of substantial benets for Italy's banks (and, by extension,
the economy itself ), without any moral hazard downside.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we will review briey the theoretical
and empirical literature on borrower runs and discuss our contribution. In Section 3 we will
describe the data we use in our empirical analysis and outline the growing importance for
the Italian banking system of delayed loan repayment and bad loans generally.

Section

4 contains a description of our identication strategy, econometric methods and empirical
results. Section 5 concludes.

2

Literature Review

How does our contribution relate to the previous literature? Theoretical contributions suggest that borrower runs are possible. Using a global games framework, Bond and Rai [2009]
prove the existence of multiple equilibria in loan repayment behavior.

9

The crucial tradeo

for borrowers is represented by the present benet of default vs. the expected loss of future
access to credit conditional on default. The expected value of future access to credit depends
upon the likelihood that other borrowers will repay their loans, as this aects banks' lending
ability.

This externality can lead to outcomes in which a borrower defaults because she

expects others to do so. Carrasco and Salgado [2014] model borrower runs in the context

9 On global games see, for instance, Morris and Shin [2001].

6

10

of a costly state verication model.

Equilibria with partial or complete default emerge

in this case as the result of banks' limited resources in auditing borrowers, resulting in a
reduction in the incentive for them to repay when defaults are expected to be high across
many borrowers.
In both these theoretical frameworks, bank nancial health mitigates the probability of
a borrower run.

But there is no empirical evidence to our knowledge that a borrower's

decision to pay or not pay depends on the health or solvency of its bank, or on the default
behavior of other borrowers.

Our empirical work focuses primarily on indicators of bank

health such as capitalization, asset composition, past bad loans, stability of funding, size,
and protability.

Obviously the probability of default will depend critically on borrower

fundamentals. To isolate the eect of bank fundamentals, we study rms that borrow from
more than one lender, and we control for rm specic and time varying factors that aect a
rm's repayment capacity (either actual or expected).
Beyond bank health, theory suggests that the occurrence of a borrower run will depend
upon the institutional environment in which contracting takes place. In particular, the ability
of creditors to recover the money lent will mitigate the incentive to delay repayment. Hence,
we study the eects of eciency of the local courts as a determinant of the decision to delay
11

repayment.

Since La Porta et al. [1997] and La Porta et al. [1998], nancial economists have

emphasized the importance of legal contract enforcement in shaping nancial relationships.
Many of the empirical studies emphasize how measures of enforcement aect ex ante contract
terms such as ownership of debt and equity, the use of collateral and covenants in debt
contracts, and the availability and price of credit (see Roberts and Su [2009] for a survey
of the empirical literature).

Djankov et al. [2003] show that civil-law countries like Italy

tend to have greater legal formalism and experience longer delays in resolving commercial
disputes (collecting on bad checks or evicting non-paying tenants) compared to common

10 See Gale and Hellwig [1985] and Townsend [1979].
11 In a costly state verication model, for instance, court eciency will be reected in and captured by the
monitoring/auditing cost parameter.

7

law countries.

Jappelli et al. [2005] study Italy, as we do, and show that credit is more

available and at lower prices in regions with better enforcement in court. A number of other
studies use changes in bankruptcy laws, mechanisms, or regulations as exogenous shocks to
enforcement costs to trace out the eects on credit supply. For example, Scott and Smith
[1986] nd that increased debtor protection following the 1978 bankruptcy reform in the
US, and hence weaker enforcement, was followed by an increase in interest rates on loans to
small borrowers. Fedaseyeu [2015] exploits changes in state regulation of debt collectors an important enforcement mechanism outside bankruptcy - and nds that credit supply to
high-risk borrowers increases with less restrictive regulation of the debt collection business.
Gropp et al. [1997] show that reductions in enforcement from state-level variation in the
amount that individuals can shield in bankruptcy from their creditors via the homestead
exemption both constrains credit supply and increases credit demand.
A number of recent studies have found that credit supply by distressed banks was constrained in Italy during both the 2007-2008 global nancial crisis as well as the more recent
Euro crisis (e.g.

Albertazzi and Marchetti, 2010;Bolton et al., 2013; and Bofondi et al.,

2013). In addition, bank distress stemming from exposure to risky sovereign debt reduced
credit supply and helped propagate the Euro crisis from distressed to non-distressed coun12

tries across the Euro system (e.g. Popov and van Horen [2013], Marco [2015]).

Our study

helps rationalize this behavior, as we show that past distress raises the risk of future rm's
default (even holding constant borrower fundamentals); hence, it makes sense that distressed
banks would raise the price and restrict access to credit when extending new loans.
As far as we know there is no empirical evidence of borrower runs motivated by concern
about bank loan losses or insolvency. Ivashina and Scharfstein [2010] do provide evidence that
US rms drew more on their credit lines with banks that had a relationship with Lehman, but
the mechanism they emphasize stems not from borrower unwillingness to re-pay their debt
(our mechanism), but instead from borrower concern that liquidity would not be available

12 On the real consequences of credit supply shocks in Italy see Cingano et al. [2013] and Balduzzi et al.
[2014].

8

in the future for the lending bank, leading to increased drawdowns on existing credit lines.
Similarly, Ippolito et al. [2015] show that Italian rms with multiple credit lines drew more
from banks that had higher pre-crisis exposure to the interbank market and thereby were
more liquidity constrained. Their paper emphasizes the traditional source of bank instability:
liquidity risk.

Trautmann and Vlahu [2013] provides experimental evidence that solvent

borrowers may be more likely to default strategically when their bank's expected strength
is low and when their own expected repayment capacity is low. Survey-based evidence of
strategic behavior by US households in mortgage markets has been provided in Guiso et al.
[2013a]. They nd that the propensity to default by households, even if solvent, is aected
by both pecuniary and non-pecuniary factors such as views of fairness and morality. It is
also related to the exposure to other people who have strategically defaulted.
We share with Ippolito et al. [2015] the focus on Italian rms and the use of the Italian
Credit Register. Our emphasis, however, is on a dierent form of runs, one that stems from
the credit-risk side of the business - delayed loan repayment - and that is motivated by
concern about a bank's viability and ability to extend credit itself in the medium term, as
opposed to having short term funding issues. Moreover, our contribution provides evidence
on the key role of the courts as a determinant of the likelihood of borrower runs, in addition
to rm size and the nature of the previous bank-rm relationship. The ineciency of the
court system in Italy is a very important policy issue aecting Italy's economic performance
13

in many dimensions.

13 The complex regulatory system, the relative ineciency of public procedures and government action,
the slowness of the justice system [...] all hinder the reallocation of productive resources to the most ecient
rms, which is one of the main mechanisms of productivity growth. [...]The large stock of non-performing
loans also reects the very long and variable duration of insolvency and credit recovery procedures, due
in turn to the country's cumbersome civil justice system. These widespread ineciencies depress potential
buyers' valuations of impaired assets and discourage their sale on the market (Ignazio Visco, Governor's
Concluding Remarks, Bank of Italy, 2015a).

9

3

Data Description

To estimate our model we need information about the (ex post) performance of bank loans
extended to non-nancial corporations, the nancial health of their lenders (banks), the
eciency of the judicial system, and characteristics of borrowers as well as the type of
lending relationship they have with their banks. Our dataset thus combines four sources of
information existing in Italy: (i) the Balance Sheet Register; (ii) the Credit Register; (iii)
measures on the functioning of the judicial system estimated from data provided by the
Ministry of Justice; and, (iv) the Bank of Italy's Supervisory Reports.
The Balance Sheet Register provides our sample of non-nancial rms.

It consists of

around 32,000 industrial rms, 99% of which are unlisted. The Register accounts for more
than 70% of industrial sector value added over the scal years 2008-13. The Balance Sheet
Register is a proprietary database set up and managed by Cerved SPA, using data deposited
by rms at the local Chambers of Commerce, as required by Italian law.

14

Data from the

Balance Sheet Register have been used extensively since 1983 by both lenders to assess rm
soundness as well as by scholars to investigate various research questions.
The Credit Register, an archive maintained by the Bank of Italy, provides lender-borrower
level data on characteristics of loans extended by banks operating in Italy. The data include
information on loan type (credit lines, term loans), size, maturity, the pledging of real collateral, personal guarantees, accounts receivable, and ex post performance. Loans are reported
when tranches exceed Euro 30,000 by the entire population of credit institutions. Hence we
capture all but the very smallest rms borrowing from banks.
We use data from the Ministry of Justice to build a measure of enforcement for creditors
based on the length of legal proceedings across Italy. Specically, we use court-level data on
the mean time to resolve matters regarding the execution of property. Following Carmignani
and Giacomelli [2009] and Giacomelli and Menon [2013], we apply the formula adopted
by the Italian Ministry of Justice and the Italian National Institute of Statistics (Istat) to

14 Cerved is a member of the European Committee of Central Balance-Sheet Data Oces.

10

calculate the court-level indicators on the length of proceedings in 2007. The length of court
proceedings is an inverse measure of eciency (or a measure of ineciency). We apply the
following formula to the ow data disseminated by the Ministry of Justice:

Dt =

where

Dt

Pt + Pt+1
Et + Ft

is time to resolve matters regarding the execution property in years,

cases at the beginning of 2007,

Ft

are new cases led during 2007 and

Et

Pt

are pending

are cases ending

with a judicial decisions or withdrawn by the parties during 2007. We are careful to measure
judicial eciency before the onset of the banking losses that began in the wake of the Euro
crisis (and before the beginning of our sample in 2008). Measured this way, we avoid reverse
causality whereby a high level of distressed loans, by clogging up the courts, leads to an
increase in the measure of judicial ineciency.
In assigning each loan contract to a judicial jurisdiction, we use the judicial court located
where the bank owning the branch has its legal residence.

This choice is motivated by

the fact that, in loan contracts, banks usually indicate the judicial court where the bank
has its legal residence as the one that will be in charge in case of legal disputes with the
borrowing rm. Ex post enforcement, however, requires several steps. First, lenders need an
injunction from the court typically located in the province of its head oce. Having gotten
an injunction, to take possession of collateral the lender then must adjudicate before the
court in the location of the collateral, which is likely, but not certain, to coincide with the
rm's location. The latter, in turn, may or may not coincide with the legal location of the
bank. Thus, legal enforcement in two provinces may matter. Since the process always begins
in the bank's province, we report most of our models using legal enforcement measured in
the province of lender's head oce. The time to get an injunction or to recover the collateral
are highly correlated and conclusions are, therefore, insensitive to this choice.

15

We present

15 The correlation between the variable on the length of the rst part of the judicial process (Processi di
Cognizione Ordinaria) and that for the proceedings of property executions is close to 0.7.

11

results using the latter measure, but we also report a robustness test in which we remove
any ambiguity about legal eciency by including only observations in which the lender and
borrower reside in the same province.
Finally, we obtain bank balance sheet data from the Supervisory Reports collected by the
Bank of Italy, which is in charge of banking supervision in Italy. We use aggregate data for
banks belonging to banking groups or holdings, and individual data for stand-alone banks,
as we want to avoid measurement errors in our bank quality indicators due to infra-group
reallocations of resources.

16

3.1 Some facts on loan quality, bank quality and judicial eciency
in Italy
The formal classication of problematic loans adopted by Italian banks is ample and includes
four categories: (i) Past due/overdrawn more than 90 days, (ii) substandard loans, (iii)
restructured exposures and (iv) bad loans. Past due/overdrawn by more than 90 days
are exposures (other than those classied as bad loans, substandard or restructured) whose
repayments have been delayed by the borrowers for more than 90 days on a continuous basis. Substandard loans are exposures to counterparties which face temporary diculties
expected to be overcome within a reasonable period of time. Specically, this class includes
two subsets of problematic loans: the rst one includes loans which are objectively substandard, such as loans or credit lines which are past due or overdrawn; the second group
includes loans classied by the lender as substandard according to a judgmental basis only,
meaning without any formal loan repayment delays to the bank in question or overdrawing
on existing credit lines. This judgment could also depend upon a delay in payments to

other

lenders. Restructured loans are exposures in which lenders, as a result of the deterioration
of the borrower's nancial situation, agree to change the original conditions, giving rise to

16 Data on branches of foreign banks operating in Italy have been discarded from the dataset, as aggregate
data are not available for holdings which are headquartered outside Italy.

12

a loss for the creditor.

Finally, the bad loans category includes exposures to insolvent

counterparties (even if not legally ascertained), regardless of any loss estimate made by the
bank and irrespective of any possible collateral or guarantee.

17

Table 1a shows the relative importance of these four categories and how they have evolved
over time during our sample. Loans were broadly performing well before the 2007-09 nancial
crisis: the share of performing loans exceeds 98% in 2006-2008. The quality of lending began
to worsen in 2009 (96% performing), and then fell in each year through 2014, i.e. after the
2007-09 nancial crisis and especially after the sovereign debt crisis, which was accompanied
by a worsening of the real performance of the Italian economy.

18

In Table 1b we report the transition matrix (looking ahead one year) for all the borrowers
in Italy based on data on loan quality published by the Bank of Italy.

19

These data indicate

that in the rst part of the sampled period around half of loans past due or overdrawn
become performing again. However, after the sovereign debt crisis many of them eventually
end up in the bad-loan category. For example, as of 2009, 51% of late or overdrawn loans
were performing one year later. In contrast, this probability falls to just 27% by the end of
2013. During the latter years, the typical scenario for a loan would be to move rst from the

17 As of September 2014, non-performing exposures are classied according to denitions established by
the European Banking Authority.

The new denitions, to be used for harmonized supervisory nancial

reporting across Europe, are basically in line with those that were in force in Italy before the break and that
were used by banks to classify the quality of the loans we analyze in this paper.

18 The large volume of bad loans also reects constraints and rigidities that oblige Italian banks to keep

impaired assets on their books much longer than banks in other main countries. Among others, the unfavorable tax treatment of write os as well as the length of bankruptcy procedures limit the incentives for
banks to sell problematic loans and restrain the development of a large secondary market for these assets.
On this accounts, in May 2015, the Italian Government has taken measures to make loan losses immediately
tax deductible.

Incentives for developing the market in non-performing loans could also come from:

(i)

legislative measures adopted by the Government in 2015 and 2016 to shorten credit recovery times and align
them with international best practices; (ii) the state guarantee scheme oered at market conditions for senior
tranches of securitized bad debts (following an agreement reached with the European Commission); (iii) the
investments of Atlante, a private fund that can operate on the riskiest securitization tranches.

19 Table 1b reports a transition matrix, which is based on the data published in the Bank of Italy's

Annual report. Data refer to the universe of banks and nancial intermediaries operating in Italy and to
the population of non-nancial companies recorded in the Register (see Bank of Italy [2015b],Table A6.15,
page 56, Banche e società nanziarie: matrici di transizione tra classi di anomalia nel rimborso dei prestiti).
Transitions are obtained by comparing the classication of a single borrower, at the beginning and at the end
of the observation periods, across the loan quality classes as they are dened in the methodological appendix
to the table (see page 197).

13

late category to the substandard category (probability > 40%) and then to transition from
substandard to the bad loans category (probability around 25%). As the transition matrix
shows, once a loan goes bad, it stays bad (bad loans is eectively an absorbing state).
The key outcome variable of this study is intended to measure a borrower's decision to
delay repayment to its bank. As such, we construct

late payment

as an indicator that equals

one if the rm has a loan with a bank classied as `past due/overdrawn', or `objective (past
due/overdrawn) substandard', and equal to zero if the loan is `performing'.

We focus on

the initial phase of the process of the loan quality deterioration because we want to avoid
measurement errors when we capture the rm's decision to default: in particular we want to
capture, as much as possible, a rm's

decision

to delay its payments. Therefore, we discard

the judgmental component of substandard loans, which are based on the subjective choice
of the lender, and restructured loans, which depend upon a bargaining between the bank
and the rm. We also discard in our dependent variable those loans classied as bad loans,
which reect a bank's nal determination that the loan will not be repaid.
Table 1a and Figure 1 show the development of

late payment

- our dependent variable

- over time. The share of loans in default increases almost monotonically, starting in 2009.
A similar development - even if the share of default is slightly lower - is observed when we
exclude credit lines from the ratio and consider the aggregate, which includes term loans
only.
The empirical model, spelled out in the next section explicitly, links borrower default to
measures of bank characteristics, including a measure of bank losses associated with changes
in the value of the sovereign bonds. See the Data Appendix for a description of the variables
and their data sources.
Table 2 reports basic summary statistics on the characteristics of banks during our sample
(2008-2013).

Most variables are available at quarterly frequency.

The prot variable is

reported, however, only at a bi-annual frequency, so we present results with and without this
variable. Our key measure of bank health - bad loans / total assets - varies substantially,

14

reecting both changes across time (as in Figure 1), as well as substantial variation in the
cross section. We also capture liquidity-risk exposure of banks in two ways, one from each
side of the balance sheet.

Italian lenders rely strongly on stable sources of funding, i.e.

deposits from residents and bank bonds held by households, which account for around 60%
of their balance sheets.

Stable funding also varies dramatically across the sample, with

some banks having around 90% stable funds and others relying mainly on other sources of
funds, such as,

inter alia, short-term wholesale funds.

For asset liquidity, we again observe

substantial variation, with the share of assets in bonds and cash varying from 5% to almost
half of the balance sheet. We also control for lender size. As in most countries, most of the
695 banks employed in this study are small, with a median asset size of 430 million Euro,
but the largest banks have over 200 billion Euro in total assets.
Table 3 reports statistics on the borrowers.

The median rm has about 50 employees

and 14 million Euros in assets. Leverage varies from around 2% to around 60% of assets,
with a median of about 30%. Firm age averages 25 years. Overall, our sample is dominated
by privately held, small and medium-sized rms.

That said, our main results discussed

below absorb with a quarter-rm dummy the direct eects of constant and time-varying
rm characteristics to focus on bank eects on default.
As far as the eciency of the judiciary in protecting creditors, Table 4 shows that the
estimated average duration of the property execution proceedings was more than three years,
equal to 1,189 days in Italy in 2007. However, signicant disparities are observable across
Italy, with the duration ranging from under one year for the Court of Crema to close seven
years for that of Cosenza. Figure 2 shows a marked contrast between the areas of the northern
and the southern parts of Italy, with the latter characterized by a signicant higher length of
the judicial proceedings. That said, heterogeneity exists across court jurisdictions operating
within these two broad areas. For example, the estimated length of the proceedings in the
Judicial Courts of Ragusa and Brindisi - both localized in the South - are equal to 3,336 and
1,137 days, respectively.

15

4

Econometric Methods and Results

We estimate a linear probability model that links borrower payment delays to a set of bank
eects, rm-time eects and measures of bank characteristics, as follows:

yi,b,t =

K
X

αk xb,t−1 + θi,t + δb + εi,b,t

k=1

where

i

denotes rm,

The outcome

b

denotes bank and

yi,b,t (late payment )

t

denotes time (quarterly or bi-annual frequency).

equals an indicator variable set to 1 if the rm has a loan

repayment delay or overdrawn with the bank in the quarter and 0 if loans granted by the
bank to the rm are performing in the quarter.

Explanatory variables (xb,t−1 ) are time-

varying bank characteristics from the end of the previous period.
bank assets to capture bank size (

stable ),

stable sources of funding (

lntot )

We include the log of

cap ),

and consider capitalization (

liquid assets (

liquidity )

the amount of

prots )

and ROE (

as bank-level

covariates; to capture the strength of the (lending) relationship between the bank and the
rm, we use the share of loans from bank

b

to rm

i (bkshare ).

Our main variable of interest is the ratio of past bad loans to total assets (

badloans ), a

measure of bank health that captures the extent to which a bank has already experienced
high levels of borrower default. We allow the eects of bad loans to vary according to the
judicial eciency of the local courts (measured by the log of the average length of property
execution proceedings (

ineaw )), as well as by rm size (captured by indicators for small,

medium-small, medium-large, and large rms by assets); we interact bad loans (as well as
other bank co-variates) with each of these variables in some of our specications. In our last
set of tests, we report interactive models based on rm credit quality.
To absorb unobserved heterogeneity at the bank level, we control for bank xed eects
(δb ). These eects capture time invariant components of managerial quality, the quality of
governance, market structure, and so on. Moreover, our main variable of interest varies at
the bank level over time, so we cluster standard errors at the bank level.

16

The rm-time

eects (θi,t ) control non-parametrically for all characteristic of borrowers that might lead to
default across all lenders, such as lack of investment opportunities or business fundamentals
related to risk, poor cash ow or low prot realizations, as well as other hard-to-measure
time-varying attributes that might be correlated with default. By absorbing these eects, we
focus on a rm's decision as to which of its banks to pay and which not to pay. Identication
comes only from rms which pay some of their banks but not others (in a given quarter).
Any borrower paying all of its banks on time, or failing to pay all of its banks, is taken out
by the rm-time eect. Thus, we can interpret the

αk

coecients as measures of `selective'

default - the extent to which a rm chooses to default, in the sense of not repaying the loan
plus interest when it is due, with respect to one bank vs. another.
Our study rests on the assumption that borrowers pay attention to the quality of their
banks' balance sheets, as it might inuence lenders' ability to extend credit in the future. This
is a very plausible assumption because bank balance sheet information is easily available and
widely disseminated, including the information on loan quality. Moreover, as the problem of
bad loans on banks balance sheet mounted, the national and international press have been
focusing on credit quality as the main factor determining bank fragility.

20

4.1 Baseline result: Accumulated bad loans encourage rms to delay repayment (default)
Table 5 reports our baseline specication with no interactive eects. As said, our sample
covers the period 2008Q4-2013Q4; bi-annual data are used in regressions which include

prots.

These regressions focus strictly on the total eect of bank variables on rm's choice

to delay loan repayment (i.e. to default). Columns (1)-(7) report the results for each bank
characteristic one by one, and columns (8) and (9) report the multivariate models. Models
with bank prots (columns (7) and (9)) have somewhat fewer than half of the observations
because this variable is reported bi-annually, rather than quarterly.

20 See, for instance, Pavesi [2015] or Legorano [2013].

17

We nd strong evidence that bank weakness leads rms to increase their willingness
to default.

Firms with more than one bank selectively default against the weaker one(s).

Specically, default is more likely at banks with high levels of past bad loans. These eects
are large, both statistically and economically. For example, an increase in bad loans from
the 25th to the 75th percentile (a change of about 0.05 - see Table 2) is associated with
an increase in default of 0.5 percentage points (=

0.05 × 0.114;

see column (8)), which is

large relative to the average default probability of about 3% (recall Table 1a). The eect is
robust, entering the regressions with a similar magnitude irrespective of the specication or
the sample (the sample drops by more than half when we include bank prot). The result
suggests that extending credit can create bank instability, apart from the standard channel
based on liquidity exposure: borrowers' tendency to default increases as they observe others
doing so. This externality suggests the possibility of a bad equilibrium in which `borrower
runs' lead to bank distress and failure.
We also nd some evidence, although less statistically robust, that banks with greater
losses from sovereign exposure face higher levels of default (columns (6) and (8)). In addition, rms are more likely to default as their share of borrowing from a bank increases; this
eect may be rationalized by interpreting

delay as a form of exibility called for by distressed

borrowers to relationship lenders or it might simply reect the idea that rms facing nancial constraints have more to gain (at least in the short term) by defaulting against banks
to whom they owe more. Another possible explanation is that rms with large loans are,
paradoxically, in a stronger bargaining position vis-à-vis the bank, because they are aware
of the possible reluctance of banks to formally classify large loans as bad.
We nd no evidence that bank size or bank prots aect default behavior. We also nd
no evidence that bank liquidity stress - either from a low share of assets in liquid investments
or heavy reliance on wholesale fund (low stable funds) - aects default. This last non-result
contrasts sharply with that of Ippolito et al. [2015], who show that rm drawdowns on
credit lines increase at banks facing funding pressures around the Lehman bankruptcy. The

18

dierence in results is likely to reect the dierent periods investigated by the two papers.
Specically, we do not focus on the immediate aftermath of the Lehman bankruptcy, but
consider a longer period which is characterized by massive injection of liquidity by the
European Central Bank that strongly alleviated liquidity shortages and funding problems of
European banks.

4.1.1 Results by rm size and bank share
Table 6 extends the baseline model by allowing the marginal eect of bank characteristics
to vary by borrower size. We accomplish this by sorting borrowers into four equal-sized bins
based on total assets and allowing the slope coecients to dier for each group (the direct
eect of the rm size-bin indicators, like all other rm characteristics, gets absorbed by the
rm-time eects). These results accomplish two goals. First, they show that the main result
- increased delayed-payment default at banks exposed to past bad loans - is robust across
the rm-size distribution in most specications. Second, the magnitude of this eect grows
with rm size, and these dierences are statistically signicant at conventional levels in the
specication including bank prots (see F-statistics in Table 6 that tests the equality of the
bad loan coecient across size classes). Thus, rms with greater bargaining power due to
a better ability to switch lenders - large rms - seem more apt to take advantage by not
paying their banks weakened by past bad loans.
Like Table 6, Table 7 extends the baseline model, this time by allowing the marginal
eect of bank characteristics to vary with the rm's share of borrowing from the bank. Here,
we test whether an increase in the importance of the bank to the rm - a plausible measure
of the strength of the bank relationship - aects the rm's willingness to default selectively.
We nd no such evidence. The share of total borrowing from a given bank does not interact
signicantly with any measure of bank characteristic, including past bad loans.

19

4.2 Judicial eciency and selective default
Table 8 reports the baseline model augmented with interactions of the bank characteristics
with our measure of enforcement - the natural log of the average durations for property

ineaw )

execution proceedings (
2).

- which varies widely across judicial courts (recall Figure

21

These results show that bank weakness aects rm-level default choices most in areas
with weak enforcement (columns (5), (8) and (9)). The positive interaction between bank
health (bad loans) and weak enforcement also demonstrates that the default behavior reects
borrower rather than lender decisions.

One alternative explanation for the main eect in

Table 5 might be that weak lenders invoke their contractual rights to force early repayment
more aggressively than less-distressed lenders. This would generate greater defaults at more
distressed lenders, even for the same borrower. But this behavior would be more attractive
for lenders operating where their ex post bargaining power, due to ecient court proceedings,
is strong. We nd, instead, that the behavior happens most where

borrower's

bargaining

power is strong (in addition, we do not use default events in which loan's terms have been
restructured; these cases would reect negotiation between borrower and lender).
To understand magnitudes, Figure 3 plots the marginal eect of bad loans on default
likelihood as a function of the level of enforcement, from the 5th to the 95th percentile of
its distribution. The marginal eect of bad loans clearly increases in the length of time for
property execution in court.
(=

At the mean, the marginal eect of bad loans is about 0.09

−1.301 + 0.196 × ln (1189);

see column (8)), close to what we nd in the non-interactive

regressions of Table 7. The eect implies that a one standard deviation increase in bad loans
would increase defaults by about 0.5 percentage points. In contrast, where enforcement is
poor - one standard deviation lower than average (e.g. Cosenza) - the eect roughly doubles.
In courts with good enforcement (e.g. Crema), in contrast, the eect of past bad loans on

21 The main eect of

ineaw

is absorbed by the bank xed eect since

jurisdiction is assigned on the basis of the legal residence of the bank.

20

ineaw

is time-invariant and the

defaults is small and not statistically signicant (standard error bands surround zero). This
variation emphasizes the importance of legal enforcement, as we only see evidence of rms
selectively defaulting against weak banks where their ex post ability to enforce is weak. Thus,
where enforcement is weak borrowers pay mainly to preserve access to future credit, much
as the incentive of sovereign governments to repay debt resides primarily in their concern
about borrowing in future years [Shleifer, 2003].
Table 9 re-introduces the rm-size interaction eects, again by estimating slope coefcients separately across size bins.

Since the model now has both a direct eect and an

interactive eect, we estimate a pair of coecients on each bank characteristic in each of the
four rm-size bins (i.e., eight coecients for each bank characteristic). These models suggest
the following: 1) banks with more bad loans face a greater level of default, conrming the
previous result; 2) this result is substantially stronger in regions with poor legal enforcement,
again conrming Table 8; and, 3) this result is robust across borrower size categories. That
said, the evidence in Table 6 - that the tendency to default selectively increases with borrower
size - appears less compelling. We do nd a stronger eect of bank exposure to bad loans
on default for the largest vs. the second-to-largest group of rms, but the coecient bands
for the parameters of these two groups are overlapping and if we test the joint hypothesis
across all four size bins, we fail to reject the null that the two pairs of coecients are equal.

4.3 Strategic v. Selective Default
We have consistently used the term `selective' default to describe our results.

We do so

because our identication strategy exploits only variation from rms that select to default
against one or more of its lenders while continuing to pay others. One issue that this approach
does not address is whether some of these selective defaults are really strategic.

That is,

do some borrowers pay less than they otherwise would because one or more of their lenders
is distressed? Or, do borrowers (many of whom are themselves distressed) pay as much as
they can, regardless of bank health, but actively select which bank to pay and which not

21

to pay? Selective but not strategic behavior, while interesting, would imply that the overall
amount of total default would not be aected by bank weakness. In fact, one might even
argue that selective default could be helpful by weeding out weak banks faster than might
otherwise occur. Quantifying the amount of strategic behavior is dicult in our setting, but
one approach we can oer is to estimate our model separately by borrower credit worthiness.
Table 10 reports such tests, with a structure parallel to that of Table 9.

Rather than

sorting by size, here we sort by borrower risk. In particular, we separate rms into three risk
bins based on the z-score, which summarizes credit quality.

22

Firms with z-scores less than

or equal to three are dened as safe, those with scores between four and six as vulnerable,
and those with scores equal to and above seven as risky.

The results suggest, rst, that

the eect of bank distress on default is robust across all three rm types; in each case
we see that the bad loans ratio aects default most in areas with weak legal enforcement.
Magnitudes increase across the three risk bins, but this make sense because the mean level of
default rises with the z-score and thus leads to larger coecients. In each bin, the marginal
eect of badloans on default is close to zero in areas with high levels of judicial eciency
and then increases, becoming positive and signicant, as judicial eciency worsens. This is
illustrated graphically in Figure 4, which reports the marginal eect of badloans on default
for each rm type across the distribution of judicial eciency (

ineaw ).

Even for the safest

category of rms, we nd evidence that default increases with bank distress in areas of poor
legal enforcement. As shown in Figure 5, the marginal eect of badloans on default becomes
positive and statistically signicant for most of the distribution of legal ineciency above
its average. This suggests that truly strategic default sometimes occurs. Defaults are higher
when lenders are weak (due to high bad loans) and legal enforcement is poor, even for the
lowest risk borrowers. Low risk borrowers have the capacity to pay but sometimes choose not
to pay, indicating the presence of strategic default and therefore less overall debt repayment

22 The

score

variable measures the probability of a rm defaulting on the basis of an adaptation to Italy of

Altman [1968]'s approach, developed by Cerved SPA and regularly used by Italian banks to assess a rm's
riskiness. The Score index ranges from one for rms least likely to default to nine for rms most likely to
default.

22

due to bank weakness and poor enforcement.

4.4 Borrowing Costs and and Legal Eciency
Our results help explain why credit supply has been shown to respond so strongly to the
strength of legal enforcement. Not only does weak enforcement reduce ex post returns when
loans default idiosyncratically, our results suggest also that losses can be contagious and lead
to default probabilities that increase across a lender's entire loan portfolio. Crucially, weak
enforcement exacerbates this risk of borrower contagion. Thus, weak enforcement increases
a bank's systematic loan risk by raising the chance that borrowers default en masse once
the likelihood of bank survival becomes suciently in doubt. If this risk is understood by
banks ex ante, then credit supply should be adversely aected in parts of Italy where legal
eciency is poor. This may lead to higher borrowing costs and/or to less credit availability.
In fact, earlier research focusing on variation across Italian provinces found that indicators
of credit availability are negatively related to judicial ineciency and, in some specications,
positively related to borrowing costs (see Jappelli et al., 2005)

23

.We focus here on borrowing

costs and nd evidence that loan interest rates are higher where legal eciency is poor (see
Table 11).

More precisely, we regress the interest rate on measures of rm credit quality

(equal to indicator variables based on the borrower credit score), time xed eects, and
our measure of legal ineciency. We report the model only for observations in which the
bank and the borrower reside in the same province, so there is not ambiguity regarding
measurement of legal eciency.

Since we are interested in the direct correlation between

23 More precisely, the average interest rate on short term loans to non nancial companies in a province is
positively associated cross sectionally with the stock of pending trials. In the xed eect specication the
length of civil trials is positively and almost signicantly associated with the interest rate at conventional
signicance level, but the stock of pending trials has a negative, but insignicant eect. The stock of pending
trials has a negative and signicant eect on credit avauilability both cross sectionally and in the xed eect
specication. The predictions of the theoretical model in Jappelli et al. [2005] depend upon the competitive
structure of banks and other details. Longer longer recovery time for posted collateral tends to lead to lower
interest rates under perfect competition in ceredit markets, but not under monopolistic competition. In both
cases, longer recovery times imply less credit availability. Note also that the prediction on

average

interest

rates depends also upon the dierent pool of applicants in provinces/times with dierent collateral recovery
times.

23

legal ineciency and loan pricing, we must leave out the bank and rm*time (or rm) xed
eects, as these would subsume the coecient of interest. Hence, omitted variables could be
problematic in the regression.
Given this caveat, we see a very strong positive and statistically signicant eect of legal
ineciency on loan pricing. The eect is similar in models with and without additional rm
control variables such as log of total assets, leverage and age (column 1 vs. 2). The magnitude
suggests that the loan rate increases by 0.40 percentage points comparing loans to borrowers
in legal jurisdictions at the 25th percentile vs.

those at the 75th (and by 80 basis points

going from the 5th to the 95th percentile). The coecient of interest remains signicant after
including macro-regional indicator variables, although the magnitude is somewhat smaller.

4.5 Robustness Tests
Table 12 reports six robustness tests of our main model with legal eciency (i.e. the models
of Table 8).

First, we report the model using term loans only.

Second, we report the

model after discarding all data beyond the rst quarter in which a loan becomes late (or
overdrawn).

Third, we control for four dimensions of loan terms.

Fourth, we reduce our

sample and include only observations in which the bank and the lender reside in the same
court jurisdiction. Fifth, we replace bank xed eects with bank-rm eects. And sixth, we
allow for the eect of accumulated bad loans to dier not only according to the eciency of
the court, but also based on the macro region a rm resides in.

24

4.5.1 Term Loans Only
By excluding credit lines from our dataset, we can help ensure that the behavior reects the
borrower's intent not to repay the loan. Credit line data combine variation generated both
by the borrower's delays in re-payment of existing balances, and variation stemming from the
borrower's demand for liquidity. Specically, delayed re-payment on an existing credit line

24 Since the results when bank prots are included are very similar, we present only the results for the
larger quarterly sample without this control variable.

24

will mechanically lead to an increase in the drawn balance, just as an active increase by the
borrower in the amount drawn. As long as the drawn balance remains below the maximum
amount of the line, we have no way to determine what motivates the borrower. A second
problem with credit lines is that the bank's choice to cut credit limits could also make default
more likely. Thus, data on credit lines may confound our interpretation. No such problems
exist with respect to term loans, since the balance of the loan is xed throughout the life
of the loan. Thus, this robustness test allows us to sharpen the distinction between bank
vulnerability stemming from liquidity exposure (the traditional concern) and vulnerability
stemming from credit-risk exposure (our focus).
Column (1) of Table 12 reports these results.

Focusing only on term loans conrms

our main message: borrowers selectively default against weak banks in regions with poor
enforcement. Term loans have no liquidity component, so this result can only reect credit
risk and not liquidity. The coecient magnitudes are somewhat smaller than those observed
when we model overall default, but this reects the lower level of default of term loans vs.
lines.

4.5.2 First Delay
The next set of regressions (column (2)) report the main results with just the rst instance
in which a loan becomes late on a payment (or overdrawn). This test alleviates the concern
that persistence in the error term leads to a bias in estimating the eects of past bad loans
on delayed repayment.

The problem is twofold.

First, once borrowers become late on a

loan, that lateness becomes persistent; late borrowers tend to stay late for many consecutive quarters. Second, loans that are late (or overdrawn) often transition to the bad-loan
account. This pattern is evident in the transition matrix described earlier (recall Table 1b).
Persistence in the error term after loans become late would therefore induce a contemporaneous correlation between the error and the level of bad loans for observations after the
rst instance of default. To remove this source of bias, we simply drop all observations after

25

a loan rst enters the state of late payment.

The basic pattern of the regression results

remains similar, with even stronger statistical signicance. The magnitudes fall, but this is
as expected because by dropping all instances of late payments after the rst one, we reduce
the mean level of the dependent variable by more than 50%.

4.5.3 Control for Loan Terms
As we have emphasized, our model fully absorbs all rm-level fundamentals by capturing
rm-quarter xed eects.

However, loan terms - interest rates, collateral, and maturity

- are not captured this way, since these may vary systematically across a rm's banking
relationships. We therefore control for the loan interest rate, the share of loans with maturity
less than one year, the average ratio of collateral in accounts receivable to loan size, and the
average ratio of real-estate collateral to loan size. Each of these variables reects variation
at the rm-lender-quarter level, so coecients remain identied even with the rm-quarter
xed eects. In some cases loan terms are not available, so the sample falls in these models.

25

We nd in column (3) that higher interest rates are associated with more default, which
seems sensible given that the rm can save more cash resources by delaying payment on
more expensive loans. We nd that shorter maturity loans are more likely to default. And
we nd some evidence that collateral mitigates default risk (at least for accounts receivable;
real estate collateral does not enter the model robustly). But what is most salient for us:
adding these variables does little to our results of interest. In fact, we nd somewhat stronger
results, although this in part may reect dierences in the sample.

4.5.4 Borrower and Lender in Same Court Jurisdiction
Next, we include only instances in which lender and borrower are located in the same court
jurisdiction. This alternative sample, which is much smaller than our main sample, accounts
for possible measurement error in mapping legal enforcement into the data. As noted above,

25 Specically, data on interest rates on loans are available from the Bank of Italy's Loan Interest Rate
Survey, which collects data from around 200 banks accounting for over 90% of total outstanding loans.

26

ex post enforcement requires lenders rst to receive an injunction from the court jurisdiction
of its head oce and, to reposess collateral (or other borrower's assets), they also need to
adjudicate in the court located near the collateral. Thus, legal enforcement in both court
jurisdictionss may matter. By focusing on cases in which the two overlap, we can test whether
potential mis-classication could generate (or bias) our ndings.

26

These results (column (4) of Table 12) again support the idea that lender weakness (bad
loans) raises default in areas with weak enforcement. If anything, these results are stronger
than those reported in our main model, meaning that the eect of bad loans on default
exhibits greater sensitivity to legal eciency in this smaller sample.

4.5.5 Controlling for Possible Endogeneity of Borrower-Lender Matching
With the results of column (5), we rule out the possibility that endogenous matching between
rms and banks could explain our results. For example, one concern might be that rms
sometimes choose a lender located in an area with poor legal enforcement with the intention
of defaulting. We do this by simply incorporating a unique xed eect for each bank-rm
pair. These eects will `control' non-parametrically for all aspects driving the rm's choice
of its lender.
The results provide little evidence that endogenous sorting aects rm default behavior.
We continue to nd that rms default more when their lender is distressed. At the mean
level of legal enforcement, the marginal eect of bad loans on default equals 0.08 (=

0.163 × ln (1189)),

−1.077+

very close to what we observe in our model with just bank eects (as in

Table 8).

26 The large drop in the sample occurs because the majority of loans are extended by the largest banks with
branches located across the whole of Italy. So, even though borrowers are usually located near a branch of
their lender, they often are not located near the lender's head oce. Thus, this sample lters out most loans
extended by the largest banks and suggests robustness with respect to lender size as well as legal eciency
measures.

27

4.5.6 Allowing for Dierences Across Macro Regions
One may wonder whether the dierences in the importance of bank health across court
jurisdictions proxies for more complex dierences between southern and northern regions.
As we have seen, we have meaningful variation across both regions, but judicial eciency is
clearly higher (

ineaw

is lower) on average in the north of Italy. Moreover, many authors

have pointed to cultural dierences across the two areas. These include dierences in social
capital, trust, and respect for others outside the family.

27

Such dierence could plausibly

aect a rm's willingness to default selectively.
To test whether these alternative sources of variation explain our results, we incorporate
additional regressors interacting the bank characteristics with an indicator set to one for
the southern regions (and major islands). Our focus is on the interaction between
and

ineaw×badloans

with this regional indicator.

badloans

This specication allows the eect of

badloans on default to vary regionally as well as across judicial areas.

The coecients on these

additional variables capture the dierence between the south (and island regions) relative
to the center and north of Italy. Column (6) shows, however, that the regional interactions
are not statistically signicant, either individually or jointly.
the signicance of two additional interactions with

badloans

For example, the F-test for
and

ineaw×badloans

has a

p-value of 0.442. So, we conclude that judicial ineciency is the main factor determining
the marginal eect of accumulated bad loans on the decision to delay payments.

5

Conclusions

This paper provides the rst empirical evidence that banks can be vulnerable to run-like
behavior when borrowers choose to delay payment in response to evidence of their bank's
distress from past bad loans. These results are strong, both statistically and economically, at
those Italian banks which operated in areas with weak legal enforcement. Most of the nance

27 See for instance, Putnam et al. [1994], Guiso et al. [2004], Guiso et al. [2013a] and Guiso et al. [2013b].

28

and economics literature, as well as the policy and regulatory apparatus, have viewed the
roots of bank vulnerability as stemming from exposure to liquidity risk. Although exposure
to credit risk is a well-known source of bank losses, we nd a

new channel

through which

credit risk might impair bank stability: delay in payments motivated by bank weakness.
We even demonstrate that where enforcement is weak, even the safest borrowers delay loan
repayment to weak banks. Our results help explain why the law and nance literature has
found weak enforcement of creditor rights to be so detrimental to well functioning debt
markets [La Porta et al., 1998].
Fragility from liquidity exposure has been addressed with mechanisms like deposit insurance, liquidity requirements (called for by the Basel III reform package) and lender of last
resort facilities operated by central banks. It seems likely that better enforcement, such as
improving the speed and certainty with which creditors can take possession of borrower's
net worth would reduce fragility stemming from credit risks and limit, in turn, the use of
those lenders of last resort facilities that might carry costs by encouraging banks to increase
leverage, issue too much short-term debt, and take excessive risk.
Our paper also contributes to the debate on the role of information, market discipline
and bank stability: while access to timely and reliable information enables investors to assess
risks inherent to nancial assets and to allocate capital eciently, full transparency might
sometimes have detrimental eects if it leads to overreaction by market participants. Our
results suggest that in bad times, dissemination of information on lender fragility might push
borrowers to delay loan repayments against weak banks, making their condition even worse.

29

References
Ugo Albertazzi and Domenico J. Marchetti.
greening:

Credit Supply, Flight to Quality and Ever-

an Analysis of Bank-Firm Relationships after Lehman.

Temi di Discussione

(Economic Working Papers) 756, Bank of Italy, Economic Research and International
Relations Area, April 2010.

Edward I. Altman. Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction Of Corporate
Bankruptcy.

Journal of Finance, 23(4):589609, September 1968.

Pierluigi Balduzzi, Emanuele Brancati, and Fabio Schiantarelli. Financial Markets, Banks'
Cost of Funding, and Firms' Decisions: Lessons from Two Crises. Boston College Working
Papers in Economics 824, Boston College Department of Economics, 2014.

Bank of Italy. Governor's Concluding Remarks, 2015a. URL

https://www.bancaditalia.

it/pubblicazioni/interventi-governatore/integov2015/en_cf_2014.pdf?
language_id=1.
Bank of Italy. Relazione Annuale, Appendice, 2015b. URL

https://www.bancaditalia.

it/pubblicazioni/relazione-annuale/2014/appendice_2014_completa.pdf.
Marcello Bofondi, Luisa Carpinelli, and Enrico Sette. Credit Supply During a Sovereign Debt
Crisis.

Temi di Discussione (Economic Working Papers) 909, Bank of Italy, Economic

Research and International Relations Area, April 2013.

Patrick Bolton, Xavier Freixas, Leonardo Gambacorta, and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli.
tionship and Transaction Lending in a Crisis.

Rela-

Temi di Discussione (Economic Working

Papers) 917, Bank of Italy, Economic Research and International Relations Area, July
2013.

Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti and Enrico Sette. Bank Balance Sheets and the Transmission of
Financial Shocks to Borrowers: Evidence from the 2007-2008 Crisis. Temi di Discussione

30

(Economic Working Papers) 848, Bank of Italy, Economic Research and International
Relations Area, January 2012.

Philip Bond and Ashok S. Rai.

Borrower Run.

Journal of International Economics,

89:

185191, 2009.

Amanda Carmignani and Silvia Giacomelli. Italian Civil Justice: Regional Disparities. Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers) 40, Bank of Italy, Economic Research
and International Relations Area, February 2009.

Vinicius Carrasco and Pablo Salgado. Coordinated Strategic Defaults and Financial Fragility
in a Costly State Verication Model.

Journal of Financial Intermediation,

23:129139,

2014.

Federico Cingano, Francesco Manaresi, and Enrico Sette. Does Credit Crunch Investments
Down? New Evidence on the Real Eects of the Bank-Lending Channel. Mo.Fi.R. Working
Papers 91, Money and Finance Research Group (Mo.Fi.R.) - Univ. Politecnica Marche Dept. Economic and Social Sciences, December 2013.

Marcia Millon Cornett, Jamie John McNutt, Philip E. Strahan, and Hassan Tehranian.
Liquidity Risk Management and Credit Supply in the Financial Crisis.

Journal of Financial

Economics, 101(2):297312, August 2011.
D. W. Diamond and P. H. Dybvig. Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity.

Journal

of Political Economy, 91:401419, 1983.
Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. Courts.

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2):453517, 2003.
Viktar Fedaseyeu. Debt Collection Agencies and the Supply of Consumer Credit. Working
Papers 15-23, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, June 2015.

31

X. Freixas, L. Laeven, and J.L. Peydro.

Systemic risk, crises and macroprudential policy.

MIT Press, 2015.

Douglas Gale and Martin Hellwig. Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The One-Period
Problem.

Review of Economic Studies, 52(4):647663, 1985.

Silvia Giacomelli and Carlo Menon. Firm Size and Judicial Eciency: Evidence from the
Neighbour's Court. Temi di Discussione (Economic Working Papers) 898, Bank of Italy,
Economic Research and International Relations Area, January 2013.

Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick. Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo.

Journal of

Financial Economics, 104(3):425451, 2012.
Reint Gropp, John Karl Scholz, and Michelle J White.
Supply and Demand.

Personal Bankruptcy and Credit

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1):21751, February 1997.

Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. The Role of Social Capital in Financial
Development.

American Economic Review, 94(3):526556, June 2004.

Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales.
Strategic Default on Mortgages.

The Determinants of Attitudes toward

Journal of Finance, 68(4):14731515, August 2013a.

Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales.

Long-term Persistence.

Journal of the

European Economic Association (forthcoming), July 2013b.
Filippo Ippolito, Jose Luis Peydro, Andrea Paolo, and Enrico Sette. Double Bank Runs and
Liquidity Risk Management.

Bank of Italy, February 2015.

Victoria Ivashina and David Scharfstein. Bank lending during the nancial crisis of 2008.

Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3):319338, 2010.
Tullio Jappelli, Marco Pagano, and Magda Bianco. Courts and Banks: Eects of Judicial
Enforcement on Credit Markets.

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 37:223244, 2005.
32

Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.
Determinants of External Finance.

Legal

Journal of Finance, 52(3):113150, July 1997.

Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. Law
and Finance.

Giovanni

Journal of Political Economy, 106(6):11131155, December 1998.

Legorano.

Journal,

Loans

November

Sour

for

2013.

Italy's
URL

The Wall Street

Banks.

http://www.wsj.com/articles/

SB10001424052702304243904579195930128307274.
Filippo De Marco. Bank Lending and the Sovereign Debt Crisis.

Bocconi University, June

2015.

Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin.
Modeling. In

Rethinking Multiple Equilibria in Macroeconomic

NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15,

NBER Chapters, pages

139182. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 2001.

Fabio Pavesi.
February

Quelle

2015.

33

banche con crediti malati sopra il

URL

20%.

Il Sole 24 Ore,

http://www.ilsole24ore.com/art/notizie/2015-02-14/

quei-33-istituti-crediti-malati-sopra-20percento-081320.shtml?grafici&
refresh_ce=1.
Alexander Popov and Neeltje van Horen. The Impact of Sovereign Debt Exposure on Bank
Lending: Evidence from the European Debt Crisis. DNB Working Papers 382, Netherlands
Central Bank, Research Department, June 2013.

Robert D. Putnam, Robert Leonardi, and Raaella Y. Nanetti.

Civic Traditions in Modern Italy.

Making Democracy Work:

Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1994.

Michael R. Roberts and Amir Su. Financial Contracting: A Survey of Empirical Research
and Future Directions.

Annual Review of Financial Economics, 1(1):207226, November

2009.

33

Jonathan A. Scott and Terrence Smith. The Eect of the Banktruptcy Reform Act of 1978
on Small Business Loan Prices.

Journal of Financial Economics, 16:119140, 1986.

Andrei Shleifer. Will the Sovereign Debt Market Survive?

American Economic Review, 93

(2):8590, May 2003.

Philip E. Strahan. Too Big to Fail: Causes, Consequences and Policy Responses.

Annual

Review of Financial Economics, 5:4361, 2013.
R. M. Townsend. Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verication.

Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2):265293, 1979.

Stefan T. Trautmann and Razvan Vlahu.
Experimental Analysis.

Strategic Loan Defaults and Coordination: An

Journal of Banking and Finance, 37(3):747760, 2013.

Giada Zempano. Renzi Takes Aim at Italy's Slow Courts.

34

Wall Street Journal, 2014.

Data appendix
Loan quality and lending relationship - Source: Credit Register, Bank of Italy
late payment (0,1):

bank, rm, quarter-level, =1 if the rm has a past due/overdrawn with the bank in the quarter; = 0 if

loans granted by the bank to the rm are performing in the quarter;

bkshare:

bank, rm, quarter-level, rm's share of borrowing from the bank in the quarter;

past due/overdrawn:

exposures (other than those classied as bad loans, substandard or restructured) whose repayments have

been delayed by the borrowers for more than 90 days on a continuous basis;

substandard: e xposures to counterparties which face temporary diculties expected to be overcome within a reasonable period
of time;

objective substandard:
restructured:

past due/overdrawn classied as substandard;

exposures in which lenders, as a result of the deterioration of the borrower's nancial situation, agree to change

the original conditions, giving rise to a loss for the creditor;

bad loans: e xposures to insolvent counterparties (even if not legally ascertained), regardless of any loss estimate made by the
bank and irrespective of any possible collateral or guarantee;

Bank characteristics - Source: Supervisory Reports, Bank of Italy
total assets, bank, quarter-level; eur millions;
lntot: bank, quarter-level; total assets, eur millions (log of );
badloans:
prots:

bank-level, by-annual, return on equity, ratio;

liquidity:
capital:

bank,quarter-level, bad loans/total assets, ratio;

bank, quarter-level, (cash and gov. bonds) /total assets, ratio;

bank, quarter-level equity/total assets, ratio;

stable funding:
govbshock:

bank, quarter-level, deposits from residents and bank bonds with households/total assets, ratio;

bank, quarter-level, bank losses from sovereign bonds holdings; source: Author's estimates based on data from

Supervisory Reports, Bank of Italy. See the upcoming description for details

35

An index of bank losses from sovereign bonds holdings (govbshock) - Source: Author's estimates based on
data from Supervisory Reports, Bank of Italy
We follow De Marco (2015) to compute the change in the value sovereign holdings (

govbshock )

using the change in the yield

(4yield) for each type of bond (based on maturity and country), multiplied by the product of the bond's duration times its
share of the bank's total assets (

govbondshare ).

We limit ourselves to bonds issued by the Italian government because they

represent the vast majority of holdings of sovereign bonds.

govbshockb,t =

X

Govshock

is denes as

durationm,t × ∆yieldm,t × govbondsharem,t−1 ,

m
where

m

denotes the original bond maturity. For a zero coupon bond the formula can be written as:

2m
.
1 + yieldm,t

durationm,t =

For a par bond, the formula simplies to

durationm,t =

1
yieldm,t


1−

1
(1 + yieldm,t )2m


.

We apply the rst formula when we know that the sovereign bonds are discount bonds and an average of the two formulae
when we have no such information.

Eciency of justices - Source: Authors' estimates from data disseminated by the Italian Ministry of Justice
ineaw :

court jurisdiction-level, Length of Property executon proceedings in days (log of );

Firm characteristics - Source: Balance sheet register
employees:

rm, year-level;

rm assets :

rm, year-level;

debt/assets :

rm, year-level;

age :

rm, year-level;

36

Table 1: Summary Statistics
The table shows statistics on problematic loans for a sample of around 32,000 industrial rms based in Italy. The description
of variables and their data sources are given in the Data Appendix.

(a) Loan Quality in Italy (Sampled Firms)
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Performing

0.986

0.987

0.982

0.956

0.936

0.922

0.909

0.880

0.853

Bad Loans

0.000

0.000

0.002

0.008

0.017

0.025

0.035

0.052

0.071

Restructured

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.007

0.014

0.017

0.018

0.016

0.019

Past Due/Overdrawn

0.009

0.008

0.010

0.013

0.012

0.015

0.011

0.011

0.008

Substandard

0.003

0.002

0.005

0.016

0.021

0.021

0.027

0.040

0.049

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.008

0.011

0.012

0.016

0.024

0.029

Late Payments

0.010

0.009

0.011

0.021

0.023

0.028

0.028

0.038

0.041

Late payments, excl. Credit Lines

0.008

0.007

0.010

0.018

0.018

0.019

0.023

0.031

0.034

o.w.:objective substd.

(b) Transition Matrix for the Universe of All Borrowers
Performing

Past Due/Overdrawn

Substandard/Restructured

Bad Loans

Loan State at 12/2010
Performing

94.62%

1.11%

3.04%

1.22%

Loan State

Past Due/Overdrawn

50.74%

10.45%

27.56%

11.25%

at 12/2009

Substandard/Restructured

10.84%

0.63%

66.15%

22.38%

0.23%

0.02%

0.66%

99.09%

Bad Loans

Loan State at 12/2011
Performing

94.85%

0.97%

3.15%

1.02%

Loan State

Past Due/Overdrawn

52.52%

13.12%

25.35%

9.01%

at 12/2010

Substandard/Restructured

8.55%

0.40%

68.68%

22.37%

Bad Loans

0.29%

0.02%

0.34%

99.35%

Loan State at 12/2012
Performing

92.71%

1.54%

4.34%

1.41%

Loan State

Past Due/Overdrawn

35.28%

12.08%

39.64%

13.00%

at 12/2011

Substandard/Restructured

6.17%

0.44%

70.30%

23.09%

Bad Loans

0.11%

0.01%

0.38%

99.50%

Loan State at 12/2013
Performing

91.77%

1.20%

5.60%

1.42%

Loan State

Past Due/Overdrawn

33.53%

13.01%

42.19%

11.27%

at 12/2012

Substandard/Restructured

4.17%

0.34%

64.69%

30.80%

Bad Loans

0.10%

0.01%

0.29%

99.60%

Loan State at time 12/2014
Performing

92.39%

1.04%

5.67%

0.90%

Loan State

Past Due/Overdrawn

27.49%

13.70%

46.91%

11.90%

at 12/2013

Substandard/Restructured

3.97%

0.22%

71.86%

23.94%

Bad Loans

0.10%

0.01%

0.27%

99.62%

37

Table 2: Bank Characteristics
The table shows statistics on bank characteristics used in our analysis. The main sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4.
The description of variables and their sources are given in the Data Appendix.

total assets
badloans
prots
liquidity
govbshock
capital
stable funding

mean

sd

p5

p25

p50

p75

p95

36,330

125,683

37

139

430

2,638

223,545

0.029

0.041

0.000

0.010

0.040

0.055

0.112

0.021

0.033

-0.042

0.007

0.022

0.040

0.074

0.163

0.147

0.040

0.060

0.128

0.254

0.460

-0.082

0.551

-0.882

-0.196

0.000

0.035

0.591

0.141

0.110

0.041

0.084

0.126

0.174

0.273

0.598

0.307

0.020

0.414

0.678

0.859

0.923

Table 3: Firm Characteristics
The table shows statistics on rm characteristics employed in our analysis. The sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4.
The description of variables and their sources are given in the Data Appendix.

mean

employees
assets
debt/assets
age
riskyness (Z-SCORE, 1-9)

p5

p25

p50

p75

p95

151

5

24

49

105

450

61,214

3,079

7,814

14,615

32,370

149,593

0.294

0.017

0.128

0.299

0.443

0.615

25

4

13

23

33

55

5

1

3

5

6

8

Table 4: Judicial Eciency in Italy: Length of Property Execution Proceedings
The table presents descriptive statistics on duration of property execution proceedings in 2007 (days, court-level data).

# of days

mean

sd

p5

p25

p50

p75

p95

1,189

745

415

628

1,007

1,482

2,638

38

39

late payment
as a function of a set of bank characteristics.

Late payment (0,1)

is equal to 1 if the rm has a loan repayment delay with the

N

rm*quarter fe
bank fe

bkshare
lntot
stable
liquidity
cap
badloans
govbshock
prots

3,088,454

yes
yes

-0.001

0.013***

(1)

3,700,309

yes
yes

0.005

0.013***

(2)

3,079,632

yes
yes

-0.001

0.013***

(3)

2,833,168

yes
yes

0.008

0.012***

(4)

3,066,502

yes
yes

0.114***

0.013***

(5)

2,900,440

yes
yes

0.003*

0.013***

(6)

1,241,541

yes
yes

-0.011

0.014***

(7)

2,656,566

yes
yes

0.002*

0.114**

0.021

-0.006

0.002

-0.001

0.012***

(8)

1,066,184

yes
yes

0.001

0.003

0.099**

0.037

-0.012

0.002

-0.001

0.014***

(9)

their sources are given in the Data Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-level. Asterisks denote signicance at the 1%(***), 5%(**), 10%( *) level, respectively.

bank in the quarter; 0 if loans granted by the bank to the rm are performing in the quarter. The sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4. The description of variables and

The table presents regressions of

Table 5: Determinants of Late payments: Bank quality

Table 6: Late payments, bank quality and rm size
The table presents regressions of

late payment

as a function of a set of bank characteristics. The model allows the eect of bank

variables to vary by borrower size. Borrowers are sorted in four equal-sized bins based on their total assets (1=small; 4=large).

Late payment (0,1)

is equal to 1 if the rm has a loan repayment delay with the bank in the quarter; 0 if loans granted by the

bank to the rm are performing in the quarter. The sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4. The description of variables and
their sources are given in the Data Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-level. Asterisks denote signicance at
the 1%(***), 5%(**), 10%( *) level, respectively.

bkshare

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.013***

0.012***

0.014***

bkshare_1
bkshare_2
bkshare_3
bkshare_4
badloans_1
badloans_2
badloans_3
badloans_4

(4)

(5)

0.007***

0.008***

0.008***

0.009***

0.013***

0.013***

0.022***

0.025***
0.076*

0.052

0.078**

0.077**

0.077**

0.085**

0.084*

0.042

0.084*

0.041

0.109***

0.129***

0.108***

0.129***

0.108***

0.169***

0.141**

0.138**

0.141**

0.138*

0.001
0.003
0.002
0.002

0.003
0.005
0.000
0.002

0.001
0.003
0.002
0.002

0.003
0.005
0.000
0.002

stable_1
stable_2
stable_3
stable_4
govbshock_1
govbshock_2
govbshock_3
govbshock_4

0.002
0.002

0.002
0.004

0.001
0.002

0.002
0.004

0.003*
0.002

0.003
0.004

0.003*
0.002

0.003
0.004

lntot_1
lntot_2
lntot_3
lntot_4

-0.001
-0.001
0.000
0.000

-0.002
-0.002
-0.001
0.000

-0.001
-0.001
0.000
0.000

-0.002
-0.002
-0.001
-0.001

cap_1
cap_2
cap_3
cap_4

0.009
0.015
0.03
0.028

0.033
0.016
0.037
0.057

0.01
0.016
0.029
0.028

0.034
0.017
0.037
0.056

-0.014

-0.012

-0.015*

-0.012

-0.015
-0.007
0.004

-0.022**
-0.007
-0.011

-0.015
-0.007
0.005

-0.022**
-0.007
-0.01

liquidity_1
liquidity_2
liquidity_3
liquidity_4
prof_1
prof_2
prof_3
prof_4
rm*quarter fe
bank fe
N

-0.002
0.01
-0.006
0.002

-0.003
0.009
-0.006
0.002

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

3,066,066

2,656,258

1,065,889

2,656,258

1,065,889

Test of equality of `badloans' coecient across size classes
F-test (p-value)

0.07

40

0.02

0.07

0.02

41

yes
yes

0.022
-0.112*

0.021***

(6)
0.012***

(7)

N

yes
yes

0.114**
-0.002

0.034
-0.094

-0.008
0.020

0.004
-0.015*

-0.000
-0.001*

0.002
0.002

0.038***

(8)

yes
yes

0.102**
-0.020

0.050
-0.092

-0.014
0.021

0.005
-0.016

-0.001
-0.002**

0.006
-0.039

0.003
0.002

0.047***

(9)

2,900,440 1,241,541 3,088,454 3,070,309 3,079,632 2,833,168 3,066,502 2,656,566 1,066,184

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

-0.000
-0.002

0.013***

(5)

rm*quarter fe
bank fe

yes
yes

0.006
-0.010*

0.017***

(4)

0.112***
0.016
yes
yes

-0.001
-0.000

0.017***

(3)

badloans
bkshare*badloans

cap
bkshare*cap

liquidty
bkshare*liquidity

stable
bkshare*stable

lntot
bkshare*lntot

yes
yes

0.002*
0.003

govbshock
bkshare*govbshock

-0.005
-0.047

0.016***

0.013***

bkshare

prots
bkshare*prots

(2)

(1)

clustered at the bank-level. Asterisks denote signicance at the 1%(***), 5%(**), 10%( *) level, respectively.

performing in the quarter. The sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4. The description of variables and their sources are given in the Data Appendix. Standard errors are

relationship (

The table presents regressions of

late payment as a function of a set of bank characteristics. The model allows the eect of bank variables to vary with strength of the bank
bkshare ). Late payment (0,1) is equal to 1 if the rm has a loan repayment delay with the bank in the quarter; 0 if loans granted by the bank to the rm are

Table 7: Late payments, bank quality and relationship lending

42

late payment

is equal to 1 if the rm has a loan repayment delay with the bank in the quarter; 0 if loans

yes
yes

-0.481
0.072

yes
yes

-1.449***
0.220***

(5)

0.006
-0.001

(6)

(7)

N

-0.533
0.082

0.069
-0.011

-0.075*
0.012*

yes
yes

0.004
-0.000

yes
yes

0.017
-0.001

-0.000
0.001

-1.301*** -1.063***
0.196*** 0.162***

-0.398
0.060

0.172*
-0.025*

-0.057
0.010

-0.013
0.002

-0.005
0.003

-0.002
0.002
-0.011
0.002

(9)

(8)

3,141,104 3,122,707 3,132,225 2,882,328 3,118,981 2,949,849 1,262,333 2,656,566 1,066,184

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

-0.069
0.010

(4)

rm*quarter fe
bank fe

yes
yes

-0.111*
0.017*

(3)

0.488***
-0.072***

-0.009
0.001

(2)

prots
prots*ineaw

govbshock
govbshock*ineaw

badloans
badloans*ineaw

cap
cap*ineaw

liquidity
liquidity*ineaw

stable
stable*ineaw

lntot
lntot*ineaw

bkshare
bkshare*ineaw

(1)

Data Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-level. Asterisks denote signicance at the 1%(***), 5%(**), 10%( *) level, respectively.

granted by the bank to the rm are performing in the quarter. The sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4. The description of variables and their sources are given in the

ineaw ). Late payment (0,1)

as a function of a set of bank characteristics. The model allows the eect of bank variables to vary with (the natural log of )

duration for property execution proceedings in 2007 (

The table presents regressions of

Table 8: Late payments and judicial eciency

Table 9: Late payments, bank quality and judicial eciency, by rm size
The table presents regressions of

late payment

as a function of a set of bank characteristics. The model allows the eect of

bank variables to vary with (the natural log of ) duration for property execution proceedings (

ineaw ) and by borrower size.
The Late payment (0,1) is

Borrowers are sorted in four equal sized-bins based on their total assets (1=smaller; 4=larger).

equal to 1 if the rm has a loan repayment delay with the bank in the quarter; 0 if loans granted by the bank to the rm are
performing in the quarter. The sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4. The description of variables and their sources are
given in the Data Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-level. Asterisks denote signicance at the 1%(***),
5%(**), 10%( *) level, respectively.

bkshare
ineaw*bkshare
bkshare_1
bkshare_2
bkshare_3
bkshare_4
ineaw*bkshare_1
ineaw*bkshare_2
ineaw*bkshare_3
ineaw*bkshare_4
stable_1
stable_2
stable_3
stable_4
ineaw*stable~1
ineaw*stable~2
ineaw*stable~3
ineaw*stable~4
govb_1
govb_2
govb_3
govb_4
ineaw*govbshock_1
ineaw*govbshock_2
ineaw*govbshock_3
ineaw*govbshock_4
lntot_1
lntot_2
lntot_3
lntot_4
ineaw*lntot_1
ineaw*lntot_2
ineaw*lntot_3
ineaw*lntot_4
cap_1
cap_2
cap_3
cap_4
ineaw*cap_1
ineaw*cap_2
ineaw*cap_3
ineaw*cap_4
badloans_1
badloans_2
badloans_3
badloans_4
ineaw*badloans_1
ineaw*badloans_2
ineaw*badloans_3
ineaw*badloans_4
liquidity_1
liquidity_2
liquidity_3
liquidity_4
ineaw*liq_1
ineaw*liq_2
ineaw*liq_3
ineaw*liq_4
rm*quarter fe
bank fe
N

(1)

(2)

0.012***

0.000
0.002

(3)

(4)

0.006***
0.008***
0.013***
0.022***

0.003
0.003
0.022
-0.017
0.000
0.001
-0.001
0.006

-0.064
-0.104**
-0.053
-0.025

-0.064
-0.104**
-0.053
-0.025

-0.064
-0.104**
-0.053
-0.024

-0.064
-0.104**
-0.053
-0.024

0.011
0.017***
0.009
0.005

0.011
0.017***
0.009
0.005

0.011
0.017***
0.009
0.005

0.011
0.017***
0.009
0.005

0.031*
-0.021
-0.010
0.019

0.031*
-0.021
-0.010
0.019

0.031*
-0.021
-0.010
0.019

0.031*
-0.021
-0.010
0.019

-0.004
0.003
0.002
-0.003

-0.004
0.003
0.002
-0.003

-0.004
0.003
0.002
-0.003

-0.004
0.003
0.002
-0.003

-0.013
-0.01-0.014
-0.010

-0.013
-0.010
-0.014
-0.009

-0.013
-0.010
-0.014
-0.009

-0.013
-0.010
-0.014
-0.009

0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001

0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001

0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001

0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001

-0.469
-0.365
-0.034
-0.714

-0.467
-0.364
-0.033
-0.715

-0.454
-0.353
-0.035
-0.731

-0.454
-0.351
-0.038
-0.728

0.069
0.054
0.008
0.107

0.069
0.054
0.008
0.107

0.067
0.052
0.008
0.109

0.067
0.052
0.008
0.109

-1.302***
-1.584***
-0.795***
-1.496***

-1.299***
-1.581***
-0.793***
-1.494***

-1.322***
-1.598***
-0.793***
-1.485***

-1.321***
-1.597***
-0.794***
-1.483***

0.193***
0.233***
0.127***
0.225***

0.193***
0.233***
0.127***
0.225***

0.196***
0.235***
0.127***
0.224***

0.196***
0.235***
0.127***
0.224***

0.206**
0.265**
0.082
0.116

0.204**
0.264**
0.081
0.116

0.207**
0.263**
0.082
0.117

0.207**
0.263**
0.082
0.115

-0.032**
-0.040**
-0.012
-0.015

-0.031**
-0.040**
-0.012
-0.015

-0.032**
-0.040**
-0.012
-0.015

-0.032**
-0.040**
-0.013
-0.015

yes
yes

yes
yes

2,656,258

2,656,258

43

yes
yes

2,656,258

yes
yes

2,656,258

Table 10: Late payments, bank quality and judicial eciency, by rm riskiness
The table presents regressions of

late payment

as a function of a set of bank characteristics. The model allows the eect of bank

ineaw ) and by
Late payment (0,1)

variables to vary with (the natural log of ) duration for property execution proceedings (

borrower riskiness.

Borrowers are sorted in risk bins (safe, vulnerable, risky) based on their z-score. The

is equal to 1 if the

rm has a loan repayment delay with the bank in the quarter; 0 if loans granted by the bank to the rm are performing in the
quarter. The sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4. The description of variables and their sources are given in the Data
Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-level. Asterisks denote signicance at the 1%(***), 5%(**), 10%( *) level,
respectively.

bkshare
bkshare_safe
bkshare_vulnerable
bkshare_risky
bkshare*ineaw
ineaw*bkshare_safe
ineaw*bkshare_vulnerable
ineaw*bkshare_risky
stable_safe
stable_vulnerable
stable_risky
ineaw*stable_safe
ineaw*stable_vulnerable
ineaw*stable_risky
gov_safe
gov_vulnerable
gov_risky
ineaw*gov_safe
ineaw*gov_vulnerable
ineaw*gov_risky
lntot_safe
lntot_vulnerable
lntot_risky
ineaw*lntot_safe
ineaw*lntot_vulnerable
ineaw*lntot_risky
cap_safe
cap_vulnerable
cap_risky
ineaw*cap_safe
ineaw*cap_vulnerable
ineaw*cap_risky
badloans_safe
badloans_vulnerable
badloans_risky
ineaw*bad_safe
ineaw*bad_vulnerable
ineaw*bad_risky
liquidity_safe
liquidity_vulnerable
liquidity_risky
ineaw*liq_safe
ineaw*liq_vulnerable
ineaw*liq_risky
prof_safe
prof_vulnerable
prof_risky
ineaw*prof_safe
ineaw*prof_vulnerable
ineaw*prof_risky
rm*quarter fe
bank fe
N

(1)

(2)

0.013***

-0.002

(3)

(4)

-0.002
0.003
0.018

-0.009
0.004
0.015

0.001
0.001
0.002

0.002
0.001
0.003

0.002

-0.048
-0.072*
-0.013

-0.048
-0.073*
-0.013

-0.046
-0.072*
-0.013

-0.086*
-0.087*
-0.031

0.008
0.012*
0.003

0.008
0.012*
0.003

0.008
0.012*
0.003

0.014**
0.014**
0.005

0.016
0.013
-0.026

0.016
0.013
-0.025

0.015
0.013
-0.025

0.003
0.01
-0.015

-0.002
-0.002
0.004

-0.002
-0.002
0.004

-0.002
-0.002
0.004

-0.001
-0.001
0.003

-0.013
-0.01
-0.005

-0.013
-0.01
-0.005

-0.013
-0.011
-0.006

-0.016
-0.012
-0.009

0.002
0.001
0.001

0.002
0.001
0.001

0.002
0.001
0.001

0.002
0.002
0.001

-0.32
-0.224
-0.934*

-0.314
-0.223
-0.936*

-0.301
-0.218
-0.969*

-0.091
-0.418
-1.134*

0.042
0.03
0.154**

0.042
0.03
0.154**

0.04
0.03
0.159**

0.013
0.063
0.183**

-0.826***
-1.178***
-2.132***

-0.823***
-1.176***
-2.130***

-0.855***
-1.172***
-2.112***

-0.667***
-1.056***
-1.484***

0.119***
0.175***
0.331***

0.118***
0.175***
0.331***

0.123***
0.175***
0.329***

0.098***
0.158***
0.239***

0.072
0.182*
0.215

0.069
0.181*
0.215

0.069
0.180*
0.223

-0.013
0.1
0.084

-0.011
-0.027*
-0.03

-0.01
-0.027*
-0.03

-0.01
-0.027*
-0.031

0.002
-0.016
-0.011
0.041
-0.021
0.079
-0.005
0.005
-0.011

yes
yes

2,656,549

44

yes
yes

2,656,549

yes
yes

2,656,549

yes
yes

1,066,145

Table 11: Interest Rates and Judicial Eciency
The table presents regressions of the average interest rate on judicial ineciency, controlling for rm's characteristics. Data on
interest rates are reported only by 200 banks, though they are largely representative of the population. The analysis refers to
loans between banks and rms based in the same judicial court. The original data is collapsed at the rm-quarter level.
stands for the (natural log of ) duration for property execution proceedings in 2007.

score

ineaw

is the Altman synthetic indicator of

rm riskiness, where 1 corresponds to low risk and 9 to high risk. More details on the variables and their sources are given in
the Data Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the rm-level. Asterisks denote signicance at the 1% (***), 5% (**) and
10% ( *) level, respectively.

inef f law
score = 1
score = 2
score = 3
score = 4
score = 5
score = 6
score = 7
score = 8
score = 9

(1)

(2)

0.409***

0.446***

0.006

0.045

0.207***

0.296***

0.381***

0.535***

0.798***

0.961***

1.174***

1.355***

1.467***

1.679***

1.601***

1.889***

2.098***

2.261***

Log (T otal Assetst−1 )
Leveraget−1
Age

-0.297***
-0.250***
-0.001

Quarter f e

N

45

yes

yes

334,090

284,987

Table 12: Robustness
The table presents regressions of

late payment

as a function of a set of bank characteristics. The model allows the eect of bank

variables to vary with (the natural log of ) duration for property execution proceedings in 2007 (

ineaw ). Late payment (0,1)

is equal to 1 if the rm has a loan repayment delay with the bank in the quarter; 0 if loans granted by the bank to the rm
are performing in the quarter. The sample covers the period 2008q4 - 2013q4. The description of variables and their sources
are given in the Data Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-level. Asterisks denote signicance at the 1%(***),
5%(**), 10%( *) level, respectively. We do six robustness tests reported in Columns (1)-(6). Column (1): term loans only;
column (2): include only the rst quarter in which a loan becomes late (or overdrawn); column (3): control for four dimensions
of loan terms (loan interest rate, share of loans with maturity less than one year, average ratio of collateral in accounts receivable
to loan size, and average ratio of real-estate collateral to loan size); column (4): include only observations in which the bank
and the lender are located in the same court jurisdiction; column (5): include
eects of

badloans

bank × f irm

xed eects; column (6): allow the

to vary by region.

bkshare
bkshare*south
bkshare*ineaw
bkshare*south*ineaw
lntot
lntot *south
lntot*ineaw
lntot*south*ineaw
stable
stable*south
stable*ineaw
stable*south*ineaw
liquidity
liquidity*south
liquidity*ineaw
liquidity*south*ineaw
cap
cap*south
cap*ineaw
cap*south*ineaw
badloans
badloans*south
badloans*ineaw
badloans*south*ineaw
govbshock
govbshock*south
govbshock*ineaw
govbshock*south*ineaw
Average interest rate
Share of short-term loans
Share of loans backed by real collateral
Share of loans backed by acc. reciev.
rm*quarter fe
bank fe
bank*rm fe
N

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.000

-0.003

-0.002

-0.010

-0.007

0.002

0.001

0.003

0.003

0.001

0.000
0.054*
0.002
-0.006

0.014

-0.004

-0.028

0.046

-0.016

-0.002

0.001

0.004

-0.007

0.002

-0.017

-0.001

-0.083

0.096

-0.059

0.003

0.001

0.014*

-0.014

0.009

0.127

0.054

0.149

-0.240

0.087

-0.025

-0.008

-0.023

0.039

-0.013

-0.140

-0.088

-0.539

-0.409

-0.343

0.017

0.012

0.081

0.056

0.056

-0.521*

-0.670***

-1.669***

-3.167**

-1.077***

0.082**

0.102***

0.253***

0.477**

0.163***

0.029**

0.005

0.010

-0.034

0.005

-0.004**

-0.000

-0.001

0.005

-0.001

-0.008
-0.000
0.001
-0.000
-0.076
-0.027
0.013*
0.001
0.146
0.176
-0.021
-0.023
-0.174
-0.196
0.025
0.043
-1.434***
0.724
0.215***
-0.101
0.014
-0.087**
-0.002
0.013*

0.001***
0.003*
0.003
-0.018***

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
no
yes

yes
yes
no

2,404,775

2,622,440

1,861,912

222,888

2,644,991

2,595,610

Test whether the eects of bad loans dier by region
F (2, 537)
P rob > F

0.820
0.442

46

Figure 1: Late payments and other problematic loans in Italy
The gure presents statistics on problematic loans for a sample of around 32,000 industrial rms based in Italy. The
description of variables and their data sources are given in the Data Appendix.

47

Figure 2: Judicial Eciency in Italy: Length of Property Prosecution Proceedings across
Italian Courts (2007, # of days)

48

Figure 3: Marginal impacts of bad loans
The gure plots the marginal eect of bad loans on default likelihood (vertical axis) as a function of the duration for the
property execution proceedings (horizontal axis, number of days)

Figure 4: Marginal impacts of bad loans, by borrower risk type
The gure plots the marginal eect of bad loans on default likelihood (vertical axis) as a function of the duration for the
property execution proceedings (horizontal axis, number of days), for dierent types of borrowers (safe, vulnerable, risky).

49

Figure 5: Marginal impacts of bad loans, safe borrowers
The gure plots the marginal eect of bad loans on default likelihood (vertical axis) as a function of the duration for the
property execution proceedings (horizontal axis, number of days), for safe borrowers.

50

