                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PESO PROBLEMS, BUBBLES, AND
                        RISK IN THE EMPIRICAL ASSESSMENT
                           OF EXCHANGE-RATE BEHAVIOR




                               Maurice Obstfeld




                            Working Paper No. 2203




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  April 1987




This paper is a discussion of "Empirical Assessment of Foreign Currency Risk
Premiums" by Richard Meese, presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
conference on "Financial Risk: Theory, Evidence and Implications," November
14-15, 1986. I am grateful for discussions with Richard Meese, for helpful
comments from the Penn macro lunch group, and for financial support from the
National Science Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. I retain full
responsibility, however, for any errors and all opinions. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2203
                                                  April 1987



              Peso Problems, Bubbles, and Risk in the Empirical
                     Assessment of Exchange-Rate Behavior


                                  ABSTRACT



     One of the most puzzling aspects of the post—1973 floating exchange

rate system has been the apparently inefficient predictive performance

of forward exchange rates. This paper explores some aspects of each of

three leading explanations of forward—rate behavior. The paper first

develops a simple rational—expectations model of the "peso problem" that

generates some key empirical regularities of the foreign exchange

markets seemingly predictable and conditionally heteroskedastic forward

forecast errors, along with possible directional misprediction by the

forward premium. The implications of bubbles for tests of forward—rate

predictive efficiency are discussed next. It is argued that the exist-

ence of bubbles is extremely difficult (if not impossible) to establish

empirically. Even though some types of bubble could distort standard

tests on the relation between spot and forward exchange rates, it seems

unlikely that these bubbles have been an important factor. Finally, the

paper examines foreign—exchange asset pricing under risk aversion and

suggests that a convincing account of forward—rate behavior should also

help explain the results found in testing other asset—pricing theories,

such as the expectations theory of the interest—rate term structure.


                                             Maurice Obstfeld
                                             Department of Economics
                                             University of Pennsylvania
                                             Philadelphia, PA 19104—6297
     One of the most puzzling aspects of the post—1973 floating exchange

rate system has been the apparently inefficient predictive performance

of forward exchange rates. Richard tleese's survey of research on inter-

national asset pricing ably documents both the evidence on forward rate

determination and the attempts of researchers to pin down the empirical

relationship between forward and spot exchange rates.

     Table 1, which reproduces in part results I reported in a 1985

paper, is representative of the empirical record. Shown in the table are

regressions linking the one-month percentage change in the spot dollar

price of a foreign currency to the corresponding one—month nominal

interest rate differential (or forward premium) from the previous month.

(The sample period is February 1975—January 1985.) For the four foreign

currencies tested, the forward premium tended on average to mispredict

the direction in which the dollar exchange rate moved during the sub-

sequent month. Forward premiums have therefore been badly biased predic-

tors of subsequent exchange—rate movements. As Meese notes, a further

indication of the poor forecasting performance of forward rates is the

large body of evidence pointing to the ex ante predictability of forward

forecast error; by past Information.

    Three broad approaches to explaining the preceding facts can be




   The table also shows that forward premiums have virtually no predic-
   tive value with respect to future depreciation. This fact is not
   necessarily evidence of some market failure; it is consistent with a
   world in which exchange rate movements are dominated by rational
   market reactions to unpredictable events. It is noteworthy that the
   early regressions of spot exchange rate levels on lagged forward
   rate levels seemed to indicate a greater predictive value of the
   forward rate than is evident in Table 1. Meese; argument that the
   forward— and spot—rate processes are cointegrated suggests that the
   latter findings are the spurious result of a common stochastic
   trend.
Table 1: One—Month Eurocurrency Interest—Rate Differentials and Subsequent
Dollar Depreciation, February 1975—January 1985


Depreciation rate                  Lagged Eurocurrency                 —2
of dollar against:     Constant    interest differential      D.—W.    R



Yen                      0.113           —2.188               1.97     0.03
                        (0.056)          (0.985)

French Franc            —0.092           —0.483               2.27    —0.01
                        (0.039)          (0.773)

Deutschemark             0.040           —1.778               2.23     0.00
                        (0.071)          (1.573)

Pound Sterling          —0.102           —1.477               1.93     0.02
                        (0.037)          (0.875)



Note: The dependent variable is the percentage change in the dollar price of
the foreign currency, expressed on an annualized basis. The independent
variables are a constant and the difference between the previous months
one—month Eurodollar deposit rate and one—month foreign Eurocurrency deposit
rate. Exchange rate data are end—of—month data from OECD Main Economic
Indicators. End—of—month interest rates come from Morgan Suaranty Trust
Company of New York, World_Financial Markets. Standard errors are given
in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.
                                      —2—


discerned in Meese's review. The first of these approaches holds that

the empirical findings may result from distributional peculiarities such

as   the   Itpeso problem or from other factors that cause nonstationarities

in the data. The second approach posits an important role for specula-

tive bubbles and/or market irrationality in exchange—rate determination.

The third approach observes that private risk aversion can imply time—

varying discrepancies between forward premiums and expected future spot

depreciation. Risk aversion thus offers another potential explanation of

measured deviations from uncovered interest parity.

      Economists have not reached a consensus interpretation of the data.

Yet, the answer may have important implications for policymakers. A

determination that the foreign—exchange market is driven by irrational

trading, for example, would stengthen both the case for fixed exchange

rates and the case for direct controls on international capital move-

ments.

      Below I explore some aspects of each of the three leading explana-

tions of forward—rate behavior. Section I develops a simple rational—

expectations model of the peso problem that generates some key empirical

regularities of the foreign exchange market: seemingly predictable and

conditionally heteroskedastic forward forecast errors, along with pos-

sible directional misprediction by the forward premium. Section II

discusses the implications of bubbles for tests of forward—rate predic-

tive efficiency. Section III expands on Meeses discussion of foreign—

exchange asset pricing under risk aversion. I suggest there that a

convincing account of forward—rate behavior should also help explain the

results found in testing other asset—pricing theories, such as the

expectations theory of the interest—rate term structure.
                                      —3—


I. Peso Problems



        A peso problem arises when market forecasts reflect the possibility

of major events that occur relatively infrequently in the data set

available to the econometrician. Even though market expectations may be

entirely reasonable cx ante, market forecasts appear biased and forecast

errors appear serially correlated in the cx post sample. To the best of

my knowledge, the effects of the peso problem on efficiency tests were

first noticed by Kennth Rogoff in connection with the behavior of

Mexican peso futures prior to the August 1976 devaluation of that cur-

rency. (An elegant formal model of the episode has been developed by

os(Sal Lizondo.) Stephen Salant and Dale Henderson presented the

first theoretical analysis of a peso—type problem in studying the be-

havior of gold prices under the threat of official gold—market interven-

tion.

        The peso problem is essentially one of small—sample inference. An

announcement by the United States Treasury Secretary that the dollar is

°too strong may lead the market to repeatedly underestimate the

dollar's future strength if monetary policies are not promptly adjusted

to push the dollar down. Market expectations will be reassessed if it

becomes clear that official pronouncements are not being backed by

concrete policy shifts. But an econometrician looking at a limited data

set would erroneously interpret hypothesis tests based on asymptotic

distribution theory as rejections of market inefficiency. Reliable

inference would require a data set covering many similar episodes,

including some in which official pronouncements did lead to the implied

policy actions.

        An example of a floating—rate peso problem shows how some aspects
                                               —4—


of the seemingly anomalous behavior of exchange rates can be modelled

without appeal to irrationality or risk aversion. Such a model requires

the description of a general—equilibrium framework within which exchange

rates are determined. To make my main points as simply as possible, I

adopt the monetary approach to exchange—rate determination, as described

by Michael Mussa. Karen Lewis has used this model to construct a com-

plementary example in which a peso problem arises because agents are

uncertain about the monetary regime currently in effect.

       The monetary approach is based on an exchange rate equation of the

form


(1) s(t)         E(s(t+1) —       s(t)3}   +



where eCt) is the natural logarithm of S(t), the domestic—currency price

of foreign exchange,         is a constant that measures the spot rate's

response to expected future depreciation, Et(.) is a rational expecta-

tion conditional on time—t information, m is a coefficient vector, and

4(t) is a vector of exogenous variables. The equation is derived from an

uncovered interest—rate parity condition together with a theory of

nominal interest rates and price levels in which the key variables are

s(t) and 4(t). The vector 4(t) could in principle include an

exogenously—varying risk premium, but such an exogeneity assumption is

implausible. The model embodied in (1) is therefore best viewed as

describing a hypothetical world economy with risk—neutral investors.

       The Hbubble_freeh solution to (I) j



(2)     s(t) =   tl/(1+))    E
                            i=o


This   solution is found by iterating (1) forward and imposing a
                                               -5.-




stationarity condition that is described in detail in the next section.

For my example, it is sufficient to assume that 4(t) consists of a

single variable (the log of the money supply) and that m                             1.


         To model a peso problem, assume that on any date t, the log money

supply is the sum of two random variables. The first is a random—walk

process, m(t) ,          the   sum of m(t—1) and a completely unpredictable mean—

zero disturbance, (t). The second random variable contributing to the

money—supply process is itself the product of two random variables,

denoted d(t) and (t). d(t) has the distribution:



                   (1 (with probability it)
     d(t)      =                                            conditional    on d(t—1)      0;
                        0 (with probability 1 —       ii)


     d(t)      =    1    (with probability 1) conditional on d(t—1)                  1.




Conditional on d(t—1) = 0, (t) is generated by the first—order

autoregressive process p(t) = pM(t—l) + Ct), where 0                            p   < I and

Et1CE(t)) = 0; but p(t+j) (j > 0) is constant at p(t) conditional on
d(t) =     1. 4(t) therefore        follows the process


(3) 4(t) =         m(t) + d(t)p(t) = m(t—1)       +    (t)     +   d(t)fi(t).

         The   interpretation      of equation (3) is this. One component of the

money supply process is a random walk, which in itself would lead to no

expected future change in money. It is the second component, the product

d(t)p(t), which causes a peso problem. Each period, there is a probabil-

ity it    that     the money supply will jump permanently by the amount p(t),

given that no such jump has yet taken place. The expected value of this

possible jump is pp(t—I) in the previous period. The z(t) process is
                                         -6-


 assumed to damp out monotonically in mean to capture the intuitive

 notion that the market expects to put progressively less weight on the

significance of a possible policy change the longer the interval over

which the change has not occurred.2

      The simple exchange—rate model set out above can now be used to

analyze the difficulties associated with peso problems. For this pur-

pose, it is assumed that d(t)       0 for all observations t available to

the econometrician. In other words1 even though the market viewed a

major policy switch as a possibility, the available data are conditioned

on the non—occurrence of that event. The peso problem modelled here has

three major implications:

      1. pparent conditional bias in market exchange—rate forecasts,

Assume for simplicity that the econometrician can directly observe the

markets expectation, Ets(t+l), of next periods exchange rate, but not

the true, cx ante money—supply process itself. In forecasting the ex-

change rate, the market took into account the possibility that d might

equal I on some future date, even though the event d         1 turned out not

to occur cx post. The possibility that d might equal 1 is reflected in

the sequence of expected future money supplies, Et$Ct+i), i ) 0.

       That sequence is computed as follows. If d(t) = 0, the event d

will have dccurred by date t+i with probability (1 —       (l—ii)]   i + w(l—

i) + u(I—ir)2 + ...   + t(I —   I)11.   On date t, the expected value of

f(t+i) is therefore the sum of m(t) and ( + ir(1—w)p + it(1—ir)p)2 +

+ 1r[(1_w)p)11}pp(t), where the latter term is just the expected date—

(t+i) value of the second component of the money—supply process. Thus,

conditional on d(t)     0,



  2
      Alternatively, one could assume a time—varying IT to capture this
      type of effect.
                                                     —7—


                              1 —     E(i—iiip)1
       E$(t+i)
                    mR) +                           — irpp(t)
                                 I — (I—nip
for   all i > 0.

       Combined with equation (2) (for the case u                       1), the above formula

implies



(5)    s(t)      m(t) +
                                     —
                                                        pit).
                          (1 +           (1—ir)p)

A similar calculation shows that the rational one—period—ahead exchange—

rate forecast is



                                           1T(1 +
(6)    Et(s(t+1)) = m(t>         +                              pit).
                                     U +        —
                                                     (1—ir)p]


Together, (5) and (6) yield a date—(t+1) forecast error of


                                                    1rpE(t+l) — (p +      (1—p)p)ip(t)
(7) s(t+1) —
                 Et(s(t+1))
                                 =   (t+1)      +
                                                           (1   +   —
                                                                        (1—ir))p3


given that d(t+1) = 0.

      Note that the forecast error conditional on d(t+1)                            0 depends on

the lagged variable pit). If pit) > 0 over some interval, for example,

the market appears systematically to overestimate the home currencys

future depreciation. This pattern of ex post forecast errors does not

imply a conditionally biased forecast: the market also took into account

the likelihood of the event d(t+1)                    1, which would have occasioned a

sharp increase in the money supply.

      More formally, if d(t+l)                 I had occurred, the equilibrium exchange

rate, sCt+1)       m(t+1) +      p(t+l)    ,   would have resulted in a forecast error
                                           -B-




                                                              + (1—p)p](1—iiip(t)
 (B> s(t+1) — Et(s(t+l)]                  t(t+1)       +                              —.
                                                             (1   +   —
                                                                          (l—1T)p]

The conditional expectation of the forecast error with respect to time—t

information only is


     nECerror(t+1)Jd(t+l) = 13        +
                                          (1—1r)Etterror(t+lHd(t+1)              03


                       (j +   ))t(t+1)
     E{ø(t+1) +                                  = 0.
                              —
                      £1 *        (l—i!)p)

Expectations are therefore conditionally unbiased.

     An econometricia,, viewing a sample conditioned on d(t)                    0 would

fail to reach this last conclusion using standard methods of inference.

If the forecast error (7) is regressed on the lagged depreciation

forecast, for example, a negative regression coefficient will be found

with high probability (as implied by results in the next paragraph). But

such a finding is not evidence of an inefficient market in the present

context. The resulting regression equation provides an estimate of

Et(error(t+1)Id(t*1)=0), which is generally nonzero. Since

Etterror(t*1)]    0, however, forecast errors are indeed uncorrelated

with past information given the true distribution of the money supply

(and hence of forecast errors).

     2. Exchangrate misprediction. This particular model implies also

that rational market forecasts will on average mispredict the exchange

rate's direction of change as long as d =          1       does not occur. By (5) and

(6), the market forecast of currency depreciation, given that d(t) = 0,

is
                                                —9—


                                          lip

     EtEs(t+1)]
                   —    s(t)                            —
                                (j +      —
                                                (l—ii)p)

If p(t) > 0, for example, the market expects the currency to depreciate,

and the home interest rate consequently exceeds the foreign rate under

uncovered interest parity. The actual change in the exchange rate,

however, is


                                        lTpE(t+1) —         (1—p)irpp(t)
     s(t+1) —    ;(t)   =   (t+1)   +
                                                U   +   —
                                                             (1—li)p]

If             t(t+1) =     0, the currency ppreciates (still assuming p(t) >
0) as the market revises downward by the factor 1—p the expected future

path of the money supply's second component. In a sample where d(t)                        0

for all t, realized and expected depreciation will therefore be nega-

tively correlated, even though interest parity holds and expectations

are rational. (Table 1 showed that recent data are characterized by a

negative correlation between forward premiums and subsequent deprecia-

tion rates.)

     3. Conditional heteroskedasticity of forecast                      errors. Peso problems
can result in time—dependence in the conditional covariances of forecast

errors. Robert Cumby and I first presented evidence of such conditional

heteroskedasticity in forward—rate forecast errors, and our finding has

been confirmed by Robert Hodrick and Sanjay Srivastava, Alberto Giavan—

nini and Philippe Jorion, and many others. As Meese notes, conditional

heteroskedasticity may pose problems for statistical inference. In a

world of risk—averse investors, the phenomenon also has a crucial im-

plication about the nature of foreign—exchange risk premiums, as

detailed below in section III,

     Assume that the random variables (t) and c Ct) themselves have
                                      —10-


 constant conditional variances, so that Et((t+1)2) r and Etc(t+1)2]
=
    r.   In spite of these assumptions, the conditional variance of the

exchange—rate forecast error depends on lagged information in the

preceding model. If d =   1   has occurred, then the exchange—rate forecast
                                             2        2
error is just e(t). Thus, Et(error(t+l) 3            r, where the conditioning
set contains d(t). If d       1 has not occurred, however, the conditional

variance of the forecast error is different. Assume p            0 for

simplicity. Under that assumption, the population conditional variance

of the forecast error, tE error(t+1)23, is n(r2 + 2 +                    + (1—i) Cr2)
     2             2
    r + T(2r0 + re), where the conditioning set again contains d(t).

       An econometrician may well find evidence of conditional heteros—

kedasticity in a sample conditioned on d(t) = 0. For example, regres-

sions of the squared forecast error (7) on variables including the

squared forward premium, 2p2p(t)2/C1 +           —
                                                     (1—ir)p32, are likely to be
significant. Cumby and I used this type of regression specification to

test for conditional heteroskedasticity.

      Other statistical difficulties may distort standard efficiency

tests even when peso problems are absent. One of these, discussed exten-

sively by fleese, is the unit—root problem, which invalidates much of the

asymptotic distribution theory on which many of the tests in the litera-

ture depend. Another instance of nonstatianarity, also mentioned by

Pleese, is probably very important in practice. ecause the processes

generating exchange—market data are subject to structural change, there

is no guarantee that the unconditional covariances of the relevant

economic variables remain constant through time. The possibility of such

structural changes has implications for econometric attempts to identify

another anomalous exchange—rate phenomenon, the speculative bubble.
                                             —1 1—•




II. Speculative Bubbles



        Speculative bubbles can be modelled within the monetary model of

the previous section. Equation (2), which gives the equilibrium exchange

rate just analyzed, is only one possible solution to the stochastic

difference equation (1). A general solution takes the form



(9)      s(t) =   E1/(1+7)]    E t7/(i+7)31Et(u'$(t+i)) +
                              i=O


where (x(t)) is any stochastic process with the martingale property,


        Et(x(t+1)] =   x(t).

Solution (2) corresponds to the choice x(t) = 0, for all t, but because

x(t) is multiplied in (9) by the exploding term ((j\)/73t, choice of a

nonzero x—process will impart explosive behavior to the exchange rate.

Such explosive paths capture the idea of speculative bubbles driven by

self—fulfilling anticipations.

        It is sometimes asserted that bubbles give rise to serially—

correlated market forecast errors or to biased forecasts, but this is

not the case when the bubbles path is described by an equation like

(9). Define vt+1(t+l)                                               and r)(t+l) =
                                   Et+iCu'$(t+i)) —   Erm'$(t+i))
x(t+1)    —
              EEx(t+1)]       x(t+1). When expectations are rational and the

model (9) is used to forecast future exchange rates, the one—step ahead

forecast error is



      s(t+i) -                 =                                         +
                 Et(s(t+1))


This error is, however, uncorrelated with time—t information (including
                                                  —12—


 lagged forecast errors), and the market forecast is therefore condition-

 ally unbiased.

      While market forecasts remain efficient, the presence of bubbles

 will generally Invalidate the usual efficiency tests. Consider, for

example, a test for bias in exchange—rate forecasts. Assume, for

simplicity, that u'$(t) itself follows a martingale process, so         that   its

conditional expectation equals its own lagged value. Then


(10) sCt+1) —
                  Et(s(t+1))
                                  =   v(t+l)         +



A significance test for the sample mean



                   T
   MCT) =   (lIT) £ Cs(t+1)       —
                                      Et[s(t+1)3)
                  t=1



is a test for unconditional bias in exchange—rate forecasts. But the

variance of MCI) can be calculated as



     VartM(T)]         (lIT2)             +
                                      V       7



when v and 1 are stationary and uncorrelated. This variance does not go

to zero as 1 -e .       It   follows that the statistic M(T) will not neces-

sarily give a consistent estimate of the mean forecast error in the

presence of a bubble. Even though agents are making optimal forecasts,

the ususal tests might give strong indications of inefficiency.

      As Meese notes, however, bubbles are an unlikely explanation of

the puzzle of forward exchange rate behavior. Under the type of bubble

described by (9), the variance of one—step—ahead forecast errors ex-

plodes over time at rate ((j))/]2, as (10) shows. Taking the logarithm

of the forward rate as an approximation to the expected logarithm of the
                                      —13—


future spot rate gives a rough empirical measure of this forecast error

under risk neutrality. The stylized facts recounted by Meese imply that

the variance of forward forecast errors does not explode over time. Nor

is such behavior observed over subperiods. In particular, a bubble as in

(9) would be inconsistent with the approximate random walk followed by

spot and forward rates.3

     There are two other reasons for dismissing divergent speculative

bubbles as a characterization of exchange—rate behavior. First, there is

a strong theoretical case for ruling them out (as discussed in my paper

with Rogoff). Second, as first pointed out by Robert Flood and Peter

Garber, bubbles are observationally equivalent to possible changes in

the 4(t) process that the public may expect with good reason.

     The observational equivalence of bubbles and anticipated future

changes is illustrated by an example related to the one analyzed in the

previous section.4 Suppose again that m is a scalar equal to I and that

4(t) is the money supply. Until a known date T in the future, 4(t) is

expected to equal the random variable m(t) with probability 1, where

m(t) = m(t—1) + 0(t), as before. There is a possibility, however, that

the 4(t) process will change permanently on date T. Specifically, the

public knows that the money supply for Y        I   will be given by the

random variable $(t') =   m(t')   + pCI), where p(t) = Cl —   d(t)](p(t—1)   +

c(t)] (for t   T) and d(t) and E(t) are as defined earlier. In words,



   There are some models in which the bubble term involves the power of
   a root that is smaller than unity In absolute value. These conver-
   gent bubbles are difficult to rule out by inspecting the data, but
   on the other hand they do not necessarily destroy the validity of
   the standard efficiency tests. It is therefore unlikely that conver-
   gent bubbles are responsible for the apparent failure of risk—
   neutral foreign exchange pricing.

   A similar example illustrating this equivalence is give by James
   Hamilton.
                                              —14—


 the public expects a sharp jump in the money supply at time T if the

 event d(t) =   1   does not occur in the interim. The expected size of the

 possible jump, p(t), evolve; as a random walk.

      Consider next the Nbubble_freeht exchange—rate solution (2), which

 is now equal to



      s(t)     m(t) +                            E (7/(1+)31p(t).
                                                i=T-t


 Rewrite this equation as


      s(t) =   m(t)   +



 (where K = ((1_)/(1)]T);             since Etp(t+l/(1_1)t4l] =

 (l_lr)p(t)/(l_w)t+l      =   p(t)/(1_lr)t   (conditional on d(t) =   0),   the result

 is a special case of (9), corresponding to                             m(t) for all
                                                        Et('$(t+i))
I. The equation therefore show; that an econometrician who is unaware

that the public expected a possible change in the money—supply process

will be unable to distinguish the exchange rate'; bubble—free path from

that of a crashing' bubble such as the one analyzed by Olivier

Blanchard. The strong theoretical case against divergent bubbles sug-

gests that econometric result; purporting to show their existence are

more likely to be the result of misspecifying agents' information sets.

     It is noteworthy that the example just given and (by implication)

some bubbles may lead to peso problems. This coincidence does not imply

that peso problems and bubbles are the same. The model of the last

section, for example, ;hows that peso problems need not give rise to

explosive exchange—rate behavior.

     The bubble model embodied in equation (9) assumes rational one—

step—ahead forecasting by market participants, but it imposes no ter—
                                  —15—


minal convergence condition to tie the exchange rate to economic fun-

damentals. As Meese notes, some researchers have suggested that market

forecasts are not rational, and that exchange rates may be prone to

Iloverreactionil or excessive' volatility. Under risk neutrality, the

recently—developed volatility tests applied to stock and bond markets

offer a "portmanteau" methodology that potentially detects bubbles as

well as other deviations from efficient asset pricing based on fundamen-

tals. How one should interpret these tests in practice is currently a

matter of some controversy. (Joe Mattey and Meese provide a survey of

the econometric issues in the debate, together with the results of Monte

Carlo experiments.) In paticular, volatility tests, like tests for

bubbles, require strong identifying assumptions about market expecta—

U on;.

     Even 14 one accepts the methodology of volatility testing in prin-

ciple, it is not clear how it can be applied to the foreign exchange

market. Economists have developed widely accepted theories of both stock

pricing and the term structure of interest rates under risk neutrality

and rational expectations; it is these theories upon which the

volatility tests build, No correspondingly clear—cut theory of risk—

neutral nominal or real exchange—rate determination exists. A consensus

theory of exchange rates would require agreement on the determinants of

relative demands for fiat monies, a; well as on the dividing line be-

tween money and near—money. Such a theory would also require a consensus

model of demand and supply in national output markets.



III. Risk



     Risk aversion on the part of market participants provides a third
                                          —16-


 potential explanation of apparent deviations from uncovered interest

 parity. Although much of the empirical literature on the risk premium

reports negative results, more recent research lends limited support to

the empirical relevance of risk—averse asset pricing.

         To see how risk aversion gives rise to departures from interest

parity, consider the relation between the nominal interest rates on one—

period bonds denominated in home and foreign currency. An international

investor following an optimal consumption/investment plan must be indif-

ferent among the three alternatives of using an additional domestic—

currency unit to augment his domestic—currency assets, allocating the

money to foreign—currency assets, or spending the money on consumption

goods today. Indifference occurs when each course of action yields the

same expected marginal return. Let the investors period utility func-

tion be u(C(t)3, let p < I denote the subjective time—preference factor,

let R (Re) denote the domestic (foreign) one—period nominal interest

rate, and let P (Pc) be the local money price of the typical home (for-

eign) consumption bundle. For a domestic investor, the optimality condi-

tion described above is


   u'CC(t>l                  u'C(t+1)3                           u'(C(t+l)]S(t+l)
                                           }
     Nt)                                         P(1+R*(t))Et(
                                 P(t+1)                             P(t+1)S(t)


where S(t), as before, is the level (rather than the log) of the ex-

change rate. Define Q(t+1) to be the cx post marginal rate of substitu-

tion between domestic currency units available on dates t and t+l; thus,

QCt+1) =    {pu'(C(t+l))/P(t+l)}+(u'[C(t)/p(t)}.       The equation above can be

rewritten in terms of this definition as


(11) 1
            C1+R(t)]EtLQ(t+1)3     U+R*(t)]Et(Q(t+1)S(t+1)/S(t],
                                            —17—


which implies


(12) (i+R(t))/[1+R*(t) 3 =
                                    EtEQ(t+1)S(t+1)/s(t) )/EtEQ(t+1)   3.


Because the one—period forward exchange rate F(t) is equated by covered

interest parity to S(t)E1+R(t))/U+R*(t), equations (11) and (12) above

lead to Meeses equation (2) for the forward rate.

        While (11) and (12) were derived by considering the alternatives

available to a typical domestic investor, consideration of a foreign

investor would lead to the same expressions. As noted earlier,

EtEQ(t+1)] is an expected marginal rate of substitution between present

and future home—currency units. Et[Q(t+1)S(t+1)/S(t)3 can likewise be

interpreted as an expected marginal rate of substitution between present

and future units of the foreign currency. In the equilibrium of an

internationally integrated asset market, all investors should have the

same expected intertemporal substitution rate for each currency they

trade. Both the numerator and the denominator on the right—hand side of

(12) are therefore independent, in equilibrium, of the particular inves-

tor considered, provided all investors have access to the same bond

markets.5

        The   implications   of (12) for uncovered interest parity are under-

stood most easily if that equation is written in the form


         1+Rt+1)           S(t+1)
(13)                                    CovtQ(t+1),S(t+1JJs(t)]
         1+R*(t+1)
                      Et     6(t)
                                              EtQt+1))

Equation (13) shows the deviation from uncovered interest parity that



       In my 1987 paper I test the international equality of intertemporal
       marginal substitution rates between the U.S. and Germany and between
       the U.S. and Japan. For post—1972 data, the tests I conduct fail to
       reject those equalities.
                                         -18—


 arises in the present model the right—hand side of the equation is

 usually referred to as the (one—period) foreign exchange risk premium on

 domestic currency. The risk premium is positive if the home currencys

 depreciation against foreign currency is unexpectedly high at times when

 the increase in the marginal utility from spending a domestic currency

unit is also unexpectedly high. In other words, the home currency is

riskier if It tends to lose foreign—exchange value in states of the

world where it is most needed. A positive risk premium implies that the

domestic—foreign interest ratio exceeds the expected depreciation of

home currency, while a negative risk premium implies the opposite.

   The right—hand side of equation (13) equals the one—period forward

premium, F(t)/S(t), less expected depreciation. Thus, the equation also

reveals that the forward—premium forecast error, tS(t+1) —         F(t)]IS(t),
consists of a true, random forecast error less a risk premium that

generally varies over time. Since the risk premium is a function of

time—t information, forward—premium forecast errors are also predictable

on the basis of that information. Many researchers therefore ascribe the

apparent partial predictability of forward—premium errors to time—

varying risk premiums. This explanation is sensible only if risk

premiums are sufficiently variable that their influence is not dominated

by that of the pure expectational errors.

     If the relevant economic variables are       jointly   lognormally dis-

tributed (because their logs are generated by a linear Gaussian

process), then (12) becomes


(14) r(t) —    r*(t)   —
                           EtEs(t+l)]    VartAs(t+1)3/2 +   Cov(q(t+1),As(t+1)),
where r(t) =   logt1+R(t),     r*(t)    logCl+R*(t)3, and qit)    log(Q(t)).

Lars Peter Hansen and Hodrick (1983) first derived this widely—tested
                                   —19—


logarithmic model within a utility—maximizing framework. A major im-

plication of this model is that the conditional variance and covariance

on the right—hand side of (14) are both constant (given stationarity)

implying a constant risk premium. Constancy follows from the fact that

the innovations in q(t+1) and s(t+1), being normal, are independent of

time—t variables, not just uncorrelated with them. Since the risk

premium must vary over time to explain the predictability of forward

forecast errors by past information, the logarithmic model is clearly

inconsistent with the data. Another of the models implications, the

conditional homoskedasticity of forward—rate forecast errors, also

contradicts the facts. Conditional heteroskedasticity may be casued by

peso problems, as noted above, but there are obviously other possible

causes.

      As Meese documents, alternative models of the risk premium also

seem to do poorly when confronted with the data. But I think it is too

early to conclude, as does Jeffrey Frankel, that risk—averse behavior

can explain only a negligible fraction of the observed serial correla-

tion in forward forecast errors. In recent work, Cumby (1986a) presents

direct estimates of foreign exchange risk premiums that provide some

support for the risk—averse asset—pricing model described by equation

(13).6 My own preliminary estimates (1987) of a logarithmic,

consumption—based model of real interest—rate differentials are also

encouraging. The problems discussed in section I above are almost cer-

tainly important, however, and one goal of research should be to take

these data problems explicitly into account. The role of risk aversion




 6
     Cumbys (1986b) results on stock—market prices in Germany, Japan,
     the United Kingdom, and the United States appear less supportive of
     the model.
                                           —20—


cannot be assessed adequately until more refined procedures for purging

the data have been developed.

          Another promising direction for    future    research is   to    integrate

studies of foreign exchange pricing with studies of price determination

in other asset markets. The (rational) expectations model of the term

structure, like uncovered interest—rate parity, has been widely tested

and rejected. As documented by Robert SMiler, John Campbell, and Kermit

Schoenholtz, the interest—rate forecasts Implicit in the term structure,

like forward foreign exchange premiums, often mispredict the direction

of future rate movements in post—1959 data. It is more than an appeal to

Occam's razor to suggest that a single theory should explain these

similar phenomena. In view of the increasingly tight links between

onshore and offshore asset markets, it is difficult to conceive of a

convincing account of the foreign—exchange risk premium that does not

simultaneously throw light on the characteristics of term premiums and

stock—market risk premiums,

          Consider, for example, the tight connection between term premiums

and foreign—exchange premiums implied by covered interest parity. Let
    (i)                                                        Ci)         (i)
F         denote the i—period forward exchange rate and R            (R*         ) the i—

period      interest rate on a domestic (foreign) bond. Covered interest

parity ensures that for any i,


          F(1) Ct)/S(t) =   t1+R (t) ]i/E1+R*(i) Ct)
To be concrete, apply the above expression to compute the ratio of the

two—period forward premium to the one—period forward premium. The result

is



           F2(t)/S(t)           t1÷R(2)(t))2/(l+RW(t))
(15) --—-                                         -—-—--—.
                                       —21—


      Let 7 (7*) denote the domestic (foreign) one—period term premium

and let       (i =   1,2)   denote the i—period foreign—exchange risk

premium. Reasoning similar to that followed above shows that


     ,(t)
             Covt{Q(t+l)Q(t+2,C1+R (t+1)])/Et(Q(t+1)Q(t+2)].

The foreign term premium ,*(t) depends in the same way on the covariance

between the foreign one—period interest rate and the cx post marginal

rate of substitution between foreign currency units delivered on dates t

and t+2. Equation (15), expressed in terms of these risk premiums, can

be shown to be


      EtS(t+2)/S(t)] + 82(t)             E(l÷R1(t+1)) + 7(t)

      EttSt+1)/S(t)) +eU)(t)            Ett1+R*(t+1)] + T*(t)


Expressions such as this one imply restrictions on the joint behavior of

foreign—exchange risk premiums and bond—market term premiums.

     Intriguing results have come out of research that examines several

asset markets at the same time. Richard Clarida and Campbell, for ex-

ample, find that variables with explanatory power for term premiums also

help predict returns to forward foreign exchange speculation. Giovannini

and Jorion report similarities in the conditional distributions of

foreign—exchange and U.S. stock—market risk premiums. In time, further

investigation into findings such as these may help explain the puzzling

behavior of forward exchange rates.
                                      —22-


Ref erences



Blanchard, Olivier J. "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes, and Rational
     Expectations," Economics Letters 3 (1979), pp. 387—389.

Campbell, John V., and Richard H. Clarida. "The Term Structure of Euro—
     market Interest Rates: An Empirical Investigation," Journal of
     Monetary Economics 19 (January 1987), pp. 25—44.

Cumby, Robert E. "Is it Risk? Interpreting Deviations from Interest
     Parity." Working Paper, Graduate School of Business Administration,
     New York University, 1986a.

Cumby, Robert E. "Consumption Risk and International Asset Returns: Some
     Empirical Evidence." Working Paper, Graduate School of Business
     Administration, New York University, 19B6b.

Cumby, Robert E., and Maurice Obetfeld. "International Interest Rate and
     Price Level Linkages under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of Recent
     Evidence," in 3.F.O. Bilson and R.C. Marston, eds., Exchange Rate
     Theory and Practice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Flood, Robert P., and Peter M. Barber. "Market Fundamentals versus Price—
     Level Bubbles: The First Tests," Journal of Political Economy 88
     (August 1980) ,   pp. 745—770.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. "The Implications of Mean—Variance Optimization
     for Four Questions in International Macroeconomics," Journal of
     International Money and Finance 5 (March 1986), pp. 853—S75.

Biovannini, Alberto, and Philippe Jorion. "Interest Rates and Risk
     Premia in the Stock Market and in the Foreign Exchange Market,"
     Journal of International Money and Finance 6 (March 1987),
     pp. 107—123,

Hamilton, James D. "On Testing for Self—Fulfilling Speculative Price
     Bubbles," International Economic Review 27 (October 1986), pp.
     545—552.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Robert J. Hodrick. "Risk Averse Speculation in
     the Forward Foreign Exchange Market: An Econometric Analysis of
     Linear Models," in J.A. Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates and_Inter-
     national_Macroeconomics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
     1983.

Hodrick, Robert J., and Sanjay Srivastava. "An Investigation of Risk
     and Return in Forward Foreign Exchange," Journal of International
     Money and Finance 3 (April 1984), pp. 5—29.

Lewis, Karen K. "The Persistence of the 'Peso Problem' when Policy is
     Noisy." Working Paper, Graduate School of Business Administration,
     New York University, 1986.

Lizondo, Jose       "Foreign Exchange Futures Prices under Fixed Exchange
     Rates," Journal of International Economics 14 (February 1983), pp
                                  —23-


     69—84.

Mattey, Joe, and Richard Meese. "Empirical Assessment of Present Value
     Relations," Econometric Reviews ? C????? 1987), pp. ?—??.

Meese, Richard. "Empirical Assessment of Foreign Currency Risk
     Premiums," this volume.

Mussa, Michael. "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments, and
     Monetary and Fiscal Policy under a Regime of Controlled Floating,"
     Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78 (May 1976), pp. 229—248.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "Floating Exchange Rates: Experience and Prospects,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 15 (2:1985), Pp. 369—450.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "How Integrated are World Capital Markets? Some New
     Tests" in G.A. Calvo et. al., eds., Debt, Stabilization, and
     Development: Essays in Memory of Carlos Diaz Alejandro. London:
     Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. "Ruling Out Divergent Speculative
     Bubbles," Journal of Monetary Economics 17 (May 1986), pp. 349—62,

Rogoff, Kenneth. "Essays on Expectations and Exchange Rate Volatility,"
     doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1979.

Salant, Stephen W., and Dale W. Henderson. "Market Anticipations of
     Government Policies and the Price of Gold," Journal of Political
     Econoy 86 (August 1978), pp. 627—648.

Shiller, Robert 3,; John V. Campbell; and Kermit L. Schoenholtz. "Forward
     Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest
     Rates," Brookijs Papers on Economic Activity 13 (1: 19B3) , pp. 173—
     217.
