                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SUBSIDIES AND STRUCTURE:
THE LASTING IMPACT OF THE HILL-BURTON PROGRAM ON THE HOSPITAL INDUSTRY

                                          Andrea Park Chung
                                            Martin Gaynor
                                         Seth Richards-Shubik

                                         Working Paper 22037
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22037


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2016




 We are grateful to Amy Finkelstein for generously providing us with the 1948-1975 AHA data, and
 Heidi Williams for generously providing us with the Hill-Burton project register data. We wish to
 thank Arie Beresteanu, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Heidi Williams, and participants at the ASSA/Health
 Economics Research Organization meeting, the NBER Health Economics program meeting, the UIC
 Institute of Government and Public Affairs seminar series, the Annual Health Economics Conference,
 and the Lehigh University Economics Department seminar series for their helpful comments and suggestions.
 None of the authors received financial support for the research nor do any of the authors have any
 material and relevant financial relationships. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein
 are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2016 by Andrea Park Chung, Martin Gaynor, and Seth Richards-Shubik. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Subsidies and Structure: The Lasting Impact of the Hill-Burton Program on the Hospital Industry
Andrea Park Chung, Martin Gaynor, and Seth Richards-Shubik
NBER Working Paper No. 22037
February 2016
JEL No. H25,H32,H54,I11,I18

                                                ABSTRACT

The hospital industry is one of the most important industries in the U.S., and industry structure can
have profound effects on the functioning of markets. Using county-level panel data, we study the effect
of public subsidies from the Hospital Survey and Construction Act of 1946, known as the Hill-Burton
program, on hospital capacity, organization of the hospital industry, and utilization. We find that the
program generated substantial increases in capacity and these changes were highly persistent, lasting
well beyond twenty years. However the increases in capacity at non-profit and public hospitals were
partially offset by reductions in capacity at for-profit hospitals. Nonetheless, we estimate that the Hill-Burton
program accounted for a net increase of over 70,000 beds nationwide, which is roughly 17 percent
of the total growth in hospital beds in the U.S. from 1948 to 1975. We also show that differences across
counties in the number of hospital beds per capita were greatly reduced over this period. Differences
between high and low income counties, rural and urban counties, and the South and the rest of the
country fell substantially. We conclude that the program largely achieved its goals, and had substantial
and long lasting effects on the hospital industry in the U.S..


Andrea Park Chung                                       Seth Richards-Shubik
Carnegie Mellon University                              Department of Economics
1606 Cypress Trl.                                       College of Business and Economics
Middleton, WI 53562                                     Lehigh University
aspark@andrew.cmu.edu                                   Rausch Business Center, Room 465
                                                        621 Taylor St
Martin Gaynor                                           Bethlehem, PA 18015
Heinz College                                           and NBER
Carnegie Mellon University                              sethrs@lehigh.edu
4800 Forbes Avenue, Room 3008
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
mgaynor@cmu.edu
1       Introduction

Health care is a large part of the U.S. economy ($2.9 trillion, 17.4% of GDP in 2013), and
the hospital industry is a large part of this sector (31% of health care spending and 5.6%
of GDP) (Hartman et al., 2015). The functioning of the hospital industry is critical to the
overall performance of health care. While hospital pricing, output, quality, and technology
adoption have been the subject of a great deal of study, there has been relatively little
attention focused on the determinants of the structure of this industry. Industry structure
obviously plays a critical role on the supply side, but also affects demand. Location affects
travel time, capacity affects waiting time, market structure affects strategic interactions
among providers, and these then feed back into equilibrium price and quality determination.
Yet in spite of the importance of industry structure, relatively little attention has been paid
to this topic.1

   The structure of the hospital industry has changed substantially over time, in terms of
the total number of hospitals, their capacity, and ownership composition. Beginning in the
post-WWII era, the industry grew substantially, from 4,375 non-federal short-term general
hospitals in 1948 to 5,875 in 1975.2 Most of the growth over this period came from non-profit
and public hospitals, with a decline in the number of for-profit hospitals. Over this same
period the hospital industry was the target of a large federal government program designed
to affect industry structure: the Hill-Burton program. This program provided substantial
subsidies for construction to non-profit and public hospitals, but not to for-profits. A logical
question that emerges is what the impact of this program was on the hospital industry in
terms of size, location, and ownership composition. A government program directed toward
capital investment could have profound, long lasting impacts on an industry.

    An obvious second question concerns crowd-out. Economists have extensively debated
the issue of public-private crowd-out, which was a central concern in the reaction against
Keynesian economic theory and the use of expansionary fiscal policy. Drawing on this ini-
tial work that considered fiscal policy in general terms, various streams of literature have
developed evaluating crowd-out in specific contexts such as health insurance (e.g., Cutler
and Gruber, 1996), charitable giving (e.g., Gruber and Hungerman, 2007), and education
(e.g., Cellini, 2009). Governments at all levels expend considerable resources in producing a
variety of goods and services that are also available from the private sector. Public provision
or subsidization almost certainly expands “access” and the use of services such as health care
and health insurance, education, arts and culture, and social services. However any increases
in public provision may be offset by reductions in private provision of these services. This
diminishes the net impact of public expenditures. Moreover if public sector involvement dis-
torts incentives in an otherwise well functioning market, there is the potential for a wasteful
misallocation of resources.
    1
     For some important exceptions, see Gowrisankaran and Town (1997), Finkelstein (2007), and Abraham
et al. (2007).
   2
     Non-federal short term general hospitals are what are commonly thought of as “hospitals.” This excludes
veterans and military hospitals as well as specialized facilities (e.g., rehabilitation or psychiatric hospitals).



                                                        1
    In this paper we examine the impact of this large federal program on the hospital industry,
and measure the extent of crowd-out that resulted from this investment. The Hospital Survey
and Construction Act of 1946, commonly referred to as the Hill-Burton program, marked
the federal government’s first major entrance into the general health care services sector
(David, 2010; Stevens, 1999). This intervention was motivated by a perceived lack of supply
of health care for workers in war production facilities during the Second World War, as well
as a lack of access to health care for individuals in poor, rural areas of the U.S. The Hill-
Burton program remains the largest piece of federal legislation to provide subsidies for the
construction of non-profit and local governmental hospitals. From July 1947 through June
1971, $28 billion in funds were distributed for the construction and modernization of health
care institutions.3

     A program of this magnitude can have substantial impacts through changes in service
capacity, changes in the number of firms, and changes in the ownership mix.4 Furthermore,
little is known about the long-term consequences for supply and utilization. We estimate
the effects of the Hill-Burton program on supply, organization and utilization in the hospital
industry, and the extent to which this large federal investment in non-profit and public hospi-
tals may have displaced growth at hospitals that otherwise would have occurred, particularly
at for-profits.

    To our knowledge, we are the first to use historical records from the American Hospital
Association to document changes in the hospital industry brought on by the Hill-Burton
program. Specifically, we estimate the impact of the program on the supply of hospitals and
beds over time in counties that received the federal subsidies. We find large and persistent
increases in hospital bed capacity, which then led to increases in the utilization of hospital
services. However the increases in capacity at subsidized hospitals were partially offset
by reductions in capacity, particularly at for-profit hospitals. The amount of crowd-out,
measured as the net increase in total beds from each planned bed, was substantial, but far
from complete. We estimate that as much as 70% of the beds added by the program were
offset by crowd-out effects.

    These results are consistent with a body of research finding substantial crowd-out in
the case of public health insurance programs. As examples of the many papers studying
Medicaid expansions, Cutler and Gruber (1996) and Gruber and Simon (2008) estimate that
about one-half of the coverage increases in Medicaid in the 1980s and 1990s were offset by
reductions in private coverage.5 On Medicare, Lichtenberg (2002) estimates that two-fifths
of the fluctuations in the program’s expenditures over time were offset by associated changes
in private health insurance expenditures. The results from Finkelstein and McKnight (2008)
indicate that two thirds of the initial increase in public spending on 65-74 year-olds from
Medicare were offset by reductions in private health insurance spending.6
   3
     Inflation-adjusted to 2012 dollars.
   4
     For example, Finkelstein (2007)) finds large impacts from the introduction of the Medicare program.
   5
     See Gruber and Simon (2008) for an extensive review of the literature on crowd-out from Medicaid
expansions.
   6
     They report a differential increase in public spending on 65-74 year-olds, relative to 55-64 year-olds, of



                                                      2
    There is a smaller, but growing, literature examining how public subsidies, either in the
forms of grants or tax benefits, crowd out private organizations. Cohen et al. (2013) use
a structural entry model to investigate whether public funds to outpatient substance abuse
treatment clinics crowd out private clinics. They estimate a 70-78% crowd-out of private
clinics. Cellini (2009) uses data from 1995-2003 on two-year community colleges in California
and finds that an increase of $100 million in funding to community colleges in a county results
in two fewer proprietary schools in that county. Harrison and Seim (2014) study the fitness
center market and estimate an equilibrium model with non-profit (YMCA) and for-profit
firms. They do not find evidence of crowd-out of for-profit fitness centers, suggesting that
non-profit tax exemptions do not put for-profits at a competitive disadvantage.

    The literature studying the impact of the Hill-Burton program itself is surprisingly sparse,
given the large scale of the program. A notable exception is Lave and Lave (1974), who find a
significant association between Hill-Burton funds per capita and an increase in total hospital
beds per capita. However, their measure includes tuberculosis, mental health, and chronic
disease beds in addition to general acute care beds. They do not find a significant increase in
short-term general beds per capita when they include population and socioeconomic control
variables. Further, their use of state-level data masks variation in responses to the program
within each state, and since all states received some funding, there are no control groups with
which to compare a counterfactual outcome.7 We use counties rather than states as the unit
of analysis, which is a more accurate reflection of how the program worked. Additionally,
the existing literature on the Hill-Burton program has not considered the issue of crowd-out
or estimated the response of for-profit organizations.8

    We provide detailed background information on how the Hill-Burton program was op-
erationalized in Section 2. Section 3 contains information on the data and explains our
identification strategy, which draws on certain institutional details provided in Section 2.
The empirical results of our main model specification are presented in Section 4. We also
include the results from several robustness checks, including a falsification exercise with the
leads of the treatment (Section 4.2) and an instrumental variables approach (Section 4.3),
which verify our main results. Section 5 assesses the crowd-out effects of the program, poten-
tial spillovers to neighboring counties, and cost of the program per bed generated. Section
6 addresses the impact of the program on health care utilization, and Section 7 provides
descriptive evidence about long-run effects and changes in the distribution of the supply of
hospital beds. We conclude in Section 8.
$766 and a differential decrease in private spending of $510 when Medicare was introduced.
    7
      In our county-level data, there are a number of counties that received no funding over the life of the
program.
    8
      Another study by Clark et al. (1980) uses a more descriptive approach to study the re-distributional
effects of the program. They find that only about one-third as much of the relative convergence in bed supply
would have occurred in 1950-1970 had there been no Hill-Burton program. Brinker and Walker (1962) also
evaluate the impact of the program, but only focus on the first 7 years of the program in Alabama and
Oklahoma. They find that the program resulted in increases in bed capacity. However, conclusions about
the program at the national level cannot be drawn from their paper.




                                                     3
2       The Hill-Burton Program

The Hill-Burton program was enacted with the Hospital Survey and Construction Act of
1946. At the time of its inception, the program was a response to the shortage of health
facilities for war production workers, as well as the perceived scarcity of health resources
in parts of the country, particularly in the South (Stevens, 1999). When initially enacted,
the Hill-Burton program provided for $75 million ($714 million in 2012 dollars) in funds
annually to be distributed among states over 4 years.9 This amount was raised to $150
million ($1.45 billion in 2012 dollars) annually in 1949. Figure 1 depicts the geographic
distribution of hospital beds per capita in 1948, at the start of the program. Based on data
from the American Hospital Association, there were a total of 4,375 short-term acute care
hospitals in the U.S. in 1948. Lighter shading denotes fewer beds per capita. In 1948, 667
of the 3,100 counties in the U.S. (about 22%) had no hospital. The majority of southern
counties and counties in the middle of the country had little or no supply of hospital beds.

    The central federal authority for the program was the Federal Hospital Council at the
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare. Hill-Burton funds were allocated in two
steps. First, an allotment formula was used to determine how the money would be disbursed
among the states. In order for any state to receive its share of the funds, it had to submit
a state plan to the Surgeon General of the U.S. Public Health Service, and the Surgeon
General had to approve the plan. The second step in the allocation process required that
states then distribute funds to projects in accordance with their state plan.

    Table 1 shows the allotment formula used to distribute the funds to the states, using
the example of 3 hypothetical states with the same population but with high, average, and
low per capita income, respectively.10 The formula, which involved the squared differences
between state per capita income and the national average, was designed to provide lower
income states with a relatively larger portion of the Hill-Burton funds, but with no state
receiving less than $10,000. For example, in 1950 Georgia was one of the lowest per capita
income states and received $2.6 million in funding, which amounts to $0.76 per person.
Meanwhile California, one of the wealthiest states, received $1.6 million, or $0.15 per person.
The funds from the program were used to cover up to one-third of the construction costs of
facilities. Throughout the life of the program, the federal government spent over $3.7 billion
($28 billion in 2012 dollars), which spurred about $12.8 billion ($96 billion in 2012 dollars)
in construction, addition, replacement and remodeling of health care facilities.

   Continuing to use Georgia as an example to illustrate the process, the Georgia Depart-
ment of Public Health first took an inventory of all hospitals to determine which hospitals
and how many beds were acceptable based on fire and health standards. It used this infor-
mation to develop the state plan, which was submitted in 1947 and approved by the Surgeon
    9
     The average construction cost of hospitals newly built with Hill-Burton funds between 1948-1950 was
$866,300, or $8.3 million in 2012 dollars.
  10
     Once a state had 4.5 beds per 1,000 people, Hill-Burton funds could no longer be distributed to that
state. However, no state in the U.S. ever reached that limit (Feshbach (1979)).



                                                   4
General on November 18, 1947. An excerpt from a summary table in Georgia’s State Plan
is provided in Figure 2. The state is broken down into counties and prioritized based on
whether or not a county was rural, its population, and bed need. Bed need was determined
by comparing the number of acceptable beds per capita with the target of 4.5 beds per
1,000. We highlight Greensboro, which was given a priority of “A,” meaning that it was
in the highest group. All state plans included this sort of prioritization, as well as various
administrative details regarding how the program would operate in that particular state.

    Next, once a state plan was approved by the Surgeon General, the state was entitled to
their specified allotment to cover one third of expenditures for construction, additions and
remodeling of health care facilities. The state plan then became the roadmap for distributing
funds within a state, and states were required to ensure that funds were distributed roughly
in accordance with their priority list. The state did not actually distribute the funds until
a construction application was approved for a specific project, and each project had to
be approved by both the state agency and the Federal Hospital Council. The applicants
proposing specific Hill-Burton construction projects included the states themselves, local
governments, public agencies, and non-profit agencies. They submitted their applications
to the state agency overseeing the program, which processed the applications in the order
of priority and then forwarded them to the Surgeon General. However if a higher priority
project did not have the financial resources necessary for the construction, maintenance and
operation of the project, then lower priority projects would be forwarded to the Surgeon
General out of order of priority.

    While it is hard to tell how often counties went “out of order” across the U.S., in Georgia
at least, 5 out of the 8 counties ranked the highest priority were the first to receive funding
in 1948. The other 3 received funding in 1949.

    In Greensboro, the county (Greene County) submitted a construction application to build
Minnie G. Boswell Memorial Hospital. These applications had to include the following:
1) description of the project site, 2) plans and specifications for the proposed project, 3)
“reasonable assurance that title to such site is or will be vested solely with the applicant”
(Federal Security Agency 1948), and 4) assurance that there would be adequate financial
resources for construction and for the maintenance and operation of the hospital. There
was also a requirement that the proposed hospital’s construction contract would provide
adequate wages for labor for construction.

   Once such an application was approved, the funds were distributed by the state to the
county to build the specific project that was approved. In the case of Minnie G. Boswell
Memorial Hospital, the application was approved in February 1948 for the construction of
28 beds with $133,750 in federal Hill-Burton money for a total construction cost of $401,250.
The non-federal share of funding came from a single donor, James Griffin Boswell, who
was the founder of the J. G. Boswell Company, which today is the country’s largest cotton
producer. Upon donating the funding for the hospital, Boswell requested the hospital be
named after his mother. Construction finished a year later, and it became the first hospital
built with Hill-Burton funding. Figures 3 and 4 summarize both steps of the allocation


                                              5
process and distribution of funds. We can see that disbursement of these funds occurred at
the state level with enforcement and monitoring at the federal level. However, final control
of the program was placed with the Federal Hospital Council. Table 2 provides summary
statistics on the projects and funding amounts approved over time (the table is discussed in
the next section).

    The maps in Figures 5 and 6 provide additional detail regarding the distribution of funds
to states. Figure 5 details the approval of Hill-Burton funds across states in 1948 (normalized
by state population). We see that funds were concentrated in southern states, with Alabama,
Mississippi and New Mexico receiving the most funding per capita. Figure 6 summarizes
total approved funding over the length of the program, from 1947-1971. Again, we see that
the majority of funding went to the southern states, particualrly Mississippi and Arkansas.



3      Data and Methods

3.1     Data

We use three main data sources in this paper: the Hill-Burton Project Register, the American
Hospital Association Survey of Hospitals, and the Area Resource File. The relevant summary
statistics are presented in Tables 2 and 3 and Appendix Table A1. The details are discussed
below.


Hill-Burton Project Register

The Hill-Burton Project Register is a publication by the U.S. Department of Health, Educa-
tion and Welfare and contains data that are a compilation of all hospital and medical facility
projects approved under the Hill-Burton program from 1947 to 1971 (U.S. Department of
Health, Education and Welfare, U.S. Public Health Service (1971)). It includes information
on the following variables for each project approved under the program: unique project num-
ber, location of the project (city, county and state), name of the facility, ownership (public or
non-profit), type of facility (general acute care, tuberculosis, mental hospital, etc.), type of
construction (new construction, remodel, replacement, addition, etc.), dollar amount of fed-
eral funds, total estimated construction cost, number of beds planned, and date of approval.
We restrict the analysis to Hill-Burton funds spent on non-federal short-term general (acute
care) hospitals. These short-term general hospitals are the focus of this paper because they
are the facilities that are open to the general public and provide a broad range of services.11
  11
    Short term general hospitals are what are generally meant by the term “hospital.” Other types of
hospitals are long term or specialized facilities, e.g., psychiatric, rehabilitation, orthopedic, etc. Federal
hospitals are not open to the general public. The overwhelming majority of U.S. hospitals are non-federal
short-term general hospitals.



                                                      6
    There were a total of 10,490 projects funded by the Hill-Burton program (excluding U.S.
territories) at a total federal cost of $27.3 billion (in 2012 dollars). When we limit the
projects to short-term general hospitals, there are 5,567 total projects with $19.5 billion
spent on those projects. Table 2 lists the number of such projects approved each year, with
the total number of beds, proposed construction costs, and federal subsidy amounts. There is
variation from year to year in the number of projects and the total subsidy amounts because
the approval of funding depended on the submission and review of projects on an individual
basis, as described in the previous section.


American Hospital Association Annual Survey of Hospitals

Our data on the primary outcomes in terms of capacity and utilization come from the annual
American Hospital Association (AHA) survey of hospitals for the years 1948 to 1975, which
includes data on the characteristics of all hospitals registered with the AHA in the United
States. These data are available in hard copy form in the annual August issue of Hospitals:
The Journal of the American Hospital Association.12 While the AHA survey data have been
used by many to study the hospital industry, few have used these older data to study the
industry in its more formative years.

    The unit of observation in the AHA survey is a hospital-year, and we have data on the
following variables: hospital name, city, county, state, total beds, admissions, days, payroll
expenditures, total expenditures and full-time equivalent (FTE) staff (total expenditures
and FTEs are only available from 1951 onward). We also observe the ownership structure of
the hospital (non-profit, non-federal public, federal, and for-profit) and the type of hospital
(short-term, long-term, general, non-general). We eliminate federal hospitals, such as Public
Health Service, military, and Veterans Administration hospitals (about 5% of hospitals each
year), and keep only short-term general hospitals (excluded are long-term stay hospitals,
children’s hospitals, maternity hospitals, etc.). There are no AHA survey data for 1954, so
we interpolate values for each variable in that year by taking the averages of their values in
1953 and 1955. We aggregate the AHA data to the county level by summing all hospital
beds by ownership type and counting the number of hospitals in a county. We aggregate to
the county level because Hill-Burton funds were typically prioritized by county (we discuss
this further in the next section, 3.2, on methodology).

    The average and median numbers of beds, admissions, and hospitals by ownership type
are shown in Table 3, for the entire sample and separately for counties that received Hill-
Burton funding and those that did not. The never-funded counties are on average smaller
than the funded counties and have fewer hospitals, but they have roughly the same number
of beds per capita as the funded counties in the year when those counties were first funded.
Appendix Table A1 gives these figures for counties separated into population terciles. The
bottom two terciles are similar in terms of hospital beds and admissions per capita, while
  12
    These data are known for their accuracy and completeness. See Appendix A1.1 for a brief discussion
and Finkelstein (2007) Appendix for additional details.



                                                  7
the counties in the largest tercile have more beds and admissions on average.

    Figure 7 shows national trends over time in the average numbers of beds and admissions
per capita in total and by ownership type. This was a period of rapid expansion in the
hospital industry: from 1948 to 1975 the total number of beds per 1,000 population increased
from about 3 to almost 4.5. The growth of non-profit and public hospitals accounted for
most of this increase. The number of for-profit beds per capita initially declined, but had a
modest net increase of 0.2 beds per 1,000 over the full time period. The number of admissions
per 1,000 population almost doubled over this time period from 85 to 150, due to increases
in non-profit and public admissions. For-profit admissions decreased slightly over this time
period from 0.093 to 0.088 per 1,000.


Area Resource File

The Area Resource File (ARF) contains data on county-level characteristics compiled from
a variety of sources, such as the U.S. Census Bureau, American Medical Association, and
the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Area Resource File (1983)). While there are hundreds of
variables available in the ARF, very few of these are available from the 1940s. For that
period we can obtain data on Census population estimates (totals and shares by age and
race), median family income, and the number of non-federal physicians.

    Because of substantional changes in county boundaries that occurred in the 1970s in the
state of Virginia, we were unable to match county-level characteristics with the AHA data
in the state of Virginia. For this reason, we exclude Virginia from the anlaysis. In addition,
we exclude Alaska and Hawaii from our analyses as they became U.S. states in the middle
of our sample period.

    Summary statistics for the ARF data are contained in Table 3. On average, the popula-
tion in counties in our sample in 1953 was about 51,940, comprised of about 9.7% over the
age of 65 and about 11.7% under age 5. Counties on average had about 10.9% of the pop-
ulation that was non-white and a median family income of $24,352 (in $2012). On average,
counties had about 0.5 medical doctors (non-federal) per 1,000. Funded counties were more
populous, with almost 4 times the average population of counties that never received fund-
ing. These counties were also slightly richer, with a higher average median family income
compared to never funded counties.


3.2     Overview of Methodology

We choose the unit of analysis as the county because Hill-Burton funds were prioritized by
county (or groups of counties at the Health Service Area level).13 While it is possible to
  13
    Unfortunately, these Health Service Areas are not available electronically for use in our analysis. Thus,
we are assuming that counties grouped in the same service area were equally likely to receive funding. This


                                                     8
proceed with a more aggregate analysis at the state level, allowing finer granularity in the
unit of analysis is preferable since a state level analysis would overlook substantial within-
state variations in capacity. Further, a state level analysis will have no “untreated” units,
because all states received funding in the first year of the program. Because not all counties
received Hill-Burton funds, we are able assess how hospital capacity changed in counties
that received Hill-Burton funding compared to those that did not. In addition we exploit
the timing of when a county was funded relative to others that did as well.

    We define a county as being exposed to the Hill-Burton program starting in the first year
any funding was approved for a project in the county. Accordingly we create an indicator
T reatit that equals 1 in the year that funding was approved for the first Hill-Burton project in
county i, and 0 otherwise. Throughout the period 1948 through 1971, counties were treated
in this way at different points in time. In order to take into account the staggered nature of
receipt of Hill-Burton funds, we use an “event study” framework and estimate how outcomes
changed over time relative to the first year of treatment. To do this we use a series of lags
of the first-treated dummy, T reati,t−m , to trace out the effect of receiving first funding m
years ago, where m ranges from 0 to 20 years.14

    The effect of the Hill-Burton program on hospital capacity should be captured by the
treatment variable and its lags. However there may be other factors that shift the demand
and supply for hospital beds and therefore also determine hospital capacity. We control for
observed factors using county-level socioeconomic variables that are likely associated with
demand shifts. In addition, it is possible that there are unobserved factors that determine the
number of beds in a county and are thus still present in the error term. We take advantage
of the fact that we have panel data by including county fixed effects, which control for any
unobserved characteristics of counties that do not change over time. We also include year
fixed effects to capture any secular national trends that may affect the number of beds per
capita. Last, since non-profit and public hospitals were eligible for Hill-Burton funding,
but for-profits were not, we estimate regressions both for the net effect on total beds and
separately for beds at non-profit or public hospitals and at for-profit hospitals.

    The regression equations are as follows:
                                                     m=20
                                                            βm T reati,t−m + Xit0 δ + ci + λt + εit
                                                      X
                   Total Beds per 1,000it = θ +                                                        (1)
                                                     m=0
                                                     m=20
                                                            βm T reati,t−m + Xit0 δ + ci + λt + εit
                                                      X
    Non-Profit/Public Beds per 1,000it = θ +                                                           (2)
                                                     m=0
                                                     m=20
                                                            βm T reati,t−m + Xit0 δ + ci + λt + εit
                                                      X
             For-Profit Beds per 1,000it = θ +                                                         (3)
                                                     m=0

where the T reati,t−m are the dummy variables indicating if the county first received Hill-
seems probable since groups of rural counties were grouped with each other rather than being grouped with
urban counties. Similarly, urban counties were grouped together.
  14
     This is a similar approach to Wolfers (2006), who studies how divorce reform laws adopted at different
times by different states affect a variety of outcomes, such as suicide rates and domestic violence.

                                                    9
Burton funding m years ago, the Xit are observable county socioeconomic and demographic
variables, the ci are county fixed effects, the λt are year effects, and the εit are random
error terms. The coefficients βm indicate the effects on bed supply due to first receiving
Hill-Burton funding m years ago.

    Since our data are from 1948 to 1975, we choose m = 0, . . . , 20 so that we can track the
longer term impacts on capacity for counties treated in the earlier part of the program. We
include one additional indicator for lags of 21 years or more. The Xit are controls for county
characteristics that likely affect the overall demand for beds, including total population and
socioeconomic factors measured as median family income and the percentage of population
that is non-white. We also include the percentages of the population over the age of 65
and under the age of 5 since these two age groups are more likely to demand higher levels
of health care services. Last, we include the number of non-federal physicians per 1,000
population, as the presence of more physicians in a county likely relates to a greater demand
for hospital beds. All regressions are estimated using weights for county population.15 To
capture the important heterogeneity in treatment effects by population we also estimate
these regressions separately for each population tercile.


3.3     Identification

3.3.1    Possible Challenges to Identification

The inclusion of year and county fixed effects in our model means that the treatment effect
parameters (βm ) are identified from within county variation. Thus our model controls for
any fixed differences across counties that are correlated both with our explanatory variables
and with hospital capacity.16 Nonetheless, the T reatit variable may still be endogenous. It
is possible, for example, that counties where there was (unobservably) low hospital demand
or high construction costs were more likely to receive Hill-Burton funding. This would
introduce a negative correlation with the error term in the regression equations, thus leading
us to underestimate the effect of the program. Alternatively, the opposite could be the case
– counties that were well prepared and would have added hospital beds anyway are the ones
that received funding. In this case we would overestimate the impact of the program.

    Thus our regressions may produce biased estimates of the effect of the Hill-Burton pro-
gram on bed capacity if there are any omitted factors that vary within counties over time
and are correlated with the Hill-Burton treatment variable. For this to be an issue it must
be that there are unobservable time varying factors that are correlated with the exact timing
  15
     Whether or not to use weights is not a straightforward matter in this context (Solon et al. (2015)), and
accordingly we have reproduced all analyses without weights (see the Supplemental Appendix). The un-
weighted average treatment effects are larger than the weighted estimates. We prefer the weighted estimates
because they are more conservative, and they have the advantage of aggregating more easily to national-level
impacts.
  16
     In addition, our results are robust if we include county-specific linear or quadratic time trends.



                                                     10
of first receiving funding, given the staggered nature of the treatment and the outcomes that
we observe.

    Though we cannot test if such omitted variables exist, we assess the exogeneity of the
timing of treatment in multiple ways. We estimate the above regressions with leads of the
treatment indicator, and find no evidence of substantial trends prior to receiving funding
(Section 4.2). We also use the priority rankings in the state plans to instrument for counties
being treated early in the program, and this analysis indicates a large local average treatment
effect among these counties (Section 4.3). Third, we consider whether spillovers to adjacent
counties could contaminate the control observations and bias our estimates, and we find no
changes in the treatment effect when such spillovers are incorporated (Section 5.2). Below
we discuss institutional factors that we believe support the assumption of exogeneity for the
exact timing of treatment.


3.3.2     Institutional Details and the Exogeneity of Treatment

Because the distribution of funds was established at the state level, a discussion of how states
may have selectively picked counties to receive funding is in order. In other words, because
we are looking at the changes in availability of beds in counties year over year, we want to
assess how a county’s propensity to be “exposed” to the program was related to the change
in beds before the program started. For example, states may have selected counties they
felt were “mature” and ready for growth. In that case, we may suspect that consumer or
hospital advocacy groups may have been able to lobby for funding, and thus, played a role
in determining whether a county would receive funds. These “behind the scene” political
bargaining events may be unobserved and correlated with the change in beds in that county
and would also be correlated with whether or not a county received funds. If such selection
did occur, we would expect our estimates of the impact on non-profit/public beds and total
beds to be biased upward since if counties that were going to grow anyway were the ones that
got the funds, then our estimate would overestimate the effect of the program. On the other
hand, if counties that were less likely to add hospital capacity (either due to weak demand,
high construction costs, or credit constraints) were selected, then we will underestimate the
effect of the program.

   However, there is some strong evidence that politics played a limited role, if any, in
the allocative process of the program. Feshbach (1979) has an interesting discussion of the
de-politicized nature of the allocative process of distributing Hill-Burton grants.


        “Bureaucratic procedure rather than direct political conflict determined the al-
        location of Hill-Burton funds. The distribution of Hill-Burton grants was de-
        politicized. Unlike federal project grants, Hill-Burton funds were not allocated
        by announcing the availability of funds, receiving a set of applicants and then
        making a decision based on the appropriateness of the application and the rela-
        tive power and resources each applicant can bring to bear on the decision-making


                                              11
     process....The rules and regulations [of the Act] reduced the importance of the
     direct use of power by individual hospitals, the entire industry, or other program
     beneficiaries in allocating Hill-Burton grants.”
     “The Hill-Burton Program disbursed funds geographically through the use of a
     formula which determined each Health Service Area’s ‘need’ for hospital beds.
     Each area was ranked according to its need and then funds were distributed
     automatically. This automatic formula allocation system reduced popular and
     partisan political influence on individual grant allocations...Applicants had little
     space to exercise influence except when competing applications existed from one
     area or when the states had surplus of funds to disburse at the end of the fiscal
     year.”


   This is echoed in Starr (1982).


     “The law carefully limited political, especially federal, discretion. ... While the
     law set procedural guidelines for state distribution of the money, it specifically
     barred any federal regulation of hospital policy. The states were to estimate
     regional hospital needs; when an applicant from an area received a grant, the area
     would go to the bottom of the list and wait another turn. These arrangements
     were meant to minimize “politics”; the entire process was presented as a scientific
     exercise.”


    Thus, we believe the implementation of the program was largely insulated from political
influence. The highly structured rules and regulations written into the Act ensured that
political struggles would be minimized.

    As mentioned previously, it is also possible that states provided funding only to counties
that they perceived as slow growing. In this case, we would expect that our estimates on the
impact of the program would be biased downward. For this to be true, there would have to
be some unobserved component of those counties that states used as a criterion for selecting
them for treatment. One would think that the main drivers of growth, without the program,
would have been demand factors, such as population, income, and the racial composition
of the county. We already control for these basic demographic characteristics, so we would
need some variable that would affect selection even after controlling for these factors. We
further control for time-invariant characteristics of counties that might contribute to being
slower growing counties by adding in county fixed effects.




                                             12
4      Effects on Hospital Capacity

4.1     Average Effects on Capacity

Figure 8 plots the estimates of the the coefficients βm in regressions (1) to (3), which give the
program’s treatment effect over time. These coefficients are also listed in Appendix Table
A2. Overall, there is a large and statistically significant increase in the supply of beds in
response to a county receiving Hill-Burton funds. The top panel plots the effect of receiving
Hill-Burton funds on hospital beds in the targeted sectors: non-profit and public hospitals.
Much of the impact occurs within the first 3 to 4 years, the typical length of time to complete
a hospital construction project. However there is further growth over the remainder of our
follow-up period, which reflects the impact of additional projects within the same county
and projects that took longer to complete.17 The estimated effects are substantial. Five
years after the first Hill-Burton project was approved, treated counties have 0.4 additional
beds in non-profit and public hospitals per 1,000 population. The average effect continues
to rise to 0.6 beds per 1,000 after 20 years from when the first project was approved.

    The second panel shows the effect on beds in for-profit hospitals. The average supply of
for-profit beds drops when a county receives Hill-Burton funds, and levels off at a decrease
of about 0.1 beds per 1,000 after three years. This provides one indication of a crowding
out effect of the program, as the subsidy was not available to for-profit hospitals. However
crowd-out was also possible within the non-profit sector, which represented the vast majority
of the hospital industry at that time. (See Section 5 for the analysis of the overall amount
of crowd-out.)

    The bottom panel plots the effect on total hospital beds in a county; i.e., the net effect
of the program accounting for the equilibrium response of other entities in the market.
The estimates show that the Hill-Burton program had large and lasting effects on hospital
capacity. After 20 years, the long-run effect was a net increase of about 0.5 beds per 1,000
population. This represents a 20 percent increase over the pre-treatment average of 2.36
beds per 1,000 in counties that were funded. In an average sized funded county (population
65,900), these effects would translate to a net growth of about 20 beds after 5 years and
about 30 beds after 20 years.

   There is substantial heterogeneity in the average treatment effects across the terciles of
county population, as shown in Figure 9 (full coefficients are reported in Appendix Table A3).
This is not surprising given the large differences in average funding amounts per capita, which
are reported in Appendix Table A1. Among funded counties, the average subsidy amount
over the life of the program was $219 per capita in the first population tercile, $140 in the
second, and $76 in the third (in $2012).18 In the first tercile the net effect on hospital beds
  17
     Additionally, if earlier projects were larger on average, this would increase the longer-run effects which
are estimated from counties treated in the early years of the program.
  18
     Regression models including the subsidy amounts are presented in Section 5.3. As discussed there,
including these amounts explains much of the heterogeneity seen across population terciles.


                                                      13
was an increase of nearly one bed per 1,000 after 5 years and reached two beds per 1,000
after 20 years. In the second tercile the effect was smaller but still substantial: 0.6 beds
after 5 years and 1.4 beds after 20 years. In the third tercile the effect was much smaller but
still (marginally) statistically significant, with a long-run effect of 0.4 beds per 1,000 after
20 years (though a wide confidence range). These differences in the funding amounts and
treatment effects are in line with the goals of the program to increase hospital capacity in
rural and other underserved areas.

    Overall, these results indicate that the Hill-Burton program had a substantial net positive
effect on U.S. hospital capacity.19 Funding led to large and long lasting increases in the
number of hospital beds. However, the program did crowd out private, for-profit hospitals.

    In other words, counties that received Hill-Burton funds saw large increases in non-
profit and public capacity and in those same counties, for-profit hospitals decreased capacity,
converted to non-profit status, or exited altogether. As a consequence, not only did the Hill-
Burton program affect capacity in terms of the number of beds, it had a lasting and profound
impact on the composition of the hospital industry. For-profit hospitals were a small portion
of the hospital industry to begin with, and the Hill-Burton program further marginalized
these hospitals by providing construction and expansion grants to their non-profit and public
competitors. The newer non-profit and public health facilities may have drawn patients away
from the smaller for-profit hospitals, thereby reducing demand for for-profit hospitals, which
ultimately caused them to decrease their presence in these markets.


4.2     Assessment of Pre-Trends

Given the staggered implementation of the program, our panel regression models can be
extended to include leads of the treatment indicator. This allows us to test for the presence
of pre-trends in hospital capacity prior to receiving funding. However, because the nature of
the Hill-Burton program required applicants to develop construction proposals in advance of
applying for funding, we need to allow some time for an adjustment period before funding
was approved. We consider there to be a 6-year adjustment period leading up to funding,
following Lave and Lave’s (1974) documentation that the pre-construction planning period
averaged about 6.5 years during the Hill-Burton program. In order to test for differences
prior to this adjustment period, we include up to 9-year leads of the treatment variable.20
  19
     The Medicare program was implemented during our sample period (in 1965), so it is possible our results
could be contaminated by the Medicare implementation. In order to examine that, we restrict our sample to
the period prior to the establishment of Medicare and estimate the same specification. The signs, magnitudes,
and significance of the coefficients are essentially unchanged. Therefore it does not appear that our results
are due to the implementation of Medicare. Column 1 in Appendix Table A4 lists these results.
  20
     The regression specification is as follows:
                                              m=20
                                              X
                                                                       0
                     Beds per 1,000it = θ +          βm T reati,t−m + Xit δ + ci + λt + εit
                                              m=−9




                                                       14
    The estimated treatment effects from these models, and their point-wise confidence bands,
are plotted in Figure 10 (the full coefficients are reported in Appendix Table A5). Visually
we can see there is little change to the overall patterns found in the regressions without
treatment leads. The top panel in the figure plots the effect of receiving Hill-Burton funds
on non-profit and public beds. The estimates are very close to zero and not statistically
significant (individually) prior to the year a county was funded. To formally test for pre-
trends we evaluate the joint significance of the leads prior to the adjustment period, i.e.,
in years 7, 8, and 9 before funding. We get an F-statistic of 0.23, with a p-value of 0.87.
Thus, we find no evidence of a trend prior to treatment. This suggests that those counties
which did receive funding were neither more nor less likely to grow in the absence of funding.
This should alleviate some of the concern that the treatment coefficients could be picking
up growth or decline at non-profit or public hospitals that would have occurred without the
program.

    The middle panel plots the average changes in for-profit beds before and after a county
received Hill-Burton funds. Here the effects between years 7 and 9 prior to funding are
statistically different from zero (F-stat=2.42, p-value=0.065), although the magnitudes are
quite small (about -0.07 beds per 1,000).21 The decline in for-profit beds becomes more
pronounced two years before a county is first funded, and about half of the total, long-run
decrease in for-profit capacity has already occurred by the time that funding is approved.
This may suggest that for-profit hospitals were decreasing capacity relative to non-treated
counties in response to Hill-Burton funds, even before a county actually received any funding.
It is plausible that for-profit hospitals were anticipating the impacts of the program since
funding information was publicly available at the start of the program.22 It is also possible
that these are small pre-existing trends. If that is the case, then our estimates will somewhat
overstate the magnitude of the crowd-out effect on for-profit hospitals.

    The bottom panel plots the results using total beds as the dependent variable. The
pre-trend of 7, 8 and 9 years prior to funding are not statistically different from zero (F-
stat=0.69, p-value=0.56). There is a downward trend in total beds closer to the year of
treatment, which is driven by for-profit beds. The long-run net effect of the program is
smaller here than in the regression without leads, and the treatment effects are no longer
(individually) statistically significant (see Appendix Table A5). This is in contrast to the
long-run effect on non-profit and public beds, which is quite similar in the specifications with
and without leads.

    To explore this difference, and to further examine the heterogeneity in treatment effects,
we present estimates from regressions with leads that are estimated separately by population
tercile. These appear in Figure 11 and Appendix Figure A1 (full coefficients are in Appendix
Table A6). For the first and second terciles, the estimates of the net effect of the program
As before, there are separate regressions for total beds, non-profit and public beds, and for-profit beds.
  21
     If this in fact indicates an endogeneity bias due to the selection of counties that were losing for-profit
beds, the bias is clearly small and would tend to reduce our estimates of the program’s net impact.
  22
     Prior work has found that for-profit hospitals respond rapidly to changes in their economic environment
(Hansmann et al., 2003; Chakravarty et al., 2006).



                                                      15
are very similar between the specifications with and without leads. Only in the third tercile
is there a notable difference when leads are included. This likely reflects a difficulty in
obtaining precise estimates for the full span of leads and lags, as most large counties were
treated relatively early in the program.23


4.3     Instrumental Variables Analysis

As discussed previously, the main empirical analysis assumes no selection on unobservables.
In other words, we assume that there are no time-varying unobservable factors that relate
to the exact timing of when counties received Hill-Burton funding. While we feel this is
quite plausible based on the institutional details of the program, to mitigate concerns about
the exogeneity of funding we also employ an instrumental variables strategy to see how our
estimates may change. We have no instruments available that vary at the county level over
time. Instead we use a cross-sectional instrument, the priority rankings in the State Plans,
to estimate a treatment effect for counties funded during the first 3 years of the Hill-Burton
program. This is the time when we might think that there would be the most non-random
selection of counties to receive funding.

   Because the instrument is cross-sectional, we examine a single 5-year difference in the
number of beds. The regression model is as follows:

            ∆5yr (Total Beds / 1,000)i = π0 + π1 T reati,1948−50 + ∆5yr Xi0 δ + Wi0 θ + ui

(because there are no county fixed-effects, two time-invariant regressors are included as Wi :
land area and rural status). We do not use longer differences (e.g., 10 years) because doing
so would contaminate the control group as more counties would receive funding during the
time over which we take the difference.24 This contamination would bias the estimates of
the program’s effect downward. For the 5-year differences, we define counties to be treated
if they were first funded in 1948, 1949, or 1950, and we take differences with the number of
beds in these counties in 1953, 1954, or 1955, respectively. For counties without their own
treatment (T reati,1948-50 = 0), the 5-year difference is taken from 1949 to 1954. We choose
to use the 5-year difference from 1949-1954 so that the controls would be in the middle of
the range used for treated counties. Thus our estimate of the growth in beds in the control
counties would only be contaminated by counties receiving funding in 1951 and 1952. We
know from our prior estimates that, on average, it took roughly three years after a project
was approved for counties to show additional non-profit or public beds. So we think the
  23
      The estimates for the third tercile are sensitive to the inclusion of a handful of very large counties that
were treated relatively late in the program, so that they would be the most informative observations for the
estimates of the longer leads.
   24
      For example, to focus on just counties first funded in 1948, one could take the 10-year difference in beds
from 1948 to 1958. The “controls” for these counties would be all others that did not receive funding in
1948, and we would also take a 10-year difference for those counties. But it is possible that many of these
counties would receive funding in the interim, say in 1953, and would thus also experience growth in beds
from 1953 to 1958 due to the program.


                                                       16
potential contamination bias from counties first funded in 1951 and 1952 is limited because
it would require the new beds to appear within one or two years from the time of approval.

    We use each county’s initial priority ranking in the State Plans as the instrument. Coun-
ties received priority rankings of A through G, with A representing the highest priority for
funding. We converted these ranking into numbers such that a prioirty rank of 1 coincided
with a priority of A. Thus, a county with a better priority ranking (lower number) had a
higher probability of obtaining funding, but it was by no means a guarantee. Of the 420
counties nationwide with a priority rank of 1, 121 were funded during 1948-1950, 113 were
funded after 1950, and 186 were never funded. For those with a priority rank of 2, 88 were
funded in 1948-1950, 122 after 1950, and 102 were never funded. For the remaining 867
counties with lower priority scores, 183 were funded during 1948-1950, 409 eventually, and
276 were never funded. Thus the probability of being funded in 1948-1950 was clearly higher
for counties with ranks of 1 or 2.

    The instrument appears well suited to address at least one hypothetical reason for vio-
lations of the exogeneity of the timing of treatment. If projects tended to be proposed for
Hill-Burton subsidies at a time when the relevant entities within a county were particularly
well organized and resourced, these entities may have been prepared to add hospital capacity
even without the program. This would bias the estimated treatment effects upward. The pri-
ority rankings did not take into account local organizational capabilities, so the instrument
should be orthogonal to such factors.

    We report the instrumental variable results in Table 4. Column (1) shows the first-
stage estimates (a linear probability model for being funded in 1948-50). As can be seen,
the priority ranking had a strong and highly significant impact on the probability a county
received Hill-Burton funding early in the program. The F-statistic on the instrument equals
50.60 (p-value <0.001). Column (2) contains the instrumental variable estimate of the effect
of receiving Hill-Burton funding on the 5-year change in the total hospital beds per capita in
a county. The effect is large and precisely estimated at about 1.5 beds per 1,000. The effect
on non-profit and public beds in column (3) is similar in magnitude and precision, while the
effect on for-profit beds in column (4) is essentially zero and imprecisely estimated. Column
(5) presents the OLS estimate of the same 5-year effect on total beds for comparison. It is
much smaller at 0.5 beds per 1,000, which indicates that counties induced into treatment
by their priority ranking had substantially larger (local average) treatment effects than the
average effect during this time period. The fact that the local average treatment effects
estimated with this approach are larger than the corresponding estimates from our regression
models provides further evidence that our main estimates do not overstate the program’s
effect.




                                             17
5      Crowd-Out, Spillovers, and Cost per Bed

We now provide an assessment of the crowd-out effects of the Hill-Burton program, and
consider the related question of possible spillovers across counties. We then use data on the
subsidy amounts per project to estimate the average cost per bed generated by the program,
net of crowd-out effects.


5.1     Using Planned Beds to Estimate Crowd-Out

The Hill-Burton Project Register contains the number of hospital beds that were planned to
be added with each project. Assuming these beds were indeed built, we can use this infor-
mation in our panel regression framework to quantify the crowd-out effects of the program.
Specifically, we estimate the effect that the number of planned beds in Hill-Burton projects
had on the total number of beds in a county, and trace out this effect over time much like
we did with the overall treatment effect. The amount of crowd-out is then reflected by the
extent to which the long-run effect of a planned bed is less than one.25

    To include the number of planned beds in our regressions we define a variable P lanBedP Cit ,
as the number of beds (per 1,000 population) that were planned to be added in projects ap-
proved in county i in year t, along with a simple indicator Apprvit for the approval of one
or more projects. The panel regression model is then as follows:

                                20
                                X                             20
                                                              X
                                                                                     0
       Beds per 1,000it = θ +         αm P lanBedP Ci,t−m +         βm Apprvi,t−m + Xit δ + ci + λt + εit   (4)
                                m=0                           m=0



The coefficients on planned beds (αm , m = 0, . . . , 20) give the net increase in total beds (per
1,000) from each planned bed (per 1,000) that was proposed in a project approved m years
ago. The approval dummies Apprvit are similar to the treatment indicators T reatit in our
main specification, except that the variable Apprvit is set to one each time a new project is
approved. This allows for an effect of a Hill-Burton project that is distinct from the effect
of number of beds in the project.

    The estimates of αm are graphed in Figure 12 and the full coefficients appear in Appendix
Table A7 . The net effect on total beds in a county 5 years after a project was approved is 0.16
per planned bed (both per 1,000 population). This continues to rise throughout the follow-
up period, reaching 0.28 net additional beds after 20 years, relative to the counterfactual
scenario with no treatment. Thus, if all planned beds were built, up to 0.72 of each bed
directly added by the Hill-Burton program was offset by reductions in hospital capacity that
would have otherwise occurred. In other words, about seventy percent of the program’s
  25
    This is an upper bound on crowd-out, since it is possible that not all of the beds planned were actually
built.



                                                     18
direct impact was offset by crowd-out effects. As we will see below, however, the average
federal expenditure per net bed was not necessarily excessive, despite this offset.


5.2     Spillovers from Neighboring Counties

The analysis above considers crowd-out effects that occurred entirely within the treated
counties. A related concern is spillovers across counties, whereby one county would be less
likely to add hospital capacity if a neighboring county received Hill-Burton subsidies. Such
spillovers, if present, would bias our estimates of the treatment effect by contaminating the
untreated counties.

   To assess this issue, we estimate regressions that include indicators for whether a neigh-
boring county was treated. However, there is little variation after the initial years of our data
because over half of the counties in the sample have a neighbor treated by 1949. Accordingly,
rather than using panel models, we estimate the effect of being treated (T reati ) or having a
neighbor treated (T reatj ) in 1948-50 on the growth in beds over a single 5-year period (like
the IV analysis discussed previously). These regressions take the following form:

 ∆5yr (Beds per 1,000)i = π0 + π1 T reati,1948−50 + π2 T reatj,1948−50 + ∆5yr Xit0 δ + Wi0 θ + ui . (5)

The dependent variable is the 5-year difference in the total number of beds per 1,000 in
a county.26 The control variables (Xit ) are the same as before; also, because there are no
county fixed-effects, we include two time-invariant regressors (Wi ): county land area and
rural status. The reference county (i) is defined to be treated (T reati,1948-50 = 1) if it was
first funded in 1948, 1949, or 1950, and the 5-year difference in beds per 1,000 is taken to
1953, 1954, or 1955, accordingly. The indicator for treatment in an adjacent county similarly
reflects whether any neighbor was first funded in 1948 to 1950. Similar to the IV analysis,
for counties without their own treatment (T reati,1948-50 = 0), the 5-year difference is taken
from 1949 to 1954.

    The results from these regressions, estimated nationwide and within each population
tercile, are presented in Table 5. In each of these samples there is almost no change in
the estimated treatment effects when the indicator for treatment in an adjacent county is
added. There appear to be modest positive spillovers from adjacent counties in the top
tercile, although these results may be driven by a small number of counties with very large
populations. For counties in the first and second terciles, the estimated spillovers are statis-
tically insignificant and negligible relative to the actual treatment effects. Thus, unlike the
within-county crowd-out effect, it appears that any cross-county geographic spillovers were
minimal.
  26
    We do not use longer differences (e.g., 10 years) because doing so would contaminate the control group
as more counties would receive funding during the time over which we take the difference. This would bias
the estimates of the program’s effect downward. See the description of the IV analysis for further discussion
on this point.



                                                     19
5.3    Subsidy Amounts and Cost per Bed

The amount of crowd-out within counties raises a question about the net cost per bed from
the program. Here we use the information on the federal subsidy for each project, from
the Project Register, to provide one assessment of the issue. We define the cost per bed as
the average federal expenditure per bed that was generated, net of the crowd-out effect. In
addition, the subsidy amounts provide information on the intensity of treatment, which can
help to explain the heterogeneity in treatment effects seen across population terciles.

    The federal subsidy amounts for each project can be included in our panel regressions in
the same way as the number of proposed beds was previously. We define a variable F undP Cit
as the per capita dollar amount of Hill-Burton subsidies approved for projects in county i in
year t (in $2012). The panel regression model is then as follows:

                                 20
                                 X                          20
                                                            X
                                                                                   0
        Beds per 1,000it = θ +         αm F undP Ci,t−m +         βm Apprvi,t−m + Xit δ + ci + λt + εit   (6)
                                 m=0                        m=0



The funding coefficients (αm , m = 0, . . . , 20) give the gain in beds per 1,000 population from
an additional dollar per person in funding (or equivalently, an additional $1,000 per 1,000
population) that was approved m years ago. The approval dummies Apprvit are defined as
before, and are included to distinguish between the effect of any funding being approved and
the effect of the amount of funding.

    The estimates of αm are reported in Table 6, and the full coefficients from this model
appear in Appendix Table A8. For example, five years after funding was approved the effect
is 0.0032 per dollar. This is the increase in the number of hospital beds per 1,000 population,
net of any crowd-out effects, for every $1 per person of Hill-Burton funding. These effects
on capacity continue to rise throughout the follow-up period. Twenty years after funding
was approved, every $1 per capita of Hill-Burton funding resulted in a net increase of over
0.0063 beds per 1,000 population.

    Using the latter number as our estimate of the long-run effect, we can say that there
would be an additional 1 bed per 1,000 population for every additional $160 per person
(= $1/0.0063) of Hill-Burton funding. Multiplying out the per capita units on both sides,
this indicates that about $160,000 in Hill-Burton funds were spent per bed added, on net,
as a result of the program. On the other hand, data from the Hill-Burton Project Register
indicate that the average subsidy amount per planned bed was $55,000 (in $2012). This in
fact indicates a similar proportion of crowd-out as did our previous analysis using the number
of planned beds. Here, the actual cost per net additional bed ($160,000) is three times larger
than the direct subsidy per bed ($55,000), which suggests that approximately two-thirds of
the funding effort was offset (i.e., the subsidy amount only covered about one-third of the
actual cost of a bed).

   Additionally, this specification shows that the subsidy amounts can account for a large
portion of the heterogeneity in average treatment effects across population terciles. For

                                                     20
example, in our base specification the average treatment effects 15 years post-approval (β15 )
by tercile are 1.71, 1.10, and 0.40 beds per 1,000 in terciles 1, 2, and 3 respectively (from
Appendix Table A3). If we multiply the average per capita subsidy amounts for each tercile
(from Appendix Table A1) by the funding coefficient for 15 years post-approval in the present
specification (α15 ) and add the treatment dummies, this gives us average effects of 1.41, 0.70,
and 0.21 beds per 1,000 in terciles 1, 2, and 3.27 The average treatment effects using the
funding amounts are close to the treatment effects estimated from the base specification,
indicating a large part of the difference in the average treatment effects between small and
large counties can be accounted for by differences in the per capita subsidy amounts.



6      Effects on Utilization

The goal of the Hill-Burton program was to address perceived shortage and access problems
in health care, particularly in poor, rural counties. The mechanism was to fund increased
capacity. As we have demonstrated, the program was quite successful in terms of increasing
the number of hospital beds. The logical next question is whether there was an increase in
utilization commensurate with this increase in capacity.

    We estimate the program’s effects on utilization with the same regression specifications as
equations (1) to (3), but now using hospital admissions per 1,000 as the dependent variable.
The results are shown in Figure 13, which plots the estimated treatment effects over time (i.e.,
βm , m = 0, . . . , 20). The full coefficients are reported in Appendix Table A9. The increases
in utilization follow the increases in capacity very closely (see Figure 8 for comparison). Five
years after the first Hill-Burton funding was approved for a county, admissions at non-profit
and public hospitals increased by 13 per 1,000. This was offset by an average decrease in
admissions at for-profit hospitals of 3.7 per 1,000. The long-run net effect of the program was
an average increase of about 15 total admissions per 1,000. This is an 18 percent increase
over the pre-treatment average of 82 admissions per 1,000 in counties that were funded,
which is similar to the net proportional increase in bed supply. In an average sized funded
county (population 65,900), the long-run effect translates to a net addition of almost 1,000
hospital admissions annually after 20 years.28

    We can use these estimates to generate a rough calculation of the occupancy rate in
the beds added by the Hill-Burton program. This provides a way to assess whether the
increase in utilization attributed to the program was commensurate with the increase in
capacity. The program resulted in a net increase of 0.45 beds and 15 admissions per 1,000
population after 20 years. Our AHA data show the average length of stay during our sample
period to be 7.8 days. Applying this to the increase in admissions suggests there were 117
additional bed-days per 1,000 people in a county, 20 years after the first Hill-Burton project
  27
     The calculations for the average treatment effects are as follows: Tercile 1: (0.00256 × 219.36 + 0.855) =
1.41; Tercile 2: (0.00238 × 140.25) + 0.366 = 0.70 Tercile 3: (0.00284 × 75.7) + 0.0497 = 0.21.
  28
     Column 2 in Appendix Table A4 lists estimates for the effect on admissions, limiting the sample to the
period before Medicare. Like the capacity analysis, our results are robust to this sample restriction.


                                                      21
was approved.29 Comparing this to the increase in available bed days (0.45 beds × 365 days)
yields an occupancy rate of 71%. This in line with the estimates of national average hospital
occupancy rates for SMSAs given in Chiswick (1976): 73.7% for 1950, 71.7% for 1955, and
74.6% for 1960. Thus it seems the beds added by the Hill-Burton program were used nearly
as much as those in other hospitals throughout the country.

    As with the increases in hospital capacity, there is also substantial heterogeneity across
terciles in the effect on admissions. Figure 14 shows the estimated treatment effects on total
admissions estimated separately by tercile (full coefficients are listed in Appendix Table A10.
In the smallest tercile the average long-run effect is over 50 admissions per 1,000, and in the
middle tercile the long-run effect is also quite large and exceeds 40 admissions per 1,000.

    This large expansion in utilization suggests that there was unmet excess (or latent)
demand for hospital services in many locations prior to the implementation of the Hill-
Burton program. One possible explanation for the lack of a supply response on the part
of the industry is the presence of capital constraints. At present U.S. hospitals are large
businesses and capital is overwhelmingly obtained through markets (debt for non-profits
and equity for for-profits). However, during the period of the Hill-Burton program, that
was not the case. Hospitals were heavily dependent on private philanthropic contributions.
Stevens (1999) (p. 33) states that


       “Capital came almost entirely from private gifts, endowments, and donations
       until after World War II, and predominantly from these sources until the 1970s.”


Stevens (1999) Table 11.2 documents that non-profit hospitals financed 40.7 percent of con-
struction costs from private contributions in 1965, versus 24.2 percent by borrowing. Another
source in Stevens (Table 11.3) shows that in 1968, 21 percent of funding for all hospitals’
(not just non-profits) construction costs came from philanthropy and 38 percent from debt.
While these data are not definitive, they suggest that capital markets for hospitals were not
well developed at the time of the Hill-Burton program, and so hospitals may have faced
significant capital constraints.

    In addition, the analysis of utilization provides a further opportunity to check for spillovers
across counties. It is certainly possible that additional hospital capacity in one county might
have drawn patients from neighboring counties. This would bias our estimates of the pro-
gram’s effects on utilization, as control counties that are adjacent to a treated county would
see a decrease in admissions at their hospitals. To assess this, we estimate regressions similar
to (5), but now with the 5-year change in admissions per 1,000 as the dependent variable.
The results shown in Appendix Table A11 show no significant effects on admissions if a neigh-
boring county was funded (although marginally significant in Tercile 2), and no changes in
the estimated treatment effects.
  29
     This assumes the average length of stay was similar in treated and untreated counties. We have assessed
this assumption with regressions similar to (1) where the dependent variable is the LOS, and have found no
evidence of large changes after treatment.


                                                    22
7      Aggregate and Long-Run Impacts of Hill-Burton

To conclude the analysis, here we offer some assessments of the aggregate and long-run
impacts of the Hill-Burton program. First we use the most flexible version of our panel
regressions (those with the subsidy amounts) to project the program’s contribution to the
growth in hospital bed supply nationwide during the life of the program (see Table 6).
Then we provide two descriptive analyses that, while they do not follow our main empirical
approach, may offer valuable additional insights. The first estimates the association between
total funding amounts and hospital capacity many years after the program ended. The
second shows the substantial decline in the variation in bed supply based on county income
and location, which occurred concurrently with the program. To be clear, we regard these
analyses as descriptive in nature, but they are useful to portray the broad scope of the
possible impacts of the Hill-Burton program.

    First, we use our panel models that include the subsidy amounts to compute the ag-
gregate impact of the Hill-Burton program. The results are shown in Table 7, which uses
regression (4) estimated both nationally and by population tercile (coefficient estimates in
Appendix Table A12). The estimated models generate baseline predictions for the number
of beds per capita in each county, which we then aggregate by multiplying out the county
population and adding across counties. The baseline predictions are fairly close to the ob-
served numbers of hospital beds both nationwide and in each tercile in 1948 and 1975.30
Then we make counterfactual predictions for 1975 using the estimated models but setting
the funding amounts (F undP Cit ) and approval dummies (Apprvit ) to zero. This projects
the counterfactual number of beds per 1,000 in each county in 1975 without the Hill-Burton
program. The difference between the aggregate number of beds in the counterfactual vs.
the baseline prediction for 1975 is our measure of the program’s total impact. We prefer the
results using regressions estimated separately by tercile as this is the most flexible specifica-
tion which allows for further heterogeneity in the treatment effects. These results are shown
in column (5). The overall impact attributed to the program from this approach is nearly
73,000 beds (858,532 – 785,643), which represents 17 percent of the total growth from 1948
to 1975 in the baseline predictions (858,532 – 427,711).

    Next, to provide descriptive evidence on the program’s effects long after it ended, we
estimate cross-sectional regressions for the association between total Hill-Burton subsidies
and the number of beds per capita by ownership type in 1990. These regressions are at the
county level and include our usual control variables as well as state fixed effects.31 Table
8 reports the results of these regressions, which include separate estimates for 1975 as a
reference point. The association between total Hill-Burton subsidies per capita over the life
of the program and the number of beds per 1,000 in a county in 1975 is 0.005. This means
  30
      The aggregated predictions do not exactly match the observed amounts due to restrictions in the regres-
sion specifications such as the fact that county fixed effects cannot vary over time. Were we to use the actual
dependent variable instead, i.e., the national average of beds per 1,000 in a county, the baseline predictions
would of course match the observed amounts exactly.
   31
      Regressions without state fixed effects yield similar results.



                                                      23
that an additional $100 of funding per capita is associated with an additional 0.5 beds per
1,000. The association drops only modestly by 1990, to 0.004. Multiplying this with the
average funding amount of $130 would account for a difference of 0.55 beds per 1,000. This
is a substantial amount, and it suggests the large effects of the program on hospital capacity
may have continued decades after the program ended.

    Finally we provide some information on distributional changes that occurred during the
time of the program. The Hill-Burton program was intended to address perceived shortages
of hospital capacity in areas that were predominately poor and rural. One would therefore
expect it to have an impact on the distribution of bed supply based on these factors. Table 9
shows the changes from 1948 to 1975 in the distribution of hospital beds per 1,000 conditional
on median family income, location, and rural status. Over the life of the Hill-Burton program,
areas with relatively low bed supply largely caught up with areas that initially had more
capacity. Counties with median family income in the bottom quintile saw an increase of 2.3
beds per 1,000 while the growth in the top quintile was only 0.5 beds. The South added 1.8
beds per 1,000 while the Northeast added only 0.7 beds. Rural counties had an increase of
2.4 beds per 1,000 while non-rural counties actually saw a decrease of 0.25 beds over this
time period. Overall the standard deviation of beds per 1,000 across counties decreased from
5.9 in 1948 to 2.5 in 1975. While this does not prove that the Hill-Burton program caused
these changes, it is clear that substantial progress was made toward the goals of expanding
hospital capacity in underserved areas and equalizing access to hospitals throughout the U.S.



8     Summary and Conclusions

Our analysis of the Hill-Burton program on hospital capacity provides evidence on the impact
of this program on the evolution of the U.S. hospital industry and feeds into the larger debate
about how government spending may crowd out private activity. Billions of governmental
dollars were poured into the hospital sector during the time-period we study. This program
had a profound and lasting impact on the U.S. hospital industry. Our capacity estimates
show a large growth in non-profit and public beds per capita in response to the program.

    We find long-lasting impacts of the Hill-Burton program on the hospital industry, with
the gains in beds lasting over 20 years. This has implications for how the hospital market
structure changed over this time period to evolve into what it is today. Large gains in capacity
or the entry and exit of hospitals affects the quantity and quality of hospital services provided
as well as pricing behavior of hospitals. Our results reveal that the Hill-Burton program was
particularly pivotal in shaping the market structure of the hospital industry by introducing
large gains in the supply of beds over a 25-year period, as well as subsidizing the growth of
non-profit and public hospitals, while crowding out growth by for-profits.

    Even though there was a non-trivial amount of crowd-out, the program still had substan-
tial net effects. Further, the Hill-Burton program resulted in a large expansion in hospital
utilization, suggesting that there was excess or latent demand for hospital services in many

                                               24
locations prior to the implementation of the program. Finally, over the life of the program
areas with relatively low numbers of beds per capita (areas with low income, rural areas,
and the South) largely caught up with areas that had greater hospital capacity.




                                            25
References
Abraham, J. M., Gaynor, M., and Vogt, W. (2007). Entry and competition in local hospital
 markets. Journal of Industrial Economics, 55:265–288.

Area Resource File (1983). US Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources
  and Services Administration, Bureau of Health Workforce, Rockville, MD.

Brinker, P. and Walker, B. (1962). The Hill-Burton Act: 1948-1954. The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 44:208–212.

Cellini, S. (2009). Crowded colleges and college crowd-out: The impact of public subsidies
  on the two-year college market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1:2:1–30.

Chiswick, B. (1976). Hospital utilization: An analysis of SMSA differences in occupancy
 rates, admission rates, and bed rates. NBER Chapters in Explorations in Economic Re-
 search, 3:24–76.

Clark, L., Field, M., Koontz, T., and Koontz, V. (1980). The impact of Hill-Burton: An
  analysis of hospital bed and physician distribution in the United States, 1950-1970. Medical
  Care, 18:532–550.

Cohen, A., Freeborn, B., and McManus, B. (2013). Competition and crowding out in the
  market for outpatient substance abuse treatment. International Economic Review, 54:159–
  184.

Cutler, D. and Gruber, J. (1996). Does public insurance crowd out private insurance?
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111:391–430.

David, G. (2010). Trends in hospital ownership type and capacity: A decomposition analysis.
 Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 39:356–370.

Feshbach, D. (1979). What’s inside the black box: A case study of allocative politics in the
  Hill-Burton program. International Journal of Health Services, 9:313–339.

Finkelstein, A. (2007). The aggregate effects of health insurance: Evidence from the intro-
  duction of Medicare. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122:1–37.

Finkelstein, A. and McKnight, R. (2008). What did Medicare do? The initial impact of
  Medicare on mortality and out of pocket medical spending. Journal of Public Economics,
  92:1644–1668.

Gowrisankaran, G. and Town, R. (1997). Dynamic equilibrium in the hospital industry.
 Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 6:45–74.

Gruber, J. and Hungerman, D. (2007). Faith-based charity and crowd-out during the great
  depression. Journal of Public Economics, 91:1043–1069.




                                             26
Gruber, J. and Simon, K. (2008). Crowd-out 10 years later: Have recent public insurance
  expansions crowded out private health insurance? Journal of Health Economics, 27:201–
  217.

Harrison, T. and Seim, K. (2014). Nonprofit tax exemptions and market structure: The case
  of fitness centers. Working Paper.

Hartman, M., Martin, A. B., Lassman, D., Catlin, A., and the National Health Expenditure
  Accounts Team (2015). National health spending in 2013: Growth slows, remains in step
  with the overall economy. Health Affairs, 34(1):150–160.

Lave, J. and Lave, L. (1974). The Hospital Construction Act: An evaluation of the Hill-
  Burton program, 1948-1973. American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.

Lichtenberg, F. (2002). The effects of Medicare on health care utilization and outcomes.
  Frontiers in Health Policy Research, 5:27–52.

Solon, G., Haider, S., and Wooldridge, J. (2015). What are we weighting for? The Journal
  of Human Resources, 50:301–316.

Starr, P. (1982). The Social Transformation of American Medicine. Basic Books.

Stevens, R. (1999). In Sickness and in Wealth: American Hospitals in the Twentieth Century.
  Johns Hopkins University Press.

U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, U.S. Public Health Service (1971). Hill-
  Burton Project Register, July1, 2947 - June 30, 1971. Office of Program Planning and
  Analysis.




                                            27
Figures

            Figure 1: Distribution of Hospital Beds Per Capita in the U.S., 1948




Source: American Hospital Association



                         Figure 2: Excerpt from Georgia’s State Plan




                                             28
          Figure 3: Step 1 of Hill-Burton Allocation Process
                             ^ƚĞƉϭ͗&ĞĚĞƌĂůŝƐƚƌŝďƵƚŝŽŶƚŽ^ƚĂƚĞƐ



                                                            Federal Hospital Council
•     Designate single state agency to
      administer the program




                                                 ^ƚĂƚĞ
                                                 WůĂŶ
•     Partition counties: Health Service Areas
•     Inventory of health-related facilities
•     Calculate need for general hospital beds
      uniformly across the state
                                                               Approval of State Plan


                                                                           $
Allotment Formula




                                                                       States




          Figure 4: Step 2 of Hill-Burton Allocation Process
                                ^ƚĞƉϮ͗^ƚĂƚĞƐŝƐƚƌŝďƵƚŝŽŶƚŽŽƵŶƚŝĞƐ


                                                          States
                                                          WƌŝŽƌŝƚǇ
                                                            >ŝƐƚ



      WƵďůŝĐŐĞŶĐǇ

          ^ƚĂƚĞ                          Construction Applications

    EŽŶͲWƌŽĨŝƚŐĞŶĐǇ


                                          Federal Hospital Council




                                         Approval of Construction


                                        $$$               $$           $

                        High Priority            Medium Priority            Low Priority
                          County                    County                    County




                                                          29
                  Figure 5: State-Level Hill-Burton Funding Per Capita, 1948




                      Range is from $0 per capita in NV to $32.2 in MS (in 2012 $)
Source: Hill-Burton Project Register



              Figure 6: State-Level Hill-Burton Funding Per Capita, 1947-1971




                    Range is from $57.3 in CA to $236.6 per capita in AR (in 2012 $)

Source: Hill-Burton Project Register




                                                  30
Figure 7: National Trend in Beds and Admissions Per Capita (PC), 1948-1975

                                                National Trend in Beds per 1,000, 1948−1975




                             5
                                                                                                                                            ●   ●
                                                                                                                                        ●
                             4

                                                                                                                                ●   ●
                                                                                                                        ●   ●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                ●   ●
                                                                                            ●           ●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                    ●
                                                            ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                    ●   ●
                                   ●   ●    ●   ●
      Beds per 1,000

                             3
                             2




                                                                                                                    Total
                                                                                                                    Non−Profit & Public
                                                                                                                    For−Profit
                             1
                             0




                                       1950                 1955                1960                1965                1970                1975

                                                                                        Year



                                           National Trends in Admissions per 1,000, 1948−1975
                             150




                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                    ●   ●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                        ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                        ●   ●
                                                                                ●   ●
                                                                            ●

                                                                ●       ●
                                                                    ●
                                                            ●
                             100




                                                        ●
      Admissions per 1,000




                                                ●   ●
                                            ●
                                       ●
                                   ●
                             50




                                                                                                                    Total
                                                                                                                    Non−Profit & Public
                                                                                                                    For−Profit
                             0




                                            1950                1955                1960                1965                1970                1975

                                                                                        Year




                                                                                    31
       Figure 8: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Beds per 1,000
Figure plots estimates of treatment effects (β̂m ) and 95% confidence intervals from
                                equations (1) to (3)
                                                                                             Effect on Non−Profit & Public Beds per 1,000




                                                                          1.0
                     Avg Change in Non−Profit and Public Beds per 1,000
                                                                                                                                                     ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                    ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                ●                                    ●    ●




                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                               ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                           ●       ●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                  ●


                                                                                              ●



                                                                                         ●

                                                                                 ●   ●
                                                                          0.0
                                                                          −0.5




                                                                                 0                    5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                                                  Effect on For−Profit Beds per 1,000
                                                                          1.0
                     Avg Change in For−Profit Beds per 1,000

                                                                          0.5
                                                                          0.0




                                                                                 ●   ●
                                                                                         ●                                                               ●
                                                                                              ●                    ●            ●   ●   ●       ●    ●       ●   ●   ●    ●
                                                                                                  ●   ●    ●   ●       ●   ●                ●
                                                                          −0.5




                                                                                 0                    5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                                                      Effect on Total Beds per 1,000
                                                                          1.0
                     Avg Change in Total Beds per 1,000

                                                                          0.5




                                                                                                                                                     ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                ●                ●
                                                                                                                                    ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                ●                                    ●    ●
                                                                                                               ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                           ●       ●

                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                  ●

                                                                                              ●


                                                                                         ●
                                                                          0.0




                                                                                 ●   ●
                                                                          −0.5




                                                                                 0                    5                    10                   15                   20
                                                                                                                       32
                                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved
           Figure 9: Effect on Hospital Beds per 1,000 by Population Tercile
Figure plots β̂m and 95% confidence intervals from equation (1) estimated separately by
                                        tercile.
                                                                              Effect on Total Beds per 1,000, 1st Tercile




                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                 ●   ●




                       Avg Change in Total Beds per 1,000
                                                                                                                                             ●            ●




                                                             2
                                                                                                                                     ●   ●

                                                                                                                            ●   ●
                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                             1
                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                              ●



                                                                          ●
                                                             0




                                                                      ●
                                                                  ●
                                                             −1




                                                                  0                   5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                              Effect on Total Beds per 1,000, 2nd Tercile
                                                             3
                       Avg Change in Total Beds per 1,000

                                                             2




                                                                                                                                                     ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                     ●   ●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                             1




                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                ●   ●
                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                  ●

                                                                              ●
                                                             0




                                                                          ●

                                                                  ●   ●
                                                             −1




                                                                  0                   5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                              Effect on Total Beds per 1,000, 3rd Tercile
                                                             3
                       Avg Change in Total Beds per 1,0000

                                                             2
                                                             1




                                                                                                                                     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●    ●
                                                                                                                    ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                  ●   ●
                                                                              ●
                                                             0




                                                                  ●   ●   ●
                                                             −1




                                                                  0                   5                    10                   15                   20
                                                                                                       33
                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved
Figure 10: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Beds per 1,000, with Leads
Figure plots estimates of treatment effects (β̂m ) and 95% confidence intervals from
             equations (1) to (3), with leads of the treatment indicator.
                                                                                                   Effect on Non−Profit & Public Beds per 1,000




                                                                          1.0
                     Avg Change in Non−Profit and Public Beds per 1,000
                                                                                                                                                                      ● ● ● ●




                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                              ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                          ●                     ● ●
                                                                                                                                              ● ● ● ● ●

                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                      ●


                                                                                                                                  ●



                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                          0.0




                                                                                   ● ●                               ● ● ●
                                                                                           ●            ●       ●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                               ●            ●
                                                                          −0.5




                                                                                 −10               −5                 0                   5          10            15           20

                                                                                                                    Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                                                            Effect on For−Profit Beds per 1,000
                                                                          1.0
                     Avg Change in For−Profit Beds per 1,000

                                                                          0.5
                                                                          0.0




                                                                                   ●
                                                                                       ● ● ● ●
                                                                                               ● ●
                                                                                                                ● ●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                                      ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ● ● ●
                                                                          −0.5




                                                                                 −10               −5                 0                   5          10            15           20

                                                                                                                    Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                                                                    Effect on Total Beds per 1,000
                                                                          1.0
                     Avg Change in Total Beds per 1,000

                                                                          0.5




                                                                                                                                                                      ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                              ● ● ● ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                              ● ● ● ● ●                              ●
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                          0.0




                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                           ●                                  ●
                                                                                                   ●                 ● ● ●
                                                                                               ● ●
                                                                                                            ● ●
                                                                          −0.5




                                                                                 −10               −5                 0                   5          10            15           20
                                                                                                                                      34
                                                                                                                    Time Since First Funding Approved
   Figure 11: Effect on Hospital Beds per 1,000 by Population Tercile, with Leads
Figure plots β̂m and 95% confidence intervals from equation (1) with leads, estimated
                                separately by tercile.
                                                                               Effect on Total Beds per 1,000, 1st Tercile




                                                           3
                      Avg Change in Total Beds per 1,000
                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●




                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                  ●            ●
                                                                                                                                                            ● ●
                                                                                                                                                     ● ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                           1

                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                          ●



                                                                  ●                                   ●
                                                                      ● ●
                                                           0




                                                                            ● ● ● ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                              ●
                                                           −1




                                                                −10          −5               0                   5                 10                 15                 20

                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                              Effect on Total Beds per 1,000, 2nd Tercile
                                                           3
                      Avg Change in Total Beds per 1,000

                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                          ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                            ● ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                 ● ●
                                                                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                                            ● ● ●
                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                              ●

                                                                                                          ●
                                                                  ● ●
                                                           0




                                                                      ●
                                                                            ● ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                    ● ● ●
                                                                                              ● ●
                                                           −1




                                                                −10          −5               0                   5                 10                 15                 20

                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                              Effect on Total Beds per 1,000, 3rd Tercile
                                                           3
                      Avg Change in Total Beds per 1,000

                                                           2
                                                           1
                                                           0




                                                                                                                                            ● ● ●
                                                                                                                      ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       ● ●
                                                                  ● ●
                                                                      ●         ●               ● ●
                                                                            ● ●   ● ●         ●
                                                                                      ● ● ● ●
                                                           −1




                                                                −10          −5               0                   5                 10                 15                 20
                                                                                                              35
                                                                                          Time Since First Funding Approved
          Figure 12: Effect of Planned Beds on Hospital Beds per 1,000
         Figure plots α̂m and 95% confidence intervals from equation (4).

                                       Effect on Total Beds per Capita from Each Planned Bed per Capita


                                1.0
                                0.8
Avg Change in Beds per Capita

                                0.6
                                0.4




                                                                                                                         ●   ●    ●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                ●   ●   ●    ●   ●
                                                                                        ●   ●
                                                                                    ●
                                0.2




                                                                   ●       ●   ●
                                                              ●        ●
                                                          ●


                                                      ●
                                0.0




                                                  ●

                                          ●   ●
                                −0.2




                                          0                   5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                  Time Since First Funding Approved




                                                                                   36
   Figure 13: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Admissions per 1,000
Figure plots estimates of treatment effects (β̂m ) and 95% confidence intervals from
equations (1) to (3), with hospital admissions per 1,000 as the dependent variable.
                                                                                             Effect on Non−Profit & Public Admissions per 1,000




                                                                                    25
                     Average Change in Non−Profit and Public Admissions per 1,000

                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                            ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●            ●
                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                              ●                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                            ●    ●
                                                                                                                          ●       ●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                  ●




                                                                                    15
                                                                                                             ●



                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                    10




                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                    5




                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                             ●
                                                                                    0
                                                                                    −5




                                                                                         0                   5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                                                                 Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                                                     Effect on For−Profit Admissions per 1,000
                                                                                    4
                     Average Change in For−Profit Admissions per 1,000

                                                                                    2
                                                                                    0




                                                                                         ●

                                                                                             ●
                                                                                    −2




                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                 ●                                                     ●        ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                           ●                                     ●
                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                          ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                     ●                ●
                                                                                                         ●        ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                    −4




                                                                                         0                   5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                                                                 Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                                                         Effect on Total Admissions per 1,000
                                                                                    25
                     Average Change in Total Admissions per 1,000

                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                            ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●            ●
                                                                                                                                           ●       ●
                                                                                    15




                                                                                                                                       ●       ●                        ●
                                                                                                                              ●                                             ●    ●
                                                                                                                          ●       ●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                    10




                                                                                                             ●


                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                    5




                                                                                         ●           ●

                                                                                             ●   ●
                                                                                    0
                                                                                    −5




                                                                                         0                   5                    10                   15                   20
                                                                                                                              37
                                                                                                                 Time Since First Funding Approved
        Figure 14: Effect on Hospital Admissions per 1,000 by Population Tercile
Figure plots β̂m and 95% confidence intervals from equation (1), with hospital admissions
           per 1,000 as the dependent variable, estimated separately by tercile.
                                                                                    Effect on Total Admissions per 1,000, 1st Tercile




                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                       ●




                        Average Change in Total Admissions per 1,000
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                      ●        ●
                                                                                                                                  ●                                 ●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                 ●   ●




                                                                       40
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                     ●   ●

                                                                                                ●


                                                                                            ●
                                                                       20




                                                                                        ●
                                                                       0




                                                                            ●

                                                                                ●   ●




                                                                            0                   5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                                                    Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                                    Effect on Total Admissions per 1,000, 2nd Tercile
                                                                       60
                        Average Change in Total Admissions per 1,000




                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                       40




                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                          ●    ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                  ●   ●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                             ●       ●    ●
                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                       20




                                                                                                ●


                                                                                            ●
                                                                       0




                                                                                        ●


                                                                            ●
                                                                                ●

                                                                                    ●




                                                                            0                   5                    10                   15                   20

                                                                                                    Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                                    Effect on Total Admissions per 1,000, 3rd Tercile
                                                                       60
                        Average Change in Total Admissions per 1,000

                                                                       40
                                                                       20




                                                                                                                 ●        ●   ●           ●    ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                     ●   ●   ●       ●            ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                ●                                                              ●    ●
                                                                            ●               ●
                                                                       0




                                                                                ●   ●   ●




                                                                            0                   5                    10                   15                   20
                                                                                                                 38
                                                                                                    Time Since First Funding Approved
Tables

          Table 1: Flow of Hill-Burton Funds to States – Hypothetical Example




Summarizing the above examples, the formula for the share of annual Hill-Burton funding
allocated to state s is as follows:
                                 n                                    o2                    
                                             1       Per Capita Incs
                                   1−        2        Nat’l Avg Inc
                                                                                × Pops
                  Shares =  P
                                                                                              
                                         n                                     o2            
                                                      1       Per Capita Inck
                                k∈U.S.   1−           2        Nat’l Avg Inc
                                                                                      × Popk




                                                      39
            Table 2: Summary of Hill-Burton Project Data by Year of Approval*

                      Non-Profit Approved Projects                        Public Approved Projects
   Year        No. of     No. of   Construction        H-B      No. of      No. of  Construction     H-B
 Approved     Projects     Beds         Cost          Share    Projects     Beds         Cost       Share
                                      ($M)**         ($M)**                            ($M)**      ($M)**
    1947         14         729        $105.5          $34.7     48         1,876       $242.3       $88.2
    1948        188       11,909      $1,748.7        $616.3     212        9,341      $1,169.6     $433.7
    1949        151        8,663      $1,501.2        $545.6     119        5,744       $939.9      $348.6
    1950        215       12,087       $2,379         $816.4     112        5,417      $1,015.5     $352.4
    1951         84        5,220       $951.3          $261      72         3,404       $489.6      $212.7
    1952        113        7,754      $1,384.2        $401.5     68         3,980       $552.4      $182.8
    1953         71        3,670       $865.0         $201.6     60         2,831       $612.2      $158.7
    1954         70        3,498       $656.4         $171.6     52         2,731       $473.4      $138.8
    1955        101        6,118      $1,348.1        $318.9     75         2,401       $419.5      $163.6
    1956        142        8,543      $1,768.6        $448.6     96         5,169       $848.3      $281.4
    1957        175        9,297      $1,801.8        $485.7     83         4,898       $764.9      $308.9
    1958        213       13,056      $2,603.4        $701.5     118        5,792       $877.3      $327.9
    1959        160       10,562      $2,013.1        $556.3     113        4,867       $804.0      $321.1
    1960        147       10,870      $2,313.8        $640.6     108        5,134       $833.5      $389.3
    1961        144        9,617      $1,801.2        $550.3     109        5,381       $839.1      $329.2
    1962        161       11,481      $2,444.4        $648.4     109        4,883       $797.7      $333.1
    1963        153       12,645      $2,744.2        $672.5     88         4,200       $719.7      $298.5
    1964        129       10,748      $2,399.4        $598.9     71         3,889       $626.1      $224.7
    1965        150        9,941      $2,674.1        $659.7     89         5,551      $1,201.7     $391.8
    1966        102        7,886      $2,095.6        $475.4     117        7,151      $1,349.4     $452.7
    1967        138       11,204      $2,717.4        $671.4     84         5,350      $1,264.3     $399.7
    1968        205       14,274       $3,801         $869.7     105        5,507      $1,123.0     $381.6
    1969        151       12,200      $3,664.4        $701.7     82         4,234      $1,135.9     $253.7
    1970         79        4,943      $1,443.8        $253.2     48         2,888       $750.1      $127.7
    1971         51        4,149      $1,190.1        $196.1     22          774        $218.2       $65.9
   Total       3,307     221,064     $48,415.7     $12,497.2    2,260      113,393    $20,067.5    $6,966.6
* Sample is limited to short-term general hospitals.
** Funding amounts are in 2012 dollars.




                                                    40
                         Table 3: Summary of County Level Data

                                  All Observations   Received Funding*     Never Funded*
                                     (N=2,967)          (N=2,106)            (N=862)
 Variable (Source)                Mean Median         Mean     Median      Mean Median
 Hospitals (AHA)
   Non-Profit / Public               1.28      1.0      1.50      1.0          0.39       0
   For-Profit                        0.33       0       0.34       0           0.26       0
   Total                             1.60      1.0      1.84      1.0          0.64       0
 Beds per 1,000 pop. (AHA)
   Non-Profit / Public               2.30      1.70     2.09     1.76          1.86       0
   For-Profit                        0.33       0       0.27       0           0.39       0
   Total                             2.63      2.15     2.36     2.06          2.25       0
 Admits. per 1,000 pop. (AHA)
   Non-Profit / Public               72.13    56.13    72.51     67.00        52.37     0.14
   For-Profit                        11.99     0.08     9.37     0.06         14.92     0.13
   Total                             84.06   74.28     81.83     76.13        67.17     0.24
 County Characteristics (ARF)
   Population                       51,940 18,570      65,889   24,282       14,516    9,970
   Median Family Income            $24,352 $24,720 $28,248 $26,931 $21,493 $21,381
   % Population Over 65              9.7%     9.3%      9.6%     9.3%        10.6%      9.5%
   % Population Under 5             11.7%    11.3%     11.0%    11.0%        12.5%     11.3%
   % Non-White                      10.9%     2.1%     10.8%     2.9%        11.7%      1.0%
   Non-Fed. MDs per 1,000             0.7      0.6       0.7      0.6          0.6       0.5
 HB Funding (HBPR)
   Total Funding                      ---      ---    $3.46M $2.38M            ---      ---
   Total Funding per Capita           ---      ---    $129.98 $102.41          ---      ---
* For counties that received Hill-Burton funding, means and medians are reported for the
year they first received funding. The median year that these counties first received funding
was 1953. For all counties that were never funded, means and medians are reported for 1953
to match the median year among the funded counties.




                                            41
                 Table 4: Instrumental Variable Estimates of Effect on Hospital Capacity
                     Dependent variables: single difference from 1948-50 to 1953-55
                              in beds by ownership type per 1,000 population.

                            (first stage)                   (second stage)                      (OLS)
     Explanatory          Treated 1948-50   Total Beds     N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds   Total Beds
     Variable                    (1)           (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)

     Priority Level          -0.0642***
                              (0.00902)
     Treated 1948-50                           1.491***         1.500***        -0.00410        0.514***
                                                (0.336)          (0.327)          (0.129)        (0.0573)
     ∆P opulation            -0.0693**         -0.147**          -0.114*          -0.0320       -0.177***
                              (0.0292)         (0.0698)         (0.0679)         (0.0268)        (0.0629)
     ∆N onW hP opn          5.33e-06***     -6.08e-06***     -6.10e-06***        8.83e-09       -2.18e-06
                             (8.27e-07)       (2.33e-06)       (2.27e-06)      (8.96e-07)      (1.77e-06)
     ∆P op65+                   0.531           7.104*           7.968**           -0.715        6.983**
                               (1.611)          (3.847)          (3.741)          (1.480)         (3.510)
42




     ∆P op < 5                  -1.510           0.862            5.665         -4.946**           -4.165
                               (2.351)          (5.713)          (5.556)          (2.198)         (5.073)
     ∆M edF amIncome        2.71e-05***       -3.57e-05*      -4.39e-05**        7.48e-06       -1.01e-05
                             (7.02e-06)       (1.85e-05)       (1.80e-05)      (7.13e-06)      (1.53e-05)
     ∆M Ds/1, 000             0.382***         1.655***         1.498***           0.156        2.072***
                              (0.0920)          (0.263)          (0.256)          (0.101)         (0.202)
     Rural (binary)          -0.398***         0.790***         0.811***          -0.0227        0.441***
                              (0.0328)          (0.141)          (0.137)         (0.0544)        (0.0731)
     Land Area              4.10e-05***     -0.000102***     -9.78e-05***       -4.34e-06     -5.88e-05***
                             (9.98e-06)       (2.84e-05)       (2.77e-05)      (1.09e-05)      (2.19e-05)
     Constant                 0.716***         -0.486**         -0.459**          -0.0276         -0.0208
                              (0.0673)          (0.219)          (0.213)         (0.0841)         (0.133)

     First-stage F-stat        50.60

     Observations              1,410            1,410            1,410           1,410           1,423
     R-squared                 0.240            0.035            0.034           0.011           0.201
                                 Standard errors in parentheses.
                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                     Table 5: Effect of Hill-Burton Projects in Own vs. Adjacent Counties on Hospital Beds
                Dependent variable: single difference from 1948-50 to 1953-55 in hospital beds per 1,000 population.

     Explanatory              Nationwide     Nationwide      Tercile 1    Tercile 1    Tercile 2    Tercile 2     Tercile 3      Tercile 3
     Variable                     (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)

     HB Funded                   0.466***     0.467***        1.490***    1.494***       0.802***   0.805***       0.405***      0.401***
                                 (0.0408)     (0.0410)          (0.147)    (0.147)       (0.0965)   (0.0962)        (0.0604)     (0.0608)
     Adj County HB Funded        0.229***                        0.138                    0.0418                   0.273***
                                 (0.0473)                       (0.115)                   (0.101)                   (0.0725)
     ∆P opulation                 0.0355*       0.0386*          -3.681       -3.677       -0.181      -0.0915       0.0311         0.0327
                                 (0.0199)       (0.0200)        (4.032)      (4.033)      (2.023)      (2.011)      (0.0283)       (0.0285)
     ∆N onW hP opn              -1.26e-06     -1.29e-06*      -6.49e-05    -6.05e-05   -0.000207*   -0.000212*     -9.61e-07      -9.56e-07
                               (7.81e-07)     (7.84e-07)     (0.000416)   (0.000416)   (0.000122)   (0.000122)    (1.09e-06)     (1.10e-06)
     ∆P op65+                    17.19***      16.79***        12.96**       12.45*      24.09***     23.92***     16.19***        15.88***
43




                                  (3.175)        (3.187)        (6.394)      (6.381)      (6.596)      (6.579)       (5.168)        (5.202)
     ∆P op < 5                  -14.40***      -15.27***          11.43        11.08       0.693        0.235      -18.88***      -19.82***
                                  (3.776)        (3.788)        (8.592)      (8.589)      (8.678)      (8.604)       (5.784)        (5.818)
     ∆M edF amIncome            -1.22e-05      -3.65e-06       7.41e-06     7.38e-06     1.98e-05     2.00e-05     -1.19e-05       1.10e-06
                               (1.18e-05)     (1.17e-05)     (2.31e-05)   (2.31e-05)   (2.42e-05)   (2.42e-05)    (1.90e-05)     (1.89e-05)
     ∆M Ds/1, 000                0.761***      0.733***       1.847***     1.868***       0.971**      0.972**     0.701***        0.669***
                                 (0.0782)       (0.0783)        (0.486)      (0.486)      (0.449)      (0.449)       (0.109)        (0.109)
     Rural (binary)             0.430***       0.449***        -0.0315      -0.0725     -1.224***    -1.233***     0.352***       0.383***
                                 (0.0500)       (0.0500)        (0.763)      (0.763)      (0.444)      (0.443)      (0.0735)       (0.0736)
     Land Area                -5.92e-05***   -5.78e-05***      1.13e-05    1.12e-05     -2.53e-05    -2.52e-05   -6.96e-05***   -6.71e-05***
                               (1.26e-05)     (1.27e-05)     (3.38e-05)   (3.38e-05)   (3.03e-05)   (3.03e-05)    (1.88e-05)     (1.90e-05)
     Constant                    -0.282**         -0.172          0.111        0.247     1.278***     1.317***        -0.249         -0.139
                                  (0.110)        (0.108)        (0.800)      (0.792)      (0.477)      (0.468)       (0.173)        (0.172)

     Observations                2,703          2,703           826         826          894           894           976            976
     R-squared                   0.165          0.157          0.183       0.181        0.117         0.116         0.181          0.169
                                                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 6: Effect of Amount of Funding on Hospital Beds per 1,000
  Dependent variable: total hospital beds per 1,000 population.

               Time Relative to        Total Beds
               Year of Funding
               Year of HB Funding      -0.000601*
                                       (0.000312)
               1 Years Later           -0.000603*
                                       (0.000343)
               2 Years Later            0.000241
                                       (0.000396)
               3 Years Later           0.00147***
                                       (0.000394)
               4 Years Later           0.00260***
                                        (0.00044)
               5 Years Later           0.00323***
                                       (0.000445)
               6 Years Later           0.00349***
                                       (0.000472)
               7 Years Later           0.00344***
                                        (0.00054)
               8 Years Later           0.00378***
                                       (0.000605)
               9 Years Later           0.00396***
                                       (0.000646)
               10 Years Later          0.00463***
                                       (0.000563)
               11 Years Later          0.00500***
                                       (0.000559)
               12 Years Later          0.00504***
                                       (0.000575)
               13 Years Later          0.00529***
                                       (0.000613)
               14 Years Later          0.00524***
                                       (0.000622)
               15 Years Later          0.00521***
                                       (0.000613)
               16 Years Later          0.00566***
                                       (0.000663)
               17 Years Later          0.00593***
                                       (0.000707)
               18 Years Later          0.00629***
                                       (0.000707)
               19 Years Later          0.00664***
                                       (0.000766)
               20 Years Later          0.00646***
                                       (0.000825)
               21+ Years Later         0.00630***
                                        (0.00085)

               Observations               83,002
               R-squared                  0.956
               Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                 44
                       Table 7: Aggregate Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Capacity

                      Variable                     National   Tercile 1   Tercile 2   Tercile 3   T1+T2+T3
                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

     From regressions with funding amounts:
     Baseline Predicted Total Beds in 1948         427,712     13,827      33,183      380,701     427,711
     Baseline Predicted Total Beds in 1975         859,267     36,733      81,434      740,365     858,532
     Counterfactual Predicted Total Beds in 1975   819,942     28,785      63,335      693,523     785,643
     (w/out Hill-Burton)

     Observed quantities:
     Total Beds in 1948                            435,220     16,218      35,247      383,754     435,219
     Total Beds in 1975                            871,019     40,264      85,249      744,766     870,279

     N                                               2968       989         989         989
45
                     Table 8: Long-Run Effects of Hill-Burton Funding on Hospital Capacity
                        Dependent variables: beds by ownership type per 1,000 population.

                         Total Beds   Total Beds     N-P / Pub.    N-P / Pub.      For-Prof.    For-Prof.
     Explanatory          in 1975      in 1990         in 1975       in 1990        in 1975      in 1990
     Variable               (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)

     H-B $ per capita     0.504***      0.424***        0.593***      0.446***    -0.0894***     -0.0228*
     (1948-75)              (0.041)       (0.030)        (0.040)       (0.030)       (0.012)     (0.0128)
     Population           0.000656     0.00777***    -0.00879***     0.000429     0.00944***    0.00734***
                          (0.00343)     (0.00215)      (0.00340)     (0.00215)     (0.00099)    (0.000907)
     Med. Fam. Inc.       6.37E-07    -1.73e-05***     -4.45E-06   -2.03e-05***   5.08e-06***   3.03e-06**
                         (4.99E-06)    (2.95E-06)     (4.95E-06)    (2.96E-06)    (1.43E-06)    (1.25e-06)
     Prop. Pop. 65+       14.07***       15.38***       13.28***      13.58***        0.787      1.799***
                            (1.905)       (1.288)        (1.887)       (1.289)       (0.546)      (0.543)
     Prop. Pop. <5        22.49***      35.46***        23.15***      31.25***        -0.66       4.209**
46




                            (6.035)       (5.019)        (5.980)       (5.023)       (1.731)      (2.118)
     MDs per 1,000        0.959***      0.696***        0.938***      0.653***      0.0206*     0.0425***
                           (0.0430)      (0.0249)       (0.0426)      (0.0250)      (0.0123)     (0.0105)
     Prop. NonWhite          -0.275     -1.361***         0.329      -1.075***     -0.604***     -0.286**
                            (0.483)       (0.308)        (0.478)       (0.308)       (0.138)      (0.130)

     State FEs              yes           yes            yes           yes            yes          yes

     Observations          2,968        2,964         2,968        2,964             2,968        2,964
     R-squared             0.331        0.428         0.353        0.429             0.323        0.317
                                        *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Table 9: Distribution of Beds per 1,000 by County Income, Census Region, and Rural Status
                           All calculations are weighted by county population.

                                 Means in 1948      Means in 1975     Change, 1948 to 1975
     Median Family Income
     Quintile 1                       0.839              3.136                  2.297
     Quintile 2                       1.725              3.699                  1.974
     Quintile 3                       2.413              3.757                  1.344
     Quintile 4                       3.269              4.950                  1.681
     Quintile 5                       3.491              4.060                  0.569
     Diff: High – Low Quintile        2.652              1.814                    -

          Census Region
     Midwest                          3.347               4.601                 1.254
     Northeast                        2.890               3.617                 0.727
     South                            2.508              4.323                  1.815
47




     West                             3.585              3.692                  0.107
     Diff: Northeast – South          0.351              -0.706                   -

          Rural/Nonrural
     Nonrural                         3.853              4.466                  0.613
     Rural                            2.148              3.682                  1.534
     Diff Nonrural-Rural              1.705              0.784                    -

                                 StdDev in 1948    StdDev in 1975     Change, 1948 to 1975
     Beds per 1,000                  3.000             2.308                 -0.692
A      Appendix

A1.1     AHA Data

The American Hospital Association is an organization that represents all hospitals in the
nation. The AHA survey data are a commonly used data set used to study the hospital
industry. The AHA sends surveys to all hospitals registered with the organization, and
for these historical surveys, the response rate is over 90% and often over 96%. They then
publish these data in the August issue of the year following the survey. The survey asks
hospitals for data on expenditures, employment and patient days for the 12-month period
ending September 30th of the year prior to the year in which the data are published. For
data on the number of beds, it is less clear whether the survey response was before February
of the publication or as of September 30th of the year prior. For our analysis, following
Finkelstein (2007), we take the year to be the year prior to the publication issue (e.g. 1950
data were published in the 1951 August issue). For additional information on the historical
AHA data, we refer the reader to Finkelstein (2007)’s appendix.




                                             48
A1.2                                                         Appendix Figures and Tables

        Figure A1: Effect on Beds by Tercile and Ownership Type, with Leads
  Figure plots β̂m and 95% CIs from equations (2)-(3) estimated separately by tercile.
                                                                       Effect on Non−Profit & Public Beds per 1,000, 1st Tercile                                                                                                          Effect on For−Profit Beds per 1,000, 1st Tercile
                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
       Avg Change in Non−Profit and Public Beds per 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                   ● ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                         ● ●




                                                                                                                                                                                 Avg Change in For−Profit Beds per 1,000
                                                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                 ● ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                     ●




                                                                                                 ●



                                                                   ● ● ●
                                                                         ● ● ● ● ●           ●
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                       ● ●                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ● ● ● ● ● ● ●         ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ● ● ● ●
                                                            −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −1
                                                                 −10         −5         0                    5                   10                 15                 20                                                       −10        −5           0              5         10        15        20

                                                                                      Time Since First Funding Approved                                                                                                                               Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                       Effect on Non−Profit & Public Beds per 1,000, 2nd Tercile                                                                                                         Effect on For−Profit Beds per 1,000, 2nd Tercile
                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
       Avg Change in Non−Profit and Public Beds per 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                 Avg Change in For−Profit Beds per 1,000
                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                       ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                         ● ● ●
                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                         ●

                                                                                                     ●



                                                                                                 ●
                                                                   ● ● ●
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ● ● ●
                                                                           ● ● ●                                                                                                                                                          ● ● ●
                                                                                       ●                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                   ● ●   ● ●                                                                                                                                                          ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ● ● ●
                                                            −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −1




                                                                 −10         −5         0                    5                   10                 15                 20                                                       −10        −5           0              5         10        15        20

                                                                                      Time Since First Funding Approved                                                                                                                               Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                       Effect on Non−Profit & Public Beds per 1,000, 3rd Tercile                                                                                                         Effect on For−Profit Beds per Capita, 3rd Tercile
                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
       Avg Change in Non−Profit and Public Beds per 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                 Avg Change in For−Profit Beds per 1,000
                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                       ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                 ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                         ● ●                                                                                                                                          ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                   ● ● ●       ●             ●
                                                                           ● ●   ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                            −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −1




                                                                 −10         −5         0                    5                   10                 15                 20                                                       −10        −5           0              5         10        15        20

                                                                                      Time Since First Funding Approved                                                                                                                               Time Since First Funding Approved


                                                                                                                                                                                49
   Figure A2: Effect on Admissions by Tercile and Ownership Type, with Leads
Figure plots β̂m and 95% CIs from equations (2)-(3) estimated separately by tercile.
                                                                     Effect on Non−Profit & Public Admissions per 1,000, 1st Tercile                                                                                                                                Effect on For−Profit Admissions per 1,000, 1st Tercile
                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
Average Change in Non−Profit and Public Admissions per 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average Change in For−Profit Admissions per 1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●            ●
                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●                                       ●
                                                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                              ●

                                                                                                                          ●




                                                                                                                      ●
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                       ●        ●                 ●
                                                                               ●                        ● ●
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                   ●        ●       ●         ●
                                                                       ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                      ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ● ● ● ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●                               ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                               −20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −20
                                                                     −10               −5                 0                   5                   10                 15                   20                                                                  −10        −5             0              5         10        15        20

                                                                                                        Time Since First Funding Approved                                                                                                                                           Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                     Effect on Non−Profit & Public Admissions per 1,000, 2nd Tercile                                                                                                                                Effect on For−Profit Admissions per 1,000, 2nd Tercile
                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
Average Change in Non−Profit and Public Admissions per 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average Change in For−Profit Admissions per 1,000
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60




                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                               ●

                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                     ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                               ● ●
                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40




                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                          ●       ● ●
                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                  ●

                                                                                                                              ●
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                          ●



                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                       ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                   ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                          ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●   ● ●
                                                               −20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −20




                                                                     −10               −5                 0                   5                   10                 15                   20                                                                  −10        −5             0              5         10        15        20

                                                                                                        Time Since First Funding Approved                                                                                                                                           Time Since First Funding Approved



                                                                     Effect on Non−Profit & Public Admissions per 1,000, 3rd Tercile                                                                                                                                Effect on For−Profit Admissions per 1,000, 3rd Tercile
                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
Average Change in Non−Profit and Public Admissions per 1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average Change in For−Profit Admissions per 1,000
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                               ●                                              ●                   ● ● ● ● ●
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                       ●                                                  ●                                                               ● ●                                                                   ●
                                                                                               ●                                                                                                                                                                    ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                           ●       ● ● ● ● ● ●   ● ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ● ● ●
                                                               −20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −20




                                                                     −10               −5                 0                   5                   10                 15                   20                                                                  −10        −5             0              5         10        15        20

                                                                                                        Time Since First Funding Approved                                                                                                                                           Time Since First Funding Approved
                                                                                                                                                                                                   50
            Table A1: Summary of County-Level Data, by Population Tercile

                                    Tercile 1*         Tercile 2*         Tercile 3*
                                    (N=988)            (N=989)            (N=989)
 Variable (Source)                Mean Median        Mean Median        Mean Median
 Hospitals (AHA)
   Non-Profit / Public             0.40      0        0.77      1.0      2.66       2.0
   For-Profit                      0.14      0        0.31       0       0.53        0
   Total                           0.53      0        1.08      1.0      3.19       2.0
 Beds per 1,000 pop. (AHA)
   Non-Profit / Public             2.05      0        1.81      1.55     3.05      2.70
   For-Profit                      0.32      0        0.40       0       0.27        0
   Total                           2.37      0        2.20      2.01     3.32      2.91
 Admits. per 1,000 pop. (AHA)
   Non-Profit / Public            57.51     0.18     59.14     50.51    99.70     95.99
   For-Profit                      9.90     0.13     14.72      0.06    11.43      0.02
   Total                          67.22     0.26     73.81     68.42    111.11 106.64
 County Characteristics (ARF)
   Population                     7,409    7,480    19,202 18,510 129,180 51,730
   Median Family Income          $22,141 $22,213 $22,077 $22,666 $28,789 $29,783
   % Population Over 65           10.5%    9.3%       9.8%     9.8%      8.7%      8.7%
   % Population Under 5           12.4%    11.4%     11.4%     11.3%    11.4%     11.2%
   % Non-White                    10.0%    0.8%      11.9%     1.9%     11.0%      3.8%
   Non-Fed. MDs per 1,000           0.5     0.4        0.6      0.6       0.9       0.8
 HB Funding (HBPR)**
   Pct. of Counties Treated       47.4%     ---      73.6%      ---     91.9%      ---
   Total Funding if Treated      $1.71M $1.39M $2.74M $2.27M $4.93M $3.52M
   Total Funding per Capita      $219.36 $182.50 $140.25 $120.00 $75.70 $55.33
* Funded and unfunded counties combined. For counties that received Hill-Burton funding,
means and medians are reported for the year they first received funding. For all counties
that were never funded, means and medians are reported for 1953 to match the median year
among the funded counties.
** Among funded counties only.




                                           51
Table A2: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Beds per 1,000
       Time Relative to        Total Beds         N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
       First Year of Funding      (1)                   (2)              (3)

       Year of Funding            -0.0125               0.0352       -0.0477***
                                 (0.0404)             (0.0410)         (0.0119)
       1 Years Later              -0.0119               0.0508       -0.0627***
                                 (0.0457)             (0.0472)         (0.0144)
       2 Years Later              0.0290                0.111*       -0.0823***
                                 (0.0605)             (0.0620)         (0.0170)
       3 Years Later             0.155***             0.259***        -0.104***
                                 (0.0590)             (0.0608)         (0.0191)
       4 Years Later             0.248***             0.364***        -0.116***
                                 (0.0640)             (0.0659)         (0.0204)
       5 Years Later             0.292***             0.411***        -0.119***
                                 (0.0596)             (0.0619)         (0.0224)
       6 Years Later             0.365***             0.481***        -0.116***
                                 (0.0646)             (0.0675)         (0.0243)
       7 Years Later             0.375***             0.492***        -0.117***
                                 (0.0715)             (0.0745)         (0.0254)
       8 Years Later             0.362***             0.476***        -0.115***
                                 (0.0752)             (0.0780)         (0.0267)
       9 Years Later             0.370***             0.490***        -0.119***
                                 (0.0819)             (0.0846)         (0.0279)
       10 Years Later            0.382***             0.501***        -0.120***
                                 (0.0871)             (0.0900)         (0.0294)
       11 Years Later            0.435***             0.548***        -0.113***
                                 (0.0926)             (0.0963)         (0.0307)
       12 Years Later            0.462***             0.570***        -0.108***
                                 (0.0988)               (0.102)        (0.0328)
       13 Years Later            0.456***             0.564***        -0.107***
                                  (0.104)               (0.108)        (0.0343)
       14 Years Later            0.459***             0.575***        -0.116***
                                  (0.114)               (0.117)        (0.0371)
       15 Years Later            0.479***             0.580***        -0.101***
                                  (0.120)               (0.123)        (0.0386)
       16 Years Later            0.494***             0.593***        -0.0990**
                                  (0.128)               (0.132)        (0.0403)
       17 Years Later            0.507***             0.604***        -0.0972**
                                  (0.136)               (0.139)        (0.0410)
       18 Years Later            0.495***             0.605***         -0.110**
                                  (0.141)               (0.144)        (0.0426)
       19 Years Later            0.482***             0.593***         -0.111**
                                  (0.150)               (0.153)        (0.0440)
       20 Years Later            0.438***             0.546***         -0.107**
                                  (0.155)               (0.159)        (0.0457)
       21+ Years Later            0.425**             0.538***         -0.113**
                                  (0.172)               (0.177)        (0.0469)
       Population                0.0234**               -0.0148       0.0382***
                                 (0.0116)             (0.0127)        (0.00463)
       Med Fam Income            2.17e-06             -1.58e-06        3.76e-06
                                (1.31e-05)           (1.27e-05)      (2.71e-06)
       Prop. Pop 65+             41.51***             41.17***           0.347
                                  (2.942)               (2.976)         (0.551)
       Prop. Pop <5              42.44***             43.73***           -1.290
                                  (3.469)               (3.311)         (0.803)
       MDs per 1,000             0.391***             0.372***          0.0186
                                 (0.0635)              (0.0781)        (0.0236)
       Prop. Pop NonWh          -4.736***            -5.051***           0.315
                                  (1.533)               (1.584)         (0.319)

       Observations               83,002           83,002              83,002
       R-squared                   0.954           0.954               0.735
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                             52
Table A3: Effect on Hospital Beds per 1,000 by Population Tercile
         Time Relative to          Tercile 1     Tercile 2       Tercile 3
         First Year of Funding       (1)           (2)             (3)

         Year of Funding           -0.288***     -0.251***          -0.0632
                                    (0.0782)      (0.0434)         (0.0463)
         1 Years Later               -0.168*     -0.264***          -0.0597
                                    (0.0904)      (0.0501)         (0.0559)
         2 Years Later                0.157        -0.0399          -0.0457
                                     (0.113)      (0.0592)         (0.0816)
         3 Years Later              0.578***      0.288***          0.0554
                                     (0.143)      (0.0659)         (0.0823)
         4 Years Later              0.737***      0.483***           0.143
                                     (0.122)      (0.0714)         (0.0932)
         5 Years Later              0.895***      0.588***          0.185*
                                     (0.133)      (0.0706)         (0.0943)
         6 Years Later              0.967***      0.664***         0.267**
                                     (0.134)      (0.0751)          (0.109)
         7 Years Later              0.979***      0.701***         0.277**
                                     (0.137)      (0.0784)          (0.122)
         8 Years Later              1.039***      0.775***          0.255*
                                     (0.144)       (0.101)          (0.133)
         9 Years Later              1.138***      0.764***          0.270*
                                     (0.153)      (0.0865)          (0.146)
         10 Years Later             1.239***      0.794***           0.286*
                                     (0.156)      (0.0907)          (0.158)
         11 Years Later             1.318***      0.886***         0.338**
                                     (0.156)      (0.0964)          (0.171)
         12 Years Later             1.440***      0.900***         0.375**
                                     (0.160)       (0.102)          (0.184)
         13 Years Later             1.595***      0.974***           0.370*
                                     (0.160)       (0.104)          (0.195)
         14 Years Later             1.706***      1.004***           0.376*
                                     (0.167)       (0.108)          (0.210)
         15 Years Later             1.714***      1.096***           0.403*
                                     (0.172)       (0.114)          (0.222)
         16 Years Later             1.869***      1.159***           0.422*
                                     (0.171)       (0.116)          (0.235)
         17 Years Later             1.901***      1.161***           0.452*
                                     (0.187)       (0.119)          (0.247)
         18 Years Later             2.030***      1.224***           0.456*
                                     (0.189)       (0.129)          (0.259)
         19 Years Later             2.114***      1.326***           0.453*
                                     (0.208)       (0.137)          (0.273)
         20 Years Later             2.104***      1.384***            0.427
                                     (0.208)       (0.146)          (0.284)
         21+ Years Later            2.002***      1.392***           0.458
                                     (0.249)       (0.153)          (0.317)
         Population                   -0.215     -2.001***       0.0319***
                                     (0.160)       (0.480)        (0.00694)
         Med Fam Income             8.92e-06    3.92e-05***     -3.30e-05***
                                   (2.61e-05)    (9.30e-06)      (8.66e-06)
         Prop. Pop 65+              29.78***      16.10***         12.31***
                                     (2.263)       (2.023)          (3.486)
         Prop. Pop <5               40.79***         2.785          -6.183*
                                     (10.43)       (3.399)          (3.706)
         MDs per 1,000              0.288**       0.656***         0.209**
                                     (0.134)       (0.178)         (0.0913)
         Prop. Pop NonWh               2.313        -0.216        -4.152***
                                     (5.353)       (0.968)          (1.314)

         Observations               27,611        27,684          27,681
         R-squared                   0.994         0.759          0.880
                        Robust standard errors in parentheses
                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                         53
Table A4: Effect on Hospital Beds and Admissions per 1,000, pre-Medicare
               Time Relative to        Admissions PC 1    Admissions PC
               First Year of Funding         (1)               (2)

               Year of Funding              -0.0383              1.837
                                           (0.0371)            (1.342)
               1 Years Later                -0.0346             -0.384
                                           (0.0446)            (1.284)
               2 Years Later                 0.0141              0.125
                                           (0.0734)            (1.555)
               3 Years Later                 0.134*              1.161
                                           (0.0728)            (1.455)
               4 Years Later               0.225***          5.446***
                                           (0.0832)            (1.611)
               5 Years Later               0.267***          7.700***
                                           (0.0792)            (1.748)
               6 Years Later               0.326***          9.595***
                                           (0.0827)            (1.944)
               7 Years Later               0.356***          10.78***
                                           (0.0933)            (2.205)
               8 Years Later               0.321***          11.26***
                                            (0.102)            (2.372)
               9 Years Later               0.295***          11.32***
                                            (0.109)            (2.641)
               10 Years Later               0.284**           9.641***
                                            (0.119)            (2.836)
               11 Years Later               0.290**           9.141***
                                            (0.129)            (2.983)
               12 Years Later               0.299**           8.790***
                                            (0.140)            (3.296)
               13 Years Later                0.274*            7.898**
                                            (0.152)            (3.711)
               14 Years Later                 0.193              5.929
                                            (0.180)            (4.226)
               15 Years Later                 0.108              5.612
                                            (0.206)            (5.074)
               16+ Years Later               0.0269              2.545
                                            (0.228)            (6.952)
               Population                   0.00969              0.457
                                           (0.0119)            (0.496)
               Med Fam Income             -2.10e-05*         -0.000321
                                          (1.28e-05)        (0.000393)
               Prop. Pop 65+               44.85***           1,045***
                                            (3.138)            (86.30)
               Prop. Pop <5                36.29***           846.2***
                                            (3.371)            (97.01)
               MDs per 1,000               0.382***          12.70***
                                           (0.0376)            (1.306)
               Prop. Pop NonWh             -3.460**             -15.31
                                            (1.641)            (53.51)

               Observations                50,366              50,366
               R-squared                    0.982              0.965
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                          54
  Table A5: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Beds per
  1,000, with Leads

Time Relative to        Total Beds      N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
First Year of Funding      (1)                (2)              (3)

9 Years Prior            -0.0746            -0.0231          -0.0516*
                         (0.113)            (0.117)          (0.0269)
8 Years Prior             -0.103            -0.0321         -0.0709**
                         (0.115)            (0.119)          (0.0292)
7 Years Prior             -0.126            -0.0541         -0.0717**
                         (0.121)            (0.124)          (0.0302)
6 Years Prior              -0.17            -0.0939         -0.0765**
                         (0.127)            (0.130)          (0.0312)
5 Years Prior             -0.159            -0.0754        -0.0837***
                         (0.134)            (0.136)          (0.0324)
4 Years Prior             -0.147            -0.0562        -0.0905***
                         (0.134)            (0.136)          (0.0342)
3 Years Prior               -0.2              -0.11         -0.0902**
                         (0.150)            (0.149)          (0.0417)
2 Years Prior             -0.188            -0.0523         -0.136***
                         (0.142)            (0.143)          (0.0401)
1 Years Prior             -0.153            -0.0096         -0.143***
                         (0.152)            (0.152)          (0.0406)
Year of Funding           -0.166            -0.0122         -0.154***
                         (0.147)            (0.149)          (0.0407)
1 Years Later             -0.169           0.00139          -0.171***
                         (0.152)            (0.154)          (0.0422)
2 Years Later             -0.133            0.0594          -0.192***
                         (0.154)            (0.157)          (0.0438)
3 Years Later            -0.0122             0.205          -0.217***
                         (0.155)            (0.159)          (0.0452)
4 Years Later            0.0763              0.309*         -0.232***
                         (0.156)            (0.161)          (0.0468)
5 Years Later              0.116            0.356**         -0.240***
                         (0.159)            (0.163)          (0.0482)
6 Years Later              0.185           0.425***         -0.240***
                         (0.158)            (0.163)          (0.0502)
7 Years Later              0.190           0.435***         -0.245***
                         (0.162)            (0.167)          (0.0521)
8 Years Later              0.173            0.419**         -0.246***
                         (0.162)            (0.167)          (0.0543)
9 Years Later              0.177            0.431**         -0.254***
                         (0.163)            (0.167)          (0.0562)
10 Years Later             0.184           0.441***         -0.257***
                         (0.166)            (0.170)          (0.0582)
11 Years Later             0.232           0.486***         -0.254***
                         (0.168)            (0.173)          (0.0608)
12 Years Later             0.256           0.508***         -0.253***
                         (0.171)            (0.175)          (0.0636)
13 Years Later             0.246           0.501***         -0.255***
                         (0.172)            (0.177)          (0.0647)
14 Years Later             0.245           0.511***         -0.266***
                         (0.170)            (0.177)          (0.0648)


                                   55
(continued table)

Time Relative to         Total Beds        N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
First Year of Funding       (1)                  (2)              (3)

15 Years Later              0.261              0.516***        -0.255***
                           (0.172)              (0.178)         (0.0674)
16 Years Later              0.273              0.528***        -0.255***
                           (0.174)              (0.180)         (0.0698)
17 Years Later              0.282              0.539***        -0.256***
                           (0.178)              (0.183)         (0.0714)
18 Years Later              0.267              0.539***        -0.272***
                           (0.178)              (0.183)         (0.0730)
19 Years Later              0.251              0.527***        -0.276***
                           (0.181)              (0.187)         (0.0751)
20 Years Later              0.203               0.479**        -0.275***
                           (0.184)              (0.190)         (0.0782)
21+ Years Later             0.181               0.469**        -0.288***
                           (0.192)              (0.197)         (0.0800)
Population                0.0229*               -0.0150        0.0379***
                          (0.0117)             (0.0127)        (0.00460)
Med Fam Income            2.39e-06             -1.49e-06        3.88e-06
                         (1.31e-05)           (1.27e-05)       (2.71e-06)
Prop. Pop 65+             41.51***             41.17***            0.338
                           (2.942)              (2.979)          (0.553)
Prop. Pop <5              42.43***             43.70***           -1.266
                           (3.463)              (3.306)          (0.804)
MDs per 1,000             0.390***             0.371***          0.0184
                          (0.0636)             (0.0782)         (0.0235)
Prop. Pop NonWh          -4.722***            -5.034***            0.312
                           (1.530)              (1.582)          (0.321)

Observations               83,002           83,002              83,002
R-squared                   0.954           0.954               0.735
                  Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                      56
Table A6: Effect of Program on Hospital Beds per 1,000 by Popu-
lation Tercile, with Leads

 Time Relative to        Tercile 1    Tercile 2     Tercile 3
 First Year of Funding     (1)          (2)           (3)

 9 Years Prior             0.0944    -8.79e-05       -0.219
                          (0.111)     (0.0602)      (0.164)
 8 Years Prior             0.0104      -0.0211       -0.233
                          (0.118)     (0.0634)      (0.174)
 7 Years Prior             0.0327      -0.0545       -0.268
                          (0.138)     (0.0696)      (0.186)
 6 Years Prior            -0.0396      -0.133*       -0.316
                          (0.147)     (0.0738)      (0.192)
 5 Years Prior            -0.0267     -0.161**       -0.296
                          (0.151)     (0.0783)      (0.206)
 4 Years Prior           -0.00829     -0.180**       -0.266
                          (0.160)     (0.0824)      (0.211)
 3 Years Prior            -0.0746    -0.284***       -0.323
                          (0.165)     (0.0875)      (0.226)
 2 Years Prior             -0.138    -0.289***       -0.364
                          (0.171)     (0.0954)      (0.225)
 1 Years Prior             -0.279    -0.319***       -0.375
                          (0.170)     (0.0969)      (0.235)
 Year of Funding         -0.353**    -0.429***      -0.401*
                          (0.176)     (0.0984)      (0.236)
 1 Years Later             -0.233    -0.446***      -0.409*
                          (0.185)      (0.102)      (0.244)
 2 Years Later             0.0915     -0.227**       -0.405
                          (0.196)      (0.108)      (0.254)
 3 Years Later            0.511**       0.0958       -0.316
                          (0.211)      (0.113)      (0.259)
 4 Years Later           0.669***      0.285**       -0.241
                          (0.204)      (0.118)      (0.267)
 5 Years Later           0.825***     0.384***       -0.211
                          (0.216)      (0.121)      (0.276)
 6 Years Later           0.895***     0.454***       -0.142
                          (0.219)      (0.126)      (0.282)
 7 Years Later           0.905***     0.485***       -0.146
                          (0.220)      (0.129)      (0.292)
 8 Years Later           0.963***     0.554***       -0.180
                          (0.227)      (0.145)      (0.301)
 9 Years Later           1.059***     0.539***       -0.178
                          (0.229)      (0.138)      (0.311)
 10 Years Later          1.159***     0.562***       -0.174
                          (0.232)      (0.142)      (0.322)
 11 Years Later          1.236***     0.649***       -0.134
                          (0.236)      (0.147)      (0.331)
 12 Years Later          1.358***     0.658***       -0.109
                          (0.241)      (0.152)      (0.340)
 13 Years Later          1.511***     0.728***       -0.127
                          (0.238)      (0.155)      (0.349)
 14 Years Later          1.620***     0.753***       -0.132
                          (0.247)      (0.159)      (0.355)


                              57
(continued table)

Time Relative to        Tercile 1     Tercile 2      Tercile 3
First Year of Funding     (1)           (2)            (3)

15 Years Later           1.626***      0.838***          -0.116
                          (0.250)       (0.163)         (0.364)
16 Years Later           1.778***      0.897***          -0.108
                          (0.247)       (0.165)         (0.372)
17 Years Later           1.808***      0.894***         -0.0884
                          (0.258)       (0.168)         (0.381)
18 Years Later           1.934***      0.954***         -0.0959
                          (0.259)       (0.175)         (0.390)
19 Years Later           2.018***      1.051***          -0.111
                          (0.274)       (0.183)         (0.401)
20 Years Later           2.007***      1.106***          -0.149
                          (0.276)       (0.190)         (0.412)
21+ Years Later          1.904***      1.106***          -0.145
                          (0.313)       (0.199)         (0.438)
Population                 -0.214     -1.972***      0.0315***
                          (0.161)       (0.478)       (0.00697)
Med Fam Income           8.85e-06    3.82e-05***    -3.23e-05***
                        (2.60e-05)    (9.33e-06)     (8.65e-06)
Prop. Pop 65+            29.82***      15.99***        12.34***
                          (2.249)       (2.010)         (3.473)
Prop. Pop <5             40.80***         3.247         -6.088*
                          (10.41)       (3.403)         (3.670)
MDs per 1,000            0.289**       0.655***         0.201**
                          (0.134)       (0.178)        (0.0881)
Prop. Pop NonWh            2.290         -0.199       -4.179***
                          (5.348)       (0.970)         (1.318)

Observations           27,611        27,684           27,681
R-squared               0.994         0.759           0.880
           Robust standard errors in parentheses.
             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                              58
Table A7: Effect of Planned Beds on Hospital Beds per 1,000

        Time Relative to
        Year of Funding                 Total Beds

        Planned Beds:

        Planned Beds Year of Funding     -0.115***
                                          (0.0213)
        Planned Beds 1 Year Later        -0.110***
                                          (0.0241)
        Planned Beds 2 Years Later        -0.0469*
                                          (0.0272)
        Planned Beds 3 Years Later         0.0510*
                                          (0.0280)
        Planned Beds 4 Years Later        0.131***
                                          (0.0307)
        Planned Beds 5 Years Later        0.158***
                                          (0.0309)
        Planned Beds 6 Years Later        0.179***
                                          (0.0338)
        Planned Beds 7 Years Later        0.161***
                                          (0.0394)
        Planned Beds 8 Years Later        0.176***
                                          (0.0441)
        Planned Beds 9 Years Later        0.184***
                                          (0.0453)
        Planned Beds 10 Years Later       0.220***
                                          (0.0413)
        Planned Beds 11 Years Later       0.236***
                                          (0.0417)
        Planned Beds 12 Years Later       0.230***
                                          (0.0427)
        Planned Beds 13 Years Later       0.248***
                                          (0.0430)
        Planned Beds 14 Years Later       0.246***
                                          (0.0462)
        Planned Beds 15 Years Later       0.245***
                                          (0.0400)
        Planned Beds 16 Years Later       0.251***
                                          (0.0431)
        Planned Beds 17 Years Later       0.249***
                                          (0.0445)
        Planned Beds 18 Years Later       0.267***
                                          (0.0436)
        Planned Beds 19 Years Later       0.289***
                                          (0.0472)
        Planned Beds 20 Years Later       0.284***
                                          (0.0505)
        Planned Beds 21+ Years Later      0.277***
                                          (0.0565)




                            59
(continued table)

Time Relative to
Year of Funding           Total Beds

Treatment Indicators:

Year of HB Funding          -0.0306
                           (0.0278)
1 Year Later                -0.0335
                            0.0295
2 Years Later               -0.0226
                            0.0343
3 Years Later               0.00660
                            0.0241
4 Years Later               0.00283
                            0.0251
5 Years Later               0.00335
                            0.0241
6 Years Later              -0.00615
                            0.0206
7 Years Later              -0.00220
                            0.0236
8 Years Later               -0.0193
                            0.0290
9 Years Later               -0.0242
                            0.0259
10 Years Later            -0.0474**
                            0.0226
11 Years Later              -0.0251
                            0.0244
12 Years Later              -0.0105
                            0.0232
13 Years Later              -0.0265
                            0.0227
14 Years Later              0.00834
                            0.0249
15 Years Later               0.0345
                            0.0252
16 Years Later               0.0279
                            0.0285
17 Years Later               0.0263
                            0.0290
18 Years Later              -0.0363
                            0.0260
19 Years Later              -0.0334
                            0.0314
20 Years Later              -0.0515
                            0.0418
21+ Years Later            -0.123**
                            0.0597




                     60
(continued table)

Time Relative to
Year of Funding                Total Beds

Other Variables:

Popiulation                     0.0384***
                                  0.00904
Med Family Income               -0.0225***
                                 (0.00670)
Prop. Pop 65+                    14.39***
                                   (2.436)
Prop. Pop <5                        -2.335
                                   (3.026)
MDs per 1,000                     0.168**
                                  (0.0811)
Prop. Pop NonWh                   -2.374**
                                   (1.030)

Observations                      82,974
R-squared                         0.864
  Robust standard errors in parentheses.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                    61
  Table A8: Effect of Amount of Funding on Hospital Beds per 1,000

                        Total Beds    N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
Variable                   (1)              (2)              (3)

Treatment Indicators:

Year of Funding          -0.113***      -0.0991***          -0.0137
                          (0.0322)         (0.029)         (0.0107)
1 Years Later            -0.110***      -0.0968***          -0.0136
                          (0.0326)        (0.0287)        (0.00974)
2 Years Later            -0.0942**       -0.0805**          -0.0138
                          (0.0391)        (0.0353)         (0.0110)
3 Years Later              -0.0503         -0.0451         -0.00519
                          (0.0322)        (0.0297)        (0.00828)
4 Years Later              -0.0453         -0.0405         -0.00482
                          (0.0323)        (0.0301)        (0.00881)
5 Years Later              -0.0544         -0.0542        -0.000174
                          (0.0345)        (0.0334)        (0.00755)
6 Years Later            -0.0603**       -0.0585**         -0.00181
                          (0.0296)        (0.0287)        (0.00858)
7 Years Later            -0.0660**       -0.0657**        -0.000340
                          (0.0304)        (0.0296)        (0.00795)
8 Years Later            -0.0866**      -0.0914***          0.00487
                          (0.0338)         (0.033)        (0.00707)
9 Years Later           -0.0854***       -0.0767**         -0.00872
                            (0.03)        (0.0312)        (0.00902)
10 Years Later          -0.0990***      -0.0950***         -0.00403
                          (0.0262)        (0.0269)        (0.00796)
11 Years Later          -0.0769***      -0.0796***          0.00271
                          (0.0267)        (0.0281)        (0.00866)
12 Years Later          -0.0687***       -0.0648**         -0.00391
                          (0.0257)        (0.0267)         (0.0103)
13 Years Later          -0.0839***      -0.0779***         -0.00601
                          (0.0238)        (0.0256)         (0.0105)
14 Years Later             -0.0373        -0.0454*          0.00810
                          (0.0251)        (0.0262)        (0.00762)
15 Years Later            -0.00848          -0.033         0.0246**
                          (0.0246)        (0.0295)         (0.0115)
16 Years Later             -0.0191          -0.039          0.0199*
                          (0.0273)        (0.0308)         (0.0120)
17 Years Later              -0.038         -0.0492           0.0112
                          (0.0265)        (0.0302)         (0.0118)
18 Years Later          -0.0935***      -0.0949***          0.00142
                          (0.0244)        (0.0285)         (0.0166)
19 Years Later          -0.0906***       -0.0838**         -0.00675
                          (0.0317)        (0.0344)         (0.0178)
20 Years Later           -0.123***       -0.122***         -0.00165
                          (0.0439)        (0.0435)         (0.0212)
21+ Years Later          -0.212***       -0.218***          0.00633
                          (0.0723)         (0.073)         (0.0230)




                                 62
(continued table)

                    Total Beds    N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
Variable               (1)              (2)              (3)

Funding Amounts:

Year of Funding     -0.000601*       -0.000443         -0.000158
                     0.000312        0.000309          0.000102
1 Years Later       -0.000603*       -0.000391       -0.000212**
                     0.000343        0.000335          0.000103
2 Years Later        0.000241         0.000588      -0.000347***
                     0.000396        0.000386          0.000111
3 Years Later       0.00147***      0.00204***      -0.000574***
                     0.000394        0.000398          0.000108
4 Years Later       0.00260***      0.00322***      -0.000612***
                     0.000440        0.000449          0.000112
5 Years Later       0.00323***      0.00386***      -0.000626***
                     0.000445        0.000460          0.000115
6 Years Later       0.00349***      0.00410***      -0.000612***
                     0.000472        0.000481          0.000129
7 Years Later       0.00344***      0.00413***      -0.000691***
                     0.000540        0.000551          0.000126
8 Years Later       0.00378***      0.00452***      -0.000732***
                     0.000605        0.000622          0.000129
9 Years Later       0.00396***      0.00464***      -0.000675***
                     0.000646        0.000668          0.000138
10 Years Later      0.00463***      0.00526***      -0.000628***
                     0.000563        0.000584          0.000134
11 Years Later      0.00500***      0.00571***      -0.000704***
                     0.000559        0.000587          0.000151
12 Years Later      0.00504***      0.00572***      -0.000682***
                     0.000575        0.000608          0.000144
13 Years Later      0.00529***      0.00594***      -0.000651***
                     0.000613        0.000646          0.000150
14 Years Later      0.00524***      0.00594***      -0.000700***
                     0.000622        0.000656          0.000153
15 Years Later      0.00521***      0.00593***      -0.000722***
                     0.000613        0.000655          0.000167
16 Years Later      0.00566***      0.00641***      -0.000750***
                     0.000663        0.000706          0.000183
17 Years Later      0.00593***      0.00654***      -0.000608***
                     0.000707        0.000737          0.000182
18 Years Later      0.00629***      0.00687***      -0.000581***
                     0.000707        0.000744          0.000178
19 Years Later      0.00664***      0.00696***         -0.000322
                     0.000766        0.000785          0.000206
20 Years Later      0.00646***      0.00687***        -0.000405*
                     0.000825        0.000840          0.000233
21+ Years Later     0.00630***      0.00676***        -0.000452*
                     0.000850        0.000858          0.000250




                             63
(continued table)

                          Total Beds        N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
Variable                     (1)                  (2)              (3)

Other Variables:

Population                 0.0575***            0.0217*         0.0358***
                             0.0127             0.0130           0.00522
Med Fam Income              1.61e-05           1.32e-05          2.95e-06
                            1.15e-05           1.13e-05          2.74e-06
Prop. Pop 65+              39.00***            38.50***            0.500
                              2.565              2.569             0.518
Prop. Pop <5               37.17***            38.13***           -0.969
                              2.983              2.802             0.795
MDs per 1,000              0.300***            0.276***           0.0241
                             0.0520             0.0664            0.0225
Prop. Pop NonWh              -0.673              -0.743           0.0698
                              1.141              1.187             0.281

Observations                83,002           83,002              83,002
R-squared                    0.956            0.957              0.736
                   Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                       64
Table A9: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Admissions per 1,000
    Time Relative to        Total Admissions   N-P / Pub. Admissions   For-Prof. Admissions
    First Year of Funding          (1)                  (2)                     (3)

    Year of Funding              3.174**              4.470***              -1.296***
                                 (1.609)               (1.612)                (0.447)
    1 Years Later                 1.264                3.099*               -1.835***
                                 (1.617)               (1.622)                (0.535)
    2 Years Later                 1.420               4.002**               -2.582***
                                 (1.868)               (1.891)                (0.632)
    3 Years Later                 2.910               6.317***              -3.407***
                                 (1.836)               (1.860)                (0.691)
    4 Years Later               6.949***              10.52***              -3.569***
                                 (1.920)               (1.945)                (0.754)
    5 Years Later               9.441***              13.17***              -3.731***
                                 (2.018)               (2.047)                (0.860)
    6 Years Later               12.00***              15.62***              -3.625***
                                 (2.126)               (2.162)                (0.905)
    7 Years Later               12.59***              15.98***              -3.391***
                                 (2.313)               (2.366)                (0.910)
    8 Years Later               13.66***              16.94***              -3.284***
                                 (2.431)               (2.478)                (0.959)
    9 Years Later               14.39***              17.66***              -3.270***
                                 (2.598)               (2.602)                (0.998)
    10 Years Later              13.59***              16.79***              -3.199***
                                 (2.652)               (2.728)                (1.043)
    11 Years Later              15.02***              18.04***              -3.016***
                                 (2.720)               (2.822)                (1.071)
    12 Years Later              15.43***              18.06***               -2.628**
                                 (2.839)               (2.929)                (1.145)
    13 Years Later              15.15***              17.95***               -2.801**
                                 (3.012)               (3.111)                (1.196)
    14 Years Later              15.41***              18.17***               -2.753**
                                 (3.207)               (3.300)                (1.283)
    15 Years Later              16.65***              19.17***                -2.526*
                                 (3.349)               (3.427)                (1.322)
    16 Years Later              17.08***              19.44***                -2.358*
                                 (3.586)               (3.657)                (1.369)
    17 Years Later              16.96***              19.52***                -2.555*
                                 (3.791)               (3.852)                (1.416)
    18 Years Later              16.54***              19.08***                -2.537*
                                 (3.972)               (4.011)                (1.471)
    19 Years Later              15.25***              17.75***                 -2.501
                                 (4.063)               (4.160)                (1.527)
    20 Years Later              14.65***              17.17***                 -2.525
                                 (4.275)               (4.363)                (1.579)
    21+ Years Later             14.60***              17.27***                 -2.669
                                 (4.807)               (4.897)                (1.697)
    Population                    0.621                 -0.507               1.128***
                                 (0.415)               (0.431)                (0.117)
    Med Fam Income              0.000334              0.000161             0.000173**
                               (0.000382)            (0.000384)            (8.61e-05)
    Prop. Pop 65+               990.4***              996.9***                 -6.421
                                 (85.55)               (88.59)                (18.06)
    Prop. Pop <5                1,063***              1,089***                 -25.46
                                 (84.71)               (85.57)                (25.36)
    MDs per 1,000               14.75***              14.24***                  0.514
                                 (1.495)               (1.917)                (0.689)
    Prop. Pop NonWh             -96.72**              -108.4**                  11.65
                                 (40.00)               (43.15)                (9.223)

    Observations                83,002                  83,002               83,002
    R-squared                    0.936                  0.937                0.712
                              Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                               65
Table A10: Effect on Hospital Admissions per 1,000 by Population Tercile
            Time Relative to            Tercile 1      Tercile 2      Tercile 3
            First Year of Funding           (1)            (2)             (3)
            Year of Funding               -3.345      -7.520***           0.772
                                         (3.367)        (1.750)         (1.921)
            1 Years Later              -8.492***      -8.843***          -1.361
                                         (3.067)        (2.062)         (2.102)
            2 Years Later               -7.987**      -12.78***          -1.004
                                         (3.623)        (2.394)         (2.569)
            3 Years Later                11.70**         -0.261          -1.634
                                         (4.545)        (2.323)         (2.718)
            4 Years Later              24.20***        9.624***          1.251
                                         (4.017)        (2.488)         (3.032)
            5 Years Later              30.30***        16.39***          2.831
                                         (4.100)        (2.541)         (3.331)
            6 Years Later              35.02***        21.57***          4.823
                                         (4.343)        (2.753)         (3.646)
            7 Years Later              35.23***        24.14***          4.870
                                         (4.564)        (2.807)         (4.027)
            8 Years Later              38.34***        28.38***          5.288
                                         (4.753)        (3.645)         (4.307)
            9 Years Later              41.95***        26.32***          6.034
                                         (4.802)        (3.199)         (4.625)
            10 Years Later              42.73***       28.73***           4.798
                                         (5.182)        (3.387)         (4.897)
            11 Years Later              44.85***       28.83***           6.198
                                         (4.794)        (3.415)         (5.173)
            12 Years Later              48.18***       30.75***           6.361
                                         (5.181)        (3.620)         (5.488)
            13 Years Later              49.08***       33.75***           5.629
                                         (5.414)        (3.717)         (5.839)
            14 Years Later              52.76***       34.25***           5.569
                                         (5.628)        (3.905)         (6.182)
            15 Years Later              55.31***       37.04***           6.592
                                         (5.273)        (4.075)         (6.551)
            16 Years Later              51.93***       37.22***           6.904
                                         (5.418)        (4.139)         (6.902)
            17 Years Later              53.46***       36.73***           6.804
                                         (5.973)        (4.373)         (7.279)
            18 Years Later              57.79***       37.86***           6.166
                                         (5.514)        (4.572)         (7.680)
            19 Years Later              54.21***       39.16***           4.427
                                         (5.990)        (4.767)         (8.000)
            20 Years Later              54.32***       45.17***           3.300
                                         (6.074)        (5.956)         (8.387)
            21+ Years Later            49.23***       44.06***            2.982
                                         (8.202)        (5.349)         (9.418)
            Population                    -8.849      -37.81***       0.952***
                                         (5.690)        (12.48)         (0.267)
            Med Fam Income            0.00142***    0.000945***     -0.000664***
                                      (0.000354)     (0.000297)      (0.000239)
            Prop. Pop 65+              642.7***       210.0***        276.3***
                                         (68.20)        (65.07)         (82.88)
            Prop. Pop <5               742.3***           79.74         -185.4*
                                         (108.9)        (113.3)         (103.9)
            MDs per 1,000              7.980***       30.27***        8.371***
                                         (2.089)        (4.524)         (2.817)
            Prop. Pop NonWh             250.4***          1.976        -102.1**
                                         (71.78)        (35.77)         (39.60)

            Observations               27,611          27,684          27,681
            R-squared                   0.988           0.697          0.864
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                             66
           Table A11: Effect of Hill-Burton Projects in Own vs. Adjacent Counties on Hospital Admissions
       Dependent variable: single difference from 1948-50 to 1953-55 in hospital admissions per 1,000 population.

     Explanatory            Nationwide    Nationwide    Tercile 1   Tercile 1   Tercile 2   Tercile 2    Tercile 3     Tercile 3
     Variable                   (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)

     HB Funded                 7.767***    7.764***     39.94***    39.96***    24.77***    25.49***        4.254*      4.287*
                                (1.724)     (1.724)       (8.011)    (8.004)      (5.035)    (5.030)        (2.187)     (2.187)
     Adj County HB Funded        -0.444                    0.472                  10.26*                     -2.404
                                (2.001)                   (6.247)                 (5.255)                   (2.625)
     ∆P opulation                0.672         0.666        67.07       67.08      -144.3      -122.4         0.742        0.728
                                (0.843)       (0.842)     (219.7)     (219.6)     (105.6)     (105.2)       (1.023)       (1.023)
     ∆N onW hP opn             1.25e-05      1.26e-05    -0.00374    -0.00372    -0.00380    -0.00486      1.41e-05      1.41e-05
                             (3.30e-05)    (3.30e-05)    (0.0227)    (0.0226)   (0.00639)   (0.00638)    (3.94e-05)    (3.94e-05)
     ∆P op65+                  368.0***     368.8***      641.1*      639.4*       -60.23      -103.6      480.9**       483.6***
67




                                (134.2)       (134.1)     (348.4)     (347.4)     (344.3)     (344.1)       (187.0)       (187.0)
     ∆P op < 5                -556.1***     -554.4***       676.8      675.6       -513.6      -625.9     -649.9***     -641.7***
                                (159.6)       (159.4)     (468.1)     (467.6)     (453.0)     (450.1)       (209.3)       (209.1)
     ∆M edF amIncome          -0.000269     -0.000285   0.000681    0.000681      0.00122     0.00128     -0.000366     -0.000480
                             (0.000498)    (0.000492)   (0.00126)   (0.00126)   (0.00126)   (0.00126)    (0.000689)    (0.000678)
     ∆M Ds/1, 000              18.19***     18.24***    71.74***    71.81***       2.975        3.230      16.47***      16.75***
                                (3.307)       (3.297)     (26.48)     (26.45)     (23.43)     (23.47)       (3.929)       (3.916)
     Rural (binary)           8.613***      8.576***       30.26       30.12      -39.51*     -41.57*      7.294***     7.025***
                                (2.112)       (2.105)     (41.60)     (41.54)     (23.15)     (23.16)       (2.661)       (2.645)
     Land Area              -0.00159***   -0.00159***   0.000629    0.000629     -0.00108    -0.00107   -0.00182***   -0.00184***
                             (0.000535)    (0.000534)   (0.00184)   (0.00184)   (0.00158)   (0.00158)    (0.000682)    (0.000682)
     Constant                    6.051         5.838       -29.37      -28.91       37.75      47.21*       10.71*         9.746
                                (4.649)       (4.548)     (43.58)     (43.12)     (24.90)     (24.46)       (6.270)       (6.181)

     Observations              2,703         2,703        826        826         894          894           976           976
     R-squared                 0.056         0.056       0.055      0.055       0.049        0.045         0.093         0.092
                                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table A12: Effect of Amount of Funding on Hospital Beds per
1,000 by Population Tercile

                        Tercile 1   Tercile 2    Tercile 3
Variable                  (1)         (2)          (3)

Treatment Indicators:

Year of Funding           -0.163    -0.175***    -0.0437*
                         (0.142)     (0.0668)    (0.0264)
1 Years Later            0.00945      -0.146*     -0.0409
                         (0.160)     (0.0757)    (0.0279)
2 Years Later             0.330*       0.195*     -0.0278
                         (0.197)      (0.101)    (0.0341)
3 Years Later            0.388**     0.340***       0.014
                         (0.176)     (0.0792)    (0.0246)
4 Years Later             0.354*     0.309***      0.0158
                         (0.196)     (0.0851)    (0.0261)
5 Years Later            0.407**     0.302***      0.0133
                         (0.187)     (0.0789)    (0.0263)
6 Years Later           0.494***     0.248***     0.00773
                         (0.186)     (0.0829)     (0.022)
7 Years Later            0.366**     0.294***     0.00685
                         (0.179)     (0.0827)    (0.0258)
8 Years Later            0.516**     0.364***    -0.00767
                         (0.202)     (0.0814)    (0.0316)
9 Years Later           0.634***     0.330***    -0.00822
                         (0.172)     (0.0942)    (0.0283)
10 Years Later          0.546***     0.343***     -0.0374
                         (0.160)     (0.0932)    (0.0242)
11 Years Later          0.502***     0.344***     -0.0167
                         (0.131)      (0.102)    (0.0253)
12 Years Later          0.590***     0.291***    -0.00171
                         (0.134)      (0.101)    (0.0242)
13 Years Later          0.696***     0.299***     -0.0126
                         (0.159)     (0.0942)    (0.0229)
14 Years Later          0.697***     0.365***      0.0235
                         (0.174)     (0.0942)    (0.0245)
15 Years Later          0.855***     0.366***    0.0497**
                         (0.176)      (0.102)    (0.0237)
16 Years Later          1.003***     0.419***      0.039
                         (0.199)     (0.0948)    (0.0281)
17 Years Later          0.903***     0.360***      0.0345
                         (0.227)      (0.104)    (0.0278)
18 Years Later          0.922***     0.351***     -0.0246
                         (0.233)      (0.127)    (0.0256)
19 Years Later          0.893***     0.424***     -0.0178
                         (0.282)      (0.135)     (0.031)
20 Years Later          0.930***     0.480***     -0.0309
                         (0.264)      (0.135)    (0.0404)
21+ Years Later         0.886***    0.459***      -0.105*
                         (0.278)      (0.124)    (0.0638)




                              68
(continued table)

                     Tercile 1    Tercile 2    Tercile 3
Variable               (1)          (2)          (3)

Funding Amounts:

Year of Funding      -0.00110*    -0.000708   -0.00138***
                    (0.000571)   (0.000431)    (0.000438)
1 Years Later       -0.00131**   -0.00104**   -0.00147***
                    (0.000650)   (0.000493)    (0.000487)
2 Years Later         -0.00130   -0.00160**     -0.000804
                    (0.000808)   (0.000635)    (0.000557)
3 Years Later         0.000193    -0.000717      0.000226
                    (0.000837)   (0.000514)    (0.000553)
4 Years Later         0.000956     0.000541    0.00147**
                    (0.000827)   (0.000556)    (0.000646)
5 Years Later          0.00132    0.00111**   0.00201***
                    (0.000884)   (0.000548)    (0.000621)
6 Years Later          0.00121   0.00167***   0.00216***
                    (0.000960)   (0.000566)    (0.000664)
7 Years Later        0.00188**   0.00162***    0.00181**
                    (0.000942)    (0.00055)    (0.000803)
8 Years Later          0.00156    0.00157**    0.00192**
                     (0.00107)   (0.000609)    (0.000871)
9 Years Later         0.00147*   0.00181***    0.00190**
                    (0.000777)    (0.00069)    (0.000924)
10 Years Later      0.00222***   0.00175***   0.00280***
                    (0.000756)   (0.000567)    (0.000743)
11 Years Later      0.00272***   0.00207***   0.00318***
                    (0.000697)   (0.000642)    (0.000679)
12 Years Later      0.00278***   0.00224***   0.00308***
                    (0.000803)   (0.000652)    (0.000696)
13 Years Later      0.00291***   0.00240***   0.00306***
                    (0.000983)   (0.000692)    (0.000705)
14 Years Later      0.00334***   0.00209***   0.00295***
                     (0.00101)   (0.000672)    (0.000754)
15 Years Later       0.00256**   0.00238***   0.00284***
                     (0.00105)   (0.000813)     (0.00071)
16 Years Later       0.00264**   0.00198***   0.00326***
                     (0.00112)   (0.000689)    (0.000788)
17 Years Later      0.00342***   0.00228***   0.00345***
                     (0.00128)   (0.000814)    (0.000844)
18 Years Later      0.00362***    0.00258**   0.00357***
                     (0.00132)    (0.00101)    (0.000773)
19 Years Later      0.00411***    0.00265**   0.00382***
                     (0.00155)     (0.0011)    (0.000841)
20 Years Later       0.00342**    0.00255**   0.00337***
                     (0.00144)    (0.00115)    (0.000904)
21+ Years Later       0.00272*   0.00235***   0.00363***
                     (0.00154)   (0.000791)    (0.000895)




                           69
(continued table)

                          Tercile 1     Tercile 2        Tercile 3
Variable                    (1)           (2)              (3)

Other Variables:

Population                -0.289***      -2.296***        0.0377***
                           (0.0900)        (0.583)         (0.0092)
Med Fam Income             4.55e-06     4.07e-05***     -2.50e-05***
                          (2.65e-05)   (0.00000931)     (0.00000786)
Prop. Pop 65+              29.23***       16.31***         13.53***
                            (2.239)        (2.069)          (3.428)
Prop. Pop <5               41.75***         2.269             -4.83
                            (10.42)        (3.406)           (3.75)
MDs per 1,000              0.294**       0.457***          0.178**
                            (0.134)        (0.155)         (0.0856)
Prop. Pop NonWh              2.110        -0.00735         -2.563**
                            (5.317)        (0.957)          (1.215)

Observations               27,611         27,684           27,681
R-squared                   0.994          0.761            0.882
               Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                70
Supplemental Appendix

   Table S1: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Beds per 1,000, Unweighted
                Time Relative to        Total Beds         N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
                First Year of Funding      (1)                   (2)              (3)

                Year of Funding          -0.185***            -0.0640**        -0.121***
                                          (0.0328)              (0.0319)        (0.0174)
                1 Years Later            -0.154***             -1.71e-05       -0.154***
                                          (0.0369)              (0.0358)        (0.0198)
                2 Years Later              0.0622              0.280***        -0.218***
                                          (0.0436)              (0.0425)        (0.0228)
                3 Years Later             0.353***             0.617***        -0.264***
                                          (0.0500)              (0.0491)        (0.0251)
                4 Years Later             0.547***             0.821***        -0.274***
                                          (0.0528)              (0.0527)        (0.0260)
                5 Years Later             0.627***             0.907***        -0.280***
                                          (0.0531)              (0.0532)        (0.0272)
                6 Years Later             0.716***             0.995***        -0.280***
                                          (0.0573)              (0.0571)        (0.0287)
                7 Years Later             0.717***             1.007***        -0.289***
                                          (0.0641)              (0.0644)        (0.0299)
                8 Years Later             0.769***             1.060***        -0.292***
                                          (0.0668)              (0.0669)        (0.0310)
                9 Years Later             0.799***             1.096***        -0.297***
                                          (0.0705)              (0.0707)        (0.0324)
                10 Years Later            0.880***             1.163***        -0.283***
                                          (0.0756)              (0.0749)        (0.0338)
                11 Years Later            0.980***             1.275***        -0.296***
                                          (0.0709)              (0.0712)        (0.0344)
                12 Years Later            1.051***             1.347***        -0.296***
                                          (0.0747)              (0.0744)        (0.0357)
                13 Years Later            1.104***             1.398***        -0.294***
                                          (0.0785)              (0.0781)        (0.0372)
                14 Years Later            1.174***             1.470***        -0.296***
                                          (0.0827)              (0.0819)        (0.0383)
                15 Years Later            1.223***             1.503***        -0.281***
                                          (0.0854)              (0.0843)        (0.0396)
                16 Years Later            1.278***             1.563***        -0.285***
                                          (0.0883)              (0.0867)        (0.0414)
                17 Years Later            1.312***             1.596***        -0.285***
                                          (0.0934)              (0.0912)        (0.0432)
                18 Years Later            1.369***             1.664***        -0.295***
                                          (0.0958)              (0.0933)        (0.0449)
                19 Years Later            1.411***             1.707***        -0.296***
                                           (0.102)              (0.0989)        (0.0468)
                20 Years Later            1.388***             1.685***        -0.297***
                                           (0.106)               (0.104)        (0.0487)
                21+ Years Later           1.438***             1.730***        -0.292***
                                           (0.116)               (0.113)        (0.0535)
                Population               -0.250***            -0.317***        0.0666***
                                          (0.0836)              (0.0926)        (0.0146)
                Med Fam Income           1.31e-05*              8.84e-06      4.29e-06***
                                         (6.73e-06)           (6.87e-06)       (1.56e-06)
                Prop. Pop 65+             35.10***             35.51***           -0.410
                                           (1.429)               (1.382)         (0.584)
                Prop. Pop <5              32.69***             32.03***            0.661
                                           (3.572)               (3.539)         (0.550)
                MDs per 1,000             0.242***             0.231***          0.0104
                                          (0.0310)              (0.0353)       (0.00981)
                Prop. Pop NonWh            3.525*               3.673**           -0.147
                                           (1.812)               (1.823)         (0.323)

                Observations               83,002           83,002              83,002
                R-squared                   0.982           0.982               0.685
                                  Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                      71
Table S2: Effect on Hospital Beds per 1,000 by Population Tercile, Unweighted
               Time Relative to           Tercile 1     Tercile 2       Tercile 3
               First Year of Funding        (1)           (2)             (3)

               Year of Funding           -0.356***      -0.237***        -0.0840*
                                          (0.0820)       (0.0430)        (0.0464)
               1 Years Later              -0.238**      -0.245***         -0.0552
                                          (0.0925)       (0.0500)        (0.0565)
               2 Years Later                0.135         -0.0251          0.0842
                                           (0.113)       (0.0609)        (0.0691)
               3 Years Later              0.529***       0.323***        0.279***
                                           (0.135)       (0.0683)        (0.0781)
               4 Years Later              0.761***       0.535***        0.442***
                                           (0.126)       (0.0770)        (0.0906)
               5 Years Later              0.873***       0.656***        0.476***
                                           (0.127)       (0.0729)        (0.0944)
               6 Years Later              1.031***       0.730***        0.544***
                                           (0.136)       (0.0762)         (0.116)
               7 Years Later              1.059***       0.781***        0.491***
                                           (0.132)       (0.0804)         (0.136)
               8 Years Later              1.139***       0.825***        0.519***
                                           (0.137)       (0.0860)         (0.144)
               9 Years Later              1.199***       0.866***        0.527***
                                           (0.136)       (0.0873)         (0.159)
               10 Years Later             1.382***       0.900***        0.588***
                                           (0.162)       (0.0927)         (0.168)
               11 Years Later             1.417***       1.010***        0.713***
                                           (0.146)       (0.0979)         (0.167)
               12 Years Later             1.632***       1.027***        0.762***
                                           (0.154)        (0.104)         (0.177)
               13 Years Later             1.779***       1.091***        0.767***
                                           (0.168)        (0.106)         (0.187)
               14 Years Later             1.900***       1.137***        0.836***
                                           (0.175)        (0.109)         (0.199)
               15 Years Later             1.914***       1.202***        0.882***
                                           (0.179)        (0.114)         (0.210)
               16 Years Later             2.023***       1.256***        0.919***
                                           (0.183)        (0.117)         (0.222)
               17 Years Later             2.040***       1.276***        0.967***
                                           (0.197)        (0.119)         (0.237)
               18 Years Later             2.184***       1.328***        1.020***
                                           (0.198)        (0.127)         (0.242)
               19 Years Later             2.285***       1.402***        1.027***
                                           (0.222)        (0.136)         (0.251)
               20 Years Later             2.285***       1.478***        0.958***
                                           (0.220)        (0.146)         (0.262)
               21+ Years Later            2.229***       1.512***        1.024***
                                           (0.234)        (0.154)         (0.289)
               Population                 -0.867**      -2.972***        -0.0928*
                                           (0.395)        (0.496)        (0.0508)
               Med Fam Income            1.94e-05**    4.35e-05***     -3.06e-05***
                                         (9.19e-06)     (9.33e-06)      (9.93e-06)
               Prop. Pop 65+              31.56***       16.93***        18.55***
                                           (2.606)        (2.170)         (3.868)
               Prop. Pop <5               34.12***          4.534           1.043
                                           (6.499)        (3.857)         (3.418)
               MDs per 1,000               0.217**       0.738***          0.342*
                                          (0.0888)        (0.165)         (0.177)
               Prop. Pop NonWh              4.618          -0.152        -2.994**
                                           (3.923)        (0.995)         (1.256)

               Observations                27,611         27,684         27,681
               R-squared                    0.992          0.730         0.843
                               Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                               72
  Table S3: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Beds per
  1,000, with Leads, Unweighted

Time Relative to        Total Beds       N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
First Year of Funding      (1)                 (2)              (3)

9 Years Prior             0.00255              0.0385          -0.0360
                         (0.0598)            (0.0602)         (0.0253)
8 Years Prior             -0.0416              0.0291       -0.0707***
                         (0.0628)            (0.0626)         (0.0269)
7 Years Prior             -0.0521              0.0241       -0.0763***
                         (0.0673)            (0.0669)         (0.0278)
6 Years Prior             -0.0975             -0.0167       -0.0807***
                         (0.0707)            (0.0701)         (0.0296)
5 Years Prior             -0.0865             0.00156       -0.0880***
                         (0.0736)            (0.0723)         (0.0324)
4 Years Prior             -0.0757              0.0182       -0.0940***
                         (0.0757)            (0.0741)         (0.0353)
3 Years Prior            -0.158**             -0.0295        -0.128***
                         (0.0778)            (0.0756)         (0.0360)
2 Years Prior             -0.177*            -0.00787        -0.169***
                         (0.0955)            (0.0941)         (0.0374)
1 Years Prior           -0.222***             -0.0107        -0.211***
                         (0.0818)            (0.0799)         (0.0389)
Year of Funding         -0.295***             -0.0647        -0.231***
                         (0.0837)            (0.0817)         (0.0401)
1 Years Later           -0.266***           -0.000816        -0.265***
                         (0.0867)            (0.0845)         (0.0422)
2 Years Later             -0.0520           0.279***         -0.331***
                         (0.0901)            (0.0878)         (0.0442)
3 Years Later            0.236**             0.616***        -0.380***
                         (0.0942)            (0.0920)         (0.0461)
4 Years Later           0.427***             0.820***        -0.393***
                         (0.0968)            (0.0951)         (0.0473)
5 Years Later           0.504***             0.906***        -0.401***
                         (0.0990)            (0.0971)         (0.0487)
6 Years Later           0.589***             0.993***        -0.404***
                          (0.100)            (0.0981)         (0.0503)
7 Years Later           0.588***             1.004***        -0.416***
                          (0.106)             (0.104)         (0.0517)
8 Years Later           0.636***             1.058***        -0.422***
                          (0.109)             (0.107)         (0.0530)
9 Years Later           0.664***             1.094***        -0.430***
                          (0.112)             (0.110)         (0.0548)
10 Years Later          0.742***             1.160***        -0.418***
                          (0.116)             (0.113)         (0.0560)
11 Years Later          0.839***             1.273***        -0.434***
                          (0.113)             (0.111)         (0.0570)
12 Years Later          0.908***             1.344***        -0.436***
                          (0.116)             (0.114)         (0.0583)
13 Years Later          0.959***             1.395***        -0.436***
                          (0.119)             (0.117)         (0.0597)
14 Years Later          1.026***             1.466***        -0.440***
                          (0.123)             (0.120)         (0.0608)


                                    73
(continued table)

Time Relative to         Total Beds        N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
First Year of Funding       (1)                  (2)              (3)

15 Years Later            1.072***             1.499***        -0.428***
                           (0.124)              (0.121)         (0.0623)
16 Years Later            1.125***             1.559***        -0.434***
                           (0.126)              (0.122)         (0.0640)
17 Years Later            1.156***             1.592***        -0.436***
                           (0.130)              (0.126)         (0.0659)
18 Years Later            1.211***             1.660***        -0.449***
                           (0.133)              (0.128)         (0.0679)
19 Years Later            1.251***             1.702***        -0.451***
                           (0.138)              (0.133)         (0.0699)
20 Years Later            1.226***             1.680***        -0.454***
                           (0.142)              (0.137)         (0.0717)
21+ Years Later           1.273***             1.725***        -0.452***
                           (0.151)              (0.145)         (0.0766)
Population               -0.251***            -0.317***        0.0661***
                          (0.0833)             (0.0925)         (0.0147)
Med Fam Income           1.30e-05*             8.85e-06       4.16e-06***
                         (6.73e-06)           (6.87e-06)       (1.57e-06)
Prop. Pop 65+             35.06***             35.50***           -0.443
                           (1.423)              (1.379)          (0.583)
Prop. Pop <5              32.78***             32.04***            0.732
                           (3.570)              (3.540)          (0.551)
MDs per 1,000             0.242***             0.231***          0.0108
                          (0.0309)             (0.0353)        (0.00983)
Prop. Pop NonWh            3.506*              3.670**            -0.164
                           (1.811)              (1.823)          (0.323)

Observations               83,002           83,002              83,002
R-squared                   0.982           0.982               0.685
                  Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                      74
Table S4: Effect of Program on Hospital Beds per 1,000 by Popu-
lation Tercile, with Leads, Unweighted

Time Relative to         Tercile 1    Tercile 2     Tercile 3
First Year of Funding      (1)          (2)           (3)

9 Years Prior              0.0931       0.0413        -0.195
                          (0.106)     (0.0649)       (0.135)
8 Years Prior              0.0345       0.0204       -0.244*
                          (0.108)     (0.0686)       (0.141)
7 Years Prior              0.0686      -0.0152       -0.266*
                          (0.119)     (0.0739)       (0.146)
6 Years Prior              0.0185      -0.0868       -0.276*
                          (0.130)     (0.0768)       (0.149)
5 Years Prior              0.0349       -0.105        -0.231
                          (0.134)     (0.0809)       (0.150)
4 Years Prior              0.0589       -0.131        -0.198
                          (0.143)     (0.0848)       (0.148)
3 Years Prior             -0.0326     -0.208**       -0.273*
                          (0.146)     (0.0904)       (0.147)
2 Years Prior             -0.0309     -0.219**      -0.360**
                          (0.202)     (0.0975)       (0.179)
1 Years Prior             -0.280*    -0.256***      -0.316**
                          (0.151)     (0.0974)       (0.150)
Year of Funding          -0.383**    -0.363***      -0.363**
                          (0.161)     (0.0986)       (0.150)
1 Years Later              -0.265    -0.374***      -0.343**
                          (0.170)      (0.102)       (0.154)
2 Years Later              0.108        -0.157        -0.213
                          (0.180)      (0.110)       (0.157)
3 Years Later            0.502***       0.187        -0.0274
                          (0.191)      (0.115)       (0.163)
4 Years Later            0.733***     0.395***         0.126
                          (0.189)      (0.122)       (0.169)
5 Years Later            0.844***     0.512***         0.151
                          (0.193)      (0.123)       (0.172)
6 Years Later            1.001***     0.581***         0.209
                          (0.200)      (0.126)       (0.175)
7 Years Later            1.027***     0.628***         0.146
                          (0.199)      (0.130)       (0.195)
8 Years Later            1.106***     0.668***         0.164
                          (0.203)      (0.136)       (0.199)
9 Years Later            1.164***     0.705***         0.163
                          (0.202)      (0.139)       (0.211)
10 Years Later           1.347***     0.735***         0.215
                          (0.220)      (0.143)       (0.217)
11 Years Later           1.381***     0.841***         0.330
                          (0.212)      (0.148)       (0.207)
12 Years Later           1.596***     0.854***        0.370*
                          (0.219)      (0.153)       (0.214)
13 Years Later           1.741***     0.915***        0.366*
                          (0.230)      (0.156)       (0.220)
14 Years Later           1.861***     0.957***        0.427*
                          (0.237)      (0.159)       (0.228)


                              75
(continued table)

Time Relative to        Tercile 1     Tercile 2       Tercile 3
First Year of Funding     (1)           (2)             (3)

15 Years Later           1.874***      1.017***         0.465**
                          (0.240)       (0.162)         (0.234)
16 Years Later           1.980***      1.067***         0.494**
                          (0.244)       (0.165)         (0.242)
17 Years Later           1.996***      1.084***         0.535**
                          (0.255)       (0.168)         (0.251)
18 Years Later           2.137***      1.132***         0.579**
                          (0.258)       (0.174)         (0.256)
19 Years Later           2.238***      1.203***         0.578**
                          (0.278)       (0.182)         (0.265)
20 Years Later           2.236***      1.277***          0.501*
                          (0.278)       (0.191)         (0.275)
21+ Years Later          2.181***      1.306***         0.545*
                          (0.290)       (0.199)         (0.299)
Population               -0.856**     -2.941***        -0.0935*
                          (0.396)       (0.492)        (0.0507)
Med Fam Income          1.93e-05**   4.29e-05***     -3.01e-05***
                        (9.18e-06)    (9.36e-06)      (9.82e-06)
Prop. Pop 65+            31.59***      16.88***        18.57***
                          (2.606)       (2.162)         (3.871)
Prop. Pop <5             34.13***        4.915           1.008
                          (6.497)       (3.855)         (3.379)
MDs per 1,000             0.217**      0.738***         0.334*
                         (0.0888)       (0.164)         (0.177)
Prop. Pop NonWh            4.598         -0.139        -3.014**
                          (3.923)       (0.996)         (1.257)

Observations            27,611         27,684          27,681
R-squared                0.992          0.731          0.843
            Robust standard errors in parentheses.
              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                              76
Table S5: Effect of Planned Beds on Hospital Beds per 1,000

        Time Relative to
        Year of Funding                 Total Beds

        Planned Beds:

        Planned Beds Year of Funding     -0.0894***
                                            0.0157
        Planned Beds 1 Years Later       -0.0748***
                                            0.0175
        Planned Beds 2 Years Later          -0.0207
                                            0.0213
        Planned Beds 3 Years Later        0.0682***
                                            0.0251
        Planned Beds 4 Years Later         0.152***
                                            0.0258
        Planned Beds 5 Years Later         0.183***
                                            0.0249
        Planned Beds 6 Years Later         0.221***
                                            0.0258
        Planned Beds 7 Years Later         0.232***
                                            0.0259
        Planned Beds 8 Years Later         0.244***
                                            0.0284
        Planned Beds 9 Years Later         0.256***
                                            0.0295
        Planned Beds 10 Years Later        0.298***
                                            0.0294
        Planned Beds 11 Years Later        0.318***
                                            0.0285
        Planned Beds 12 Years Later        0.350***
                                            0.0312
        Planned Beds 13 Years Later        0.385***
                                            0.0329
        Planned Beds 14 Years Later        0.395***
                                            0.0347
        Planned Beds 15 Years Later        0.389***
                                            0.0327
        Planned Beds 16 Years Later        0.391***
                                            0.0352
        Planned Beds 17 Years Later        0.414***
                                            0.0368
        Planned Beds 18 Years Later        0.436***
                                            0.0371
        Planned Beds 19 Years Later        0.484***
                                            0.0477
        Planned Beds 20 Years Later        0.481***
                                            0.0498
        Planned Beds 21+ Years Later      0.439***




                            77
(continued table)

Time Relative to
Year of Funding          Total Beds

Treatment Indicators:

Year of Funding          -0.0840***
                            0.0244
1 Years Later            -0.0864***
                            0.0234
2 Years Later              0.000837
                            0.0270
3 Years Later             0.0743***
                            0.0288
4 Years Later               0.0593*
                            0.0314
5 Years Later               0.0549*
                            0.0282
6 Years Later                0.0281
                            0.0289
7 Years Later                0.0242
                            0.0297
8 Years Later                0.0211
                            0.0278
9 Years Later                0.0238
                            0.0308
10 Years Later             -0.00967
                            0.0303
11 Years Later             -0.00875
                            0.0319
12 Years Later              -0.0328
                            0.0343
13 Years Later             -0.0670*
                            0.0346
14 Years Later              -0.0450
                            0.0366
15 Years Later             -0.00578
                            0.0364
16 Years Later              0.00954
                            0.0388
17 Years Later              -0.0222
                            0.0408
18 Years Later            -0.0856**
                            0.0423
19 Years Later             -0.132**
                            0.0554
20 Years Later            -0.145***
                            0.0529
21+ Years Later             -0.145*
                            0.0802




                    78
(continued table)

Time Relative to
Year of Funding                Total Beds

Other Variables:

Popiulation                      -0.140*
                                 0.0731
Med Family Income               -0.00314
                                0.00529
Prop. Pop 65+                   17.10***
                                  1.719
Prop. Pop <5                      -1.457
                                  1.940
MDs per 1,000                   0.376***
                                  0.116
Prop. Pop NonWh                   -0.589
                                  0.695

Observations                      82,974
R-squared                         0.790
  Robust standard errors in parentheses.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                    79
     Table S6: Instrumental Variable Estimates of Effect on Hospital Capacity, Unweighted
                    Dependent variables: five-year change from 1948 to 1953
                        in beds by ownership type per 1,000 population.

                         (first stage)                  (second stage)                      (OLS)
     Explanatory       Treated 1948-50   Total Beds    N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds   Total Beds
     Variable                 (1)           (2)               (3)             (4)            (5)

     Priority Level      -0.0437***
                          (0.00711)
     Treated 1948-50                       2.936***        2.816***           0.135        1.044***
                                            (0.639)         (0.603)          (0.221)        (0.0906)
     ∆P opulation           0.0134           -0.607          -0.585          -0.0194          -0.564
                           (0.0998)         (0.392)         (0.371)          (0.136)         (0.343)
     ∆N onW hP opn         6.17e-06        -1.85e-05       -1.70e-05        -1.56e-06      -8.18e-06
                          (4.35e-06)      (1.74e-05)      (1.65e-05)       (6.04e-06)     (1.50e-05)
     ∆P op65+                -0.672        16.45***        15.32***           1.464        14.51***
                            (1.395)         (5.516)         (5.212)          (1.911)         (4.787)
80




     ∆P op < 5               -1.920         14.31*          15.85**           -1.796           7.279
                            (1.887)         (7.636)         (7.215)          (2.645)         (6.433)
     ∆M edF amIncome      1.10e-05**     -4.78e-05**     -4.69e-05**        -2.91e-06      -2.55e-05
                          (4.62e-06)      (1.95e-05)      (1.84e-05)       (6.75e-06)     (1.59e-05)
     ∆M Ds/1, 000          0.286***        1.397***        1.263***           0.132        1.950***
                           (0.0814)         (0.371)         (0.350)          (0.128)         (0.281)
     Rural (binary)       -0.400***        1.242***        1.193***           0.0473       0.542***
                           (0.0535)         (0.313)         (0.296)          (0.109)         (0.186)
     Land Area           2.96e-05***      -8.24e-05*       -5.98e-05        -2.26e-05      -3.29e-05
                          (9.97e-06)      (4.28e-05)      (4.05e-05)       (1.48e-05)     (3.43e-05)
     Constant              0.674***       -1.107***       -1.037***          -0.0678          -0.137
                           (0.0670)         (0.410)         (0.387)          (0.142)         (0.218)

     Observations           1,410           1,410            1,410           1,410          1,423
     R-squared              0.104                                                           0.142
                             Standard errors in parentheses.
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
         Table S7: Effect of Hill-Burton Projects in Own vs. Adjacent Counties on Hospital Beds, Unweighted
             Dependent variable: five-year change from 1948 to 1953 in hospital beds per 1,000 population.

     Explanatory            Nationwide   Nationwide   Tercile 1    Tercile 1    Tercile 2    Tercile 2     Tercile 3    Tercile 3
     Variable                   (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)

     HB Funded               0.891***     0.894***     1.808***    1.810***      0.822***    0.826***       0.602***    0.603***
                              (0.0633)    (0.0632)      (0.174)     (0.174)       (0.100)     (0.100)       (0.0773)    (0.0773)
     Adj County HB Funded      0.0404                   0.0550                    0.0490                      0.0870
                              (0.0635)                  (0.131)                   (0.103)                   (0.0932)
     ∆P opulation               -0.237      -0.233       -7.579       -7.550       -1.530        -1.426       -0.122       -0.118
                               (0.159)     (0.159)      (6.059)      (6.056)      (2.602)       (2.592)      (0.134)      (0.134)
     ∆N onW hP opn            2.26e-06     2.14e-06    0.000123     0.000121    -0.000154    -0.000159       2.39e-06    2.23e-06
     ∆P op65+                18.78***     18.63***      14.94*        14.85*     24.55***     24.34***       13.83**      13.54**
                               (3.935)     (3.927)      (7.906)      (7.899)      (7.308)       (7.292)      (6.139)      (6.131)
81




     ∆P op < 5                  -2.519      -2.639        9.554        9.398       3.392          2.854    -18.57***    -18.50***
                               (4.880)     (4.876)      (9.733)      (9.721)      (9.166)       (9.091)      (6.981)      (6.981)
     ∆M edF amIncome         -1.22e-05    -1.21e-05    -6.43e-06    -6.42e-06    2.57e-05      2.60e-05     -6.51e-06    -6.03e-06
                            (1.24e-05)   (1.24e-05)   (2.03e-05)   (2.03e-05)   (2.50e-05)   (2.50e-05)    (2.42e-05)   (2.41e-05)
     ∆M Ds/1, 000            1.509***     1.510***     1.633***     1.635***      1.079**      1.080**      1.416***     1.416***
                               (0.203)     (0.203)      (0.545)      (0.545)      (0.463)      (0.463)       (0.209)      (0.209)
     Rural (binary)          0.562***     0.563***       -0.546       -0.563     -1.255**     -1.264**      0.414***     0.421***
                               (0.110)     (0.110)      (1.357)      (1.356)      (0.532)      (0.532)       (0.100)     (0.0999)
     Land Area               -6.75e-06    -6.82e-06    8.39e-06      8.74e-06    -1.36e-05    -1.35e-05   -6.29e-05**   -6.22e-05*
                            (2.03e-05)   (2.03e-05)   (3.85e-05)   (3.85e-05)   (3.50e-05)   (3.50e-05)    (3.19e-05)   (3.19e-05)
     Constant                -0.333**     -0.305**        0.723        0.775      1.281**      1.326**        -0.210       -0.150
                               (0.155)     (0.148)      (1.380)      (1.373)      (0.562)      (0.553)       (0.223)      (0.213)

     Observations             2,703        2,703        826          826        894             894          976           976
     R-squared                0.120        0.119       0.152        0.152      0.107           0.107        0.172         0.171
                                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
   Table S8: Effect of Amount of Funding on Hospital Beds per 1,000,
   Unweighted

                        Total Beds        N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
Variable                   (1)                  (2)              (3)

Treatment Indicators:

Year of Funding          -0.201***           -0.200***        -0.000926
                           0.0308              0.0322          0.00739
1 Years Later            -0.184***           -0.175***         -0.00913
                           0.0304              0.0316          0.00746
2 Years Later            -0.0646**             -0.0463        -0.0182**
                           0.0317              0.0320          0.00756
3 Years Later              0.0356              0.0575*       -0.0219***
                           0.0294              0.0297          0.00794
4 Years Later              0.0431             0.0639**        -0.0208**
                           0.0298              0.0307          0.00817
5 Years Later              0.0274               0.0449        -0.0175**
                           0.0280              0.0291          0.00818
6 Years Later              0.0195               0.0363        -0.0168**
                           0.0291              0.0299          0.00817
7 Years Later             0.00536               0.0227        -0.0174**
                           0.0294              0.0303          0.00838
8 Years Later              0.0162               0.0330        -0.0168**
                           0.0291              0.0301          0.00812
9 Years Later              0.0283               0.0362         -0.00788
                           0.0294              0.0308          0.00918
10 Years Later            0.00826              0.00776         0.000501
                           0.0303              0.0315          0.00881
11 Years Later            0.00368              0.00929         -0.00562
                           0.0313              0.0329          0.00848
12 Years Later            -0.0109             -0.00773         -0.00319
                           0.0333              0.0346          0.00884
13 Years Later            -0.0131             -0.00800         -0.00507
                           0.0343              0.0355          0.00995
14 Years Later             0.0262               0.0209          0.00536
                           0.0360              0.0376          0.00913
15 Years Later             0.0447               0.0252         0.0195**
                           0.0372              0.0391          0.00982
16 Years Later             0.0554               0.0350          0.0204*
                           0.0401              0.0419           0.0107
17 Years Later             0.0267             0.000858         0.0258**
                           0.0454              0.0471           0.0109
18 Years Later            -0.0262              -0.0431          0.0169
                           0.0516              0.0532           0.0115
19 Years Later            -0.0470              -0.0596          0.0126
                           0.0635              0.0643           0.0117
20 Years Later            -0.0539              -0.0841        0.0302**
                           0.0594              0.0620           0.0133
21+ Years Later            0.0311              -0.0110          0.0421*
                           0.0745              0.0752           0.0218




                                     82
(continued table)

                    Total Beds     N-P / Pub. Beds   For-Prof. Beds
Variable               (1)               (2)              (3)

Funding Amounts:

Year of Funding     -0.000725***      -0.000362      -0.000362***
                      0.000265        0.000274          9.25e-05
1 Years Later       -0.000740***      -0.000318      -0.000422***
                      0.000274        0.000278          9.66e-05
2 Years Later         -0.000198       0.000432       -0.000631***
                      0.000302        0.000299         0.000110
3 Years Later        0.000814**      0.00161***      -0.000800***
                      0.000321        0.000320         0.000125
4 Years Later        0.00182***      0.00265***      -0.000824***
                      0.000323        0.000334         0.000125
5 Years Later        0.00240***      0.00322***      -0.000829***
                      0.000329        0.000345         0.000128
6 Years Later        0.00275***      0.00358***      -0.000835***
                      0.000347        0.000363         0.000129
7 Years Later        0.00293***      0.00381***      -0.000873***
                      0.000346        0.000369         0.000132
8 Years Later        0.00309***      0.00400***      -0.000901***
                      0.000396        0.000424         0.000139
9 Years Later        0.00321***      0.00420***      -0.000986***
                      0.000404        0.000443         0.000161
10 Years Later       0.00379***      0.00466***      -0.000869***
                      0.000401        0.000433         0.000145
11 Years Later       0.00418***      0.00509***      -0.000908***
                      0.000405        0.000456         0.000148
12 Years Later       0.00461***      0.00551***      -0.000900***
                      0.000466        0.000512         0.000149
13 Years Later       0.00487***      0.00571***      -0.000837***
                      0.000519        0.000559         0.000165
14 Years Later       0.00495***      0.00584***      -0.000886***
                      0.000533        0.000589         0.000153
15 Years Later       0.00505***      0.00593***      -0.000881***
                      0.000583        0.000642         0.000160
16 Years Later       0.00520***      0.00612***      -0.000924***
                      0.000648        0.000709         0.000171
17 Years Later       0.00554***      0.00644***      -0.000902***
                      0.000729        0.000788         0.000174
18 Years Later       0.00600***      0.00686***      -0.000855***
                      0.000855        0.000914         0.000158
19 Years Later       0.00647***      0.00721***      -0.000736***
                       0.00103         0.00108         0.000150
20 Years Later       0.00615***      0.00698***      -0.000826***
                       0.00104         0.00111         0.000163
21+ Years Later      0.00533***      0.00603***      -0.000692***
                      0.000846        0.000882         0.000157




                              83
(continued table)

                           Total Beds     N-P / Pub. Beds    For-Prof. Beds
Variable                      (1)               (2)               (3)

Other Variables:

Population                  -0.158**         -0.213***         0.0551***
                             0.0678            0.0747            0.0141
Med Fam Income             1.59e-05**        1.19e-05*        4.06e-06***
                            6.52e-06          6.61e-06          1.55e-06
Prop. Pop 65+               33.85***          34.05***           -0.195
                              1.420             1.363             0.592
Prop. Pop <5                33.00***          32.43***            0.572
                              3.578             3.546             0.553
MDs per 1,000               0.229***          0.217***           0.0121
                             0.0315            0.0360           0.00995
Prop. Pop NonWh              4.077**          4.300**            -0.223
                              1.834             1.843             0.327

Observations                 83,002            83,002           83,002
R-squared                     0.982            0.982             0.683
                    Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                     84
     Table S9: Effect of Hill-Burton Projects in Own vs. Adjacent Counties on Hospital Admissions, Unweighted
        Dependent variable: five-year change from 1948 to 1953 in hospital admissions per 1,000 population.

     Explanatory            Nationwide   Nationwide   Tercile 1    Tercile 1    Tercile 2   Tercile 2   Tercile 3    Tercile 3
     Variable                   (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)

     HB Funded                22.43***    22.52***     48.57***    48.45***     27.26***    27.77***     7.500***    7.510***
                               (2.835)     (2.828)       (8.480)    (8.472)       (4.752)    (4.744)       (2.571)    (2.570)
     Adj County HB Funded        1.383                    -2.883                   7.561                    0.585
                               (2.843)                   (6.385)                  (4.883)                  (3.102)
     ∆P opulation               -7.270       -7.147       -21.14       -22.68      -108.8      -92.72       -3.991       -3.960
                               (7.117)      (7.111)      (295.7)      (295.6)     (123.3)     (122.9)      (4.474)      (4.469)
     ∆N onW hP opn            0.000119     0.000115     -0.00214     -0.00201    -0.00430    -0.00509    0.000130     0.000129
                            (0.000313)   (0.000313)     (0.0262)     (0.0262)   (0.00649)   (0.00648)   (0.000191)   (0.000191)
     ∆P op65+                  293.1*         288.1        476.9        481.6      270.4        237.8        108.0       106.0
85




                               (176.1)      (175.8)      (385.9)      (385.6)     (346.2)     (345.8)      (204.3)      (203.9)
     ∆P op < 5                  -153.2       -157.3        494.3        502.5      -513.2      -596.2     -581.3**     -580.9**
                               (218.5)      (218.3)      (475.1)      (474.5)     (434.1)     (431.1)      (232.3)      (232.2)
     ∆M edF amIncome         -0.000406    -0.000399    -0.000331    -0.000332     0.00177     0.00183     -0.00112     -0.00112
                            (0.000556)   (0.000556)   (0.000990)   (0.000990)   (0.00119)   (0.00119)   (0.000804)   (0.000803)
     ∆M Ds/1, 000             35.90***     35.93***      53.33**      53.20**      6.761        6.911    31.69***     31.69***
                               (9.093)      (9.091)      (26.62)      (26.61)     (21.93)     (21.94)      (6.968)      (6.965)
     Rural (binary)           11.26**      11.29**         16.91       17.82       -36.20      -37.68      6.217*       6.267*
                               (4.940)      (4.939)      (66.25)      (66.19)     (25.21)     (25.21)      (3.333)      (3.321)
     Land Area               -0.000922    -0.000924    -0.000328    -0.000346    -0.00119    -0.00117   -0.00213**   -0.00212**
                            (0.000908)   (0.000908)    (0.00188)    (0.00188)   (0.00166)   (0.00166)    (0.00106)    (0.00106)
     Constant                    0.985        1.956       -6.299       -9.045       30.34       37.22     17.29**      17.70**
                               (6.935)      (6.640)      (67.34)      (67.03)     (26.60)     (26.24)      (7.416)      (7.091)

     Observations             2,703        2,703        826         826           894         894          976          976
     R-squared                0.038        0.038       0.052       0.051         0.055       0.053        0.081        0.081
                                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                Table S10: Aggregate Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Capacity, Unweighted

                      Variable                     National   Tercile 1   Tercile 2   Tercile 3   T1+T2+T3
                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

     From regressions with funding amounts:
     Baseline Predicted Total Beds in 1948         375,896     13,480      32,791      368,695        427,711
     Baseline Predicted Total Beds in 1975         859,173     34,866      81,094      728,231        858,532
     Counterfactual Predicted Total Beds in 1975   737,055     25,826      59,657      668,838        877,763
     (w/out Hill-Burton)

     Observed quantities:
     Total Beds in 1948                            435,220     16,218      35,247      383,754        435,219
     Total Beds in 1975                            871,019     40,264      85,249      744,766        870,279

     N                                               2968       989         989         989
86
          Table S11: Long-Run Effects of Hill-Burton Funding on Hospital Capacity, Unweighted
                     Dependent variables: beds by ownership type per 1,000 population.

                        Total Beds   Total Beds     N-P / Pub.   N-P / Pub.    For-Prof.   For-Prof.
     Explanatory         in 1975      in 1990         in 1975      in 1990      in 1975     in 1990
     Variable              (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)

     H-B $ per capita   0.684***       0.602***      0.758***      0.603***   -0.0738***    -0.00152
                          0.0319         0.0374       0.0314         0.0377      0.0109      0.0123
     Population         -0.0488**       -0.0143     -0.0568***      -0.0271     0.00801     0.0127*
                          0.0221         0.0228       0.0217         0.0230     0.00751     0.00749
     Med. Fam. Inc.      1.03e-05    -1.86e-05***    8.16e-06    -1.86e-05***   2.17e-06    8.06e-09
                         6.57e-06      7.15e-06      6.47e-06      7.21e-06     2.24e-06    2.35e-06
     Prop. Pop. 65+     13.05***       18.64***      11.72***      17.63***     1.333**       1.013
                           1.787          2.019        1.760          2.036       0.608       0.663
     Prop. Pop. <5        8.924*        17.68**       9.013*         14.65*     -0.0889       3.039
87




                           4.982          8.029        4.907          8.097       1.696       2.637
     MDs per 1,000      1.529***       1.053***      1.435***      0.970***    0.0937***   0.0831***
                          0.0729         0.0633       0.0718         0.0639      0.0248      0.0208
     Prop. NonWhite       -0.175         -0.915        0.126         -0.669     -0.301*      -0.246
                           0.483          0.582        0.476          0.587       0.164       0.191

     State FEs             yes           yes           yes           yes         yes          yes

     Observations         2,968         2,964        2,968        2,964         2,968        2,964
     R-squared            0.343         0.299        0.365        0.300         0.099        0.105
                                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Table S12: Distribution of Beds per 1,000 by County Income, Census Region, and Rural Status, Unweighted
                                 All calculations are weighted by county population.

                                        Means in 1948     Means in 1975      Change, 1948 to 1975
            Median Family Income
            Quintile 1                       0.601              2.800                 2.199
            Quintile 2                       1.265              3.706                 2.441
            Quintile 3                       1.962              4.266                 2.304
            Quintile 4                       2.478              4.321                 1.843
            Quintile 5                       4.423              3.856                 -0.567
            Diff: High – Low Quintile        3.822              1.521                    -

                 Census Region
            Midwest                          2.799              4.240                 1.441
            Northeast                        2.854              4.023                 1.169
            South                            1.373              3.495                 2.122
88




            West                             2.515              3.437                 0.922
            Diff: Northeast – South          1.481              0.528                   -

                 Rural/Nonrural
            Nonrural                         6.167              4.622                 -1.545
            Rural                            1.754              3.709                 1.955
            Diff Nonrural-Rural              4.413              0.913                    -

                                        StdDev in 1948    StdDev in 1975     Change, 1948 to 1975
            Beds per 1,000                  12.780            2.995                 -9.785
Table S13: Effect on Hospital Beds and Admissions per 1,000, pre-Medicare, Unweighted
                     Time Relative to        Admissions PC 1    Admissions PC
                     First Year of Funding         (1)               (2)

                     Year of Funding            -0.185***            -0.920
                                                 (0.0329)           (1.298)
                     1 Years Later              -0.148***          -2.779**
                                                 (0.0391)           (1.303)
                     2 Years Later                0.113**          -3.417**
                                                 (0.0488)           (1.455)
                     3 Years Later               0.386***          6.367***
                                                 (0.0545)           (1.570)
                     4 Years Later               0.587***          17.04***
                                                 (0.0623)           (1.712)
                     5 Years Later               0.631***          21.77***
                                                 (0.0618)           (1.795)
                     6 Years Later               0.713***          26.17***
                                                 (0.0671)           (2.057)
                     7 Years Later               0.715***          26.86***
                                                 (0.0689)           (2.045)
                     8 Years Later               0.750***          30.63***
                                                 (0.0744)           (2.268)
                     9 Years Later               0.743***          30.89***
                                                 (0.0768)           (2.201)
                     10 Years Later              0.813***          33.42***
                                                 (0.0863)           (2.960)
                     11 Years Later              0.821***          32.01***
                                                 (0.0867)           (2.539)
                     12 Years Later              0.885***          34.94***
                                                 (0.0899)           (2.641)
                     13 Years Later              0.951***          36.43***
                                                 (0.0975)           (2.919)
                     14 Years Later              1.048***          38.90***
                                                  (0.102)           (3.051)
                     15 Years Later              1.098***          42.87***
                                                  (0.108)           (3.242)
                     16+ Years Later             1.210***          44.10***
                                                  (0.119)           (3.818)
                     Population                  -0.286**          -7.862**
                                                  (0.123)           (3.266)
                     Med Fam Income              3.44e-06         0.000598**
                                                (9.27e-06)        (0.000262)
                     Prop. Pop 65+               37.84***          739.8***
                                                  (3.741)           (72.27)
                     Prop. Pop <5                34.33***          507.5***
                                                  (8.155)           (144.0)
                     MDs per 1,000               0.284**            5.558*
                                                  (0.134)           (2.869)
                     Prop. Pop NonWh               1.232           316.4***
                                                  (5.750)           (104.6)

                     Observations                50,366              50,366
                     R-squared                    0.992              0.983
                               Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                89
Table S14: Effect of Hill-Burton Program on Hospital Admissions per 1,000, Unwieghted
          Time Relative to        Total Admissions   N-P / Pub. Admissions   For-Prof. Admissions
          First Year of Funding          (1)                  (2)                     (3)

          ear of Funding                -2.237*               1.213               -3.451***
                                        (1.294)              (1.251)                (0.631)
          1 Years Later               -4.224***               0.531               -4.757***
                                        (1.271)              (1.172)                (0.752)
          2 Years Later               -5.863***               0.889               -6.754***
                                        (1.423)              (1.311)                (0.827)
          3 Years Later                 3.884**             12.23***              -8.349***
                                        (1.535)              (1.492)                (0.852)
          4 Years Later                13.74***             22.28***              -8.547***
                                        (1.578)              (1.562)                (0.897)
          5 Years Later                19.18***             27.83***              -8.654***
                                        (1.626)              (1.638)                (0.924)
          6 Years Later                23.96***             32.55***              -8.589***
                                        (1.774)              (1.764)                (0.969)
          7 Years Later                24.05***             32.73***              -8.688***
                                        (1.939)              (1.950)                (0.999)
          8 Years Later                27.77***             36.44***              -8.672***
                                        (2.065)              (2.062)                (1.040)
          9 Years Later                28.43***             37.13***              -8.706***
                                        (2.127)              (2.137)                (1.078)
          10 Years Later               30.65***             39.03***              -8.380***
                                        (2.404)              (2.323)                (1.134)
          11 Years Later               32.70***             41.27***              -8.573***
                                        (2.114)              (2.081)                (1.151)
          12 Years Later               34.99***             43.03***              -8.048***
                                        (2.218)              (2.170)                (1.208)
          13 Years Later               36.31***             44.47***              -8.158***
                                        (2.330)              (2.279)                (1.242)
          14 Years Later               38.01***             46.15***              -8.142***
                                        (2.389)              (2.315)                (1.283)
          15 Years Later               40.44***             48.38***              -7.938***
                                        (2.476)              (2.385)                (1.332)
          16 Years Later               40.54***             48.17***              -7.638***
                                        (2.743)              (2.647)                (1.384)
          17 Years Later               40.50***             48.45***              -7.960***
                                        (2.682)              (2.553)                (1.446)
          18 Years Later               41.87***             49.80***              -7.928***
                                        (2.688)              (2.555)                (1.506)
          19 Years Later               41.36***             49.00***              -7.642***
                                        (2.825)              (2.682)                (1.568)
          20 Years Later               43.18***             50.94***              -7.760***
                                        (3.136)              (3.000)                (1.630)
          21+ Years Later              44.45***             51.58***              -7.140***
                                        (3.106)              (2.911)                (1.791)
          Population                  -5.715***             -7.538***              1.823***
                                        (1.917)              (2.109)                (0.417)
          Med Fam Income            0.000744***           0.000586***            0.000157***
                                     (0.000177)            (0.000177)             (5.24e-05)
          Prop. Pop 65+                744.2***             773.2***                 -28.74
                                        (35.85)              (33.75)                (18.07)
          Prop. Pop <5                 808.2***             793.0***                  14.94
                                        (70.28)              (70.58)                (19.61)
          MDs per 1,000                10.20***             10.16***                0.0397
                                        (1.720)              (1.598)                (0.251)
          Prop. Pop NonWh              159.1***             152.3***                  6.859
                                        (41.29)              (41.50)                (8.070)

          Observations                83,002                  83,002               83,002
          R-squared                    0.969                  0.971                0.637
                                    Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     90
Table S15: Effect on Hospital Admissions per 1,000 by Population Tercile, Unweighted
                  Time Relative to             Tercile 1     Tercile 2      Tercile 3
                  First Year of Funding            (1)           (2)             (3)
                  Year of Funding              -7.113**     -7.980***           0.772
                                                (3.272)       (1.714)         (1.921)
                  1 Years Later               -11.99***     -8.819***          -1.361
                                                (2.996)       (2.042)         (2.102)
                  2 Years Later               -9.872***     -13.16***          -1.004
                                                (3.501)       (2.344)         (2.569)
                  3 Years Later                9.512**         -0.344          -1.634
                                                (4.089)       (2.326)         (2.718)
                  4 Years Later               23.98***       9.912***          1.251
                                                (3.850)       (2.467)         (3.032)
                  5 Years Later               29.10***       17.30***          2.831
                                                (3.948)       (2.546)         (3.331)
                  6 Years Later               35.80***       23.69***          4.823
                                                (4.425)       (2.736)         (3.646)
                  7 Years Later               33.90***       25.76***          4.870
                                                (4.404)       (2.804)         (4.027)
                  8 Years Later               38.72***       29.39***          5.288
                                                (4.741)       (3.091)         (4.307)
                  9 Years Later               40.01***       28.73***          6.034
                                                (4.761)       (3.111)         (4.625)
                  10 Years Later              44.64***       30.91***           4.798
                                                (6.576)       (3.331)         (4.897)
                  11 Years Later              43.40***       32.03***           6.198
                                                (4.859)       (3.388)         (5.173)
                  12 Years Later              48.88***       33.77***           6.361
                                                (5.092)       (3.589)         (5.488)
                  13 Years Later              50.58***       36.47***           5.629
                                                (5.277)       (3.724)         (5.839)
                  14 Years Later              53.09***       37.99***           5.569
                                                (5.509)       (3.902)         (6.182)
                  15 Years Later              57.49***       40.26***           6.592
                                                (5.418)       (4.098)         (6.551)
                  16 Years Later              51.80***       39.21***           6.904
                                                (5.538)       (4.210)         (6.902)
                  17 Years Later              53.92***       39.90***           6.804
                                                (5.821)       (4.377)         (7.279)
                  18 Years Later              57.06***       39.81***           6.166
                                                (5.632)       (4.518)         (7.680)
                  19 Years Later              52.94***       40.35***           4.427
                                                (6.523)       (4.731)         (8.000)
                  20 Years Later              53.81***       47.64***           3.300
                                                (6.152)       (6.389)         (8.387)
                  21+ Years Later             50.24***       45.15***           2.982
                                                (6.703)       (5.261)         (9.418)
                  Population                     -3.981     -63.67***       0.952***
                                                (18.07)       (14.08)         (0.267)
                  Med Fam Income            0.000946***    0.00110***     -0.000664***
                                             (0.000238)    (0.000297)      (0.000239)
                  Prop. Pop 65+               618.0***      193.2***        276.3***
                                                (65.74)       (71.36)         (82.88)
                  Prop. Pop <5                702.4***         35.99          -185.4*
                                                (114.8)       (119.0)         (103.9)
                  MDs per 1,000               6.841***      31.83***        8.371***
                                                (2.072)       (4.304)         (2.817)
                  Prop. Pop NonWh             285.0***         2.803         -102.1**
                                                (70.74)       (36.30)         (39.60)

                  Observations                27,611         27,684          27,681
                  R-squared                    0.986          0.666          0.864
                                  Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   91
Table S16: Effect of Amount of Funding on Hospital Beds per 1,000
by Population Tercile, Unweighted

                          Tercile 1     Tercile 2      Tercile 3
Variable                    (1)           (2)            (3)

Treatment Indicators:

Year of Funding           -0.263**      -0.158**       -0.112***
                            0.111        0.0697          0.0228
1 Years Later              -0.0865       -0.131*      -0.0858***
                            0.125        0.0779          0.0207
2 Years Later               0.179         0.168*        -0.00549
                            0.151        0.0901          0.0229
3 Years Later              0.364**      0.379***       0.0661***
                            0.153        0.0862          0.0224
4 Years Later              0.384**      0.389***       0.0655***
                            0.156        0.0976          0.0235
5 Years Later              0.401**      0.393***         0.0412*
                            0.159        0.0778          0.0228
6 Years Later             0.502***      0.344***          0.0395
                            0.176        0.0814          0.0262
7 Years Later              0.348**      0.381***         0.0607*
                            0.160        0.0808          0.0353
8 Years Later             0.433***      0.426***          0.0557
                            0.161        0.0828          0.0354
9 Years Later             0.621***      0.453***          0.0565
                            0.163        0.0889          0.0368
10 Years Later            0.600***      0.464***          0.0171
                            0.172        0.0819          0.0332
11 Years Later            0.585***      0.472***        -0.00978
                            0.159        0.0891          0.0314
12 Years Later            0.744***      0.428***        -0.00724
                            0.177        0.0898          0.0318
13 Years Later            0.871***      0.410***         -0.0122
                            0.193        0.0948          0.0316
14 Years Later            0.944***      0.508***         0.00674
                            0.207        0.0881          0.0317
15 Years Later            0.997***      0.507***          0.0289
                            0.210        0.0978          0.0326
16 Years Later            1.098***      0.528***          0.0220
                            0.220        0.0905          0.0371
17 Years Later            0.956***      0.497***          0.0270
                            0.230         0.101          0.0425
18 Years Later            1.035***      0.460***         -0.0216
                            0.222         0.128          0.0454
19 Years Later            0.935***      0.517***         -0.0637
                            0.260         0.132          0.0522
20 Years Later            1.038***      0.582***       -0.0848**
                            0.257         0.139          0.0391
21+ Years Later           1.034***      0.566***          -0.130
                            0.288         0.126          0.0905




                               92
(continued table)

                     Tercile 1    Tercile 2    Tercile 3
Variable               (1)          (2)          (3)

Funding Amounts:

Year of Funding     -0.000874*    -0.000659   -0.000749*
                     0.000446     0.000435     0.000428
1 Years Later       -0.00105**   -0.000942*   -0.00108**
                     0.000501     0.000494     0.000469
2 Years Later        -0.000620   -0.00129**    -0.000699
                     0.000644     0.000597     0.000530
3 Years Later         0.000166    -0.000606     0.000234
                     0.000684     0.000577     0.000559
4 Years Later         0.000956     0.000484    0.00158**
                     0.000651     0.000655     0.000646
5 Years Later        0.00137**     0.00102*   0.00223***
                     0.000695     0.000578     0.000604
6 Years Later         0.00144*   0.00162***   0.00239***
                     0.000762     0.000596     0.000643
7 Years Later       0.00228***   0.00169***     0.00171*
                     0.000680     0.000584     0.000878
8 Years Later       0.00229***   0.00169***     0.00169*
                     0.000754     0.000643     0.000962
9 Years Later       0.00185***    0.00172**      0.00160
                     0.000703     0.000689      0.00106
10 Years Later      0.00253***   0.00171***   0.00262***
                     0.000688     0.000554     0.000976
11 Years Later      0.00271***   0.00202***   0.00366***
                     0.000694     0.000654     0.000730
12 Years Later      0.00293***   0.00220***   0.00372***
                     0.000872     0.000664     0.000751
13 Years Later      0.00290***   0.00254***   0.00354***
                     0.000927     0.000778     0.000748
14 Years Later      0.00307***   0.00211***   0.00367***
                     0.000898     0.000694     0.000776
15 Years Later      0.00285***   0.00243***   0.00373***
                      0.00101     0.000858     0.000753
16 Years Later       0.00281**   0.00210***   0.00428***
                      0.00122     0.000731     0.000841
17 Years Later      0.00380***   0.00223***   0.00430***
                      0.00126     0.000841     0.000881
18 Years Later      0.00378***    0.00271**   0.00441***
                      0.00131      0.00116     0.000795
19 Years Later      0.00476***    0.00271**   0.00497***
                      0.00165      0.00121     0.000852
20 Years Later       0.00386**    0.00258**   0.00420***
                      0.00164      0.00126     0.000954
21+ Years Later     0.00323**    0.00241***   0.00417***
                      0.00155     0.000901     0.000924




                          93
(continued table)

                            Tercile 1    Tercile 2       Tercile 3
Variable                      (1)          (2)             (3)

Other Variables:

Population -0.983***       -3.410***       -0.0637
                              0.345         0.584          0.0439
Med Fam Income             1.74e-05*    4.35e-05***     -2.68e-05***
                            9.29e-06      9.32e-06        9.68e-06
Prop. Pop 65+               31.73***      16.59***        17.73***
                              2.597         2.177           3.775
Prop. Pop <5                34.30***         3.747          1.095
                              6.460         3.799           3.492
MDs per 1,000 0.221**       0.496***        0.288
                             0.0883          0.137         0.185
Prop. Pop NonWh               4.413         -0.118         -1.421
                              3.887         0.956          1.169

Observations                27,611        27,684          27,681
R-squared                    0.992         0.733          0.844
               Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                 94
