NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SAFE ASSET SCARCITY AND AGGREGATE DEMAND
Ricardo J. Caballero
Emmanuel Farhi
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Working Paper 22044
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22044

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

This paper is forthcoming in the American Economic Review, Papers and Proceeding, May 2016.
It was presented at the January 2016 AEA meetings in the session: “Global Reserve Assets in a
Low Interest Rate World.” We thank Olivier Blanchard, Gita Gopinath, and our discussant Mark
Gertler for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ricardo J. Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Safe Asset Scarcity and Aggregate Demand
Ricardo J. Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
NBER Working Paper No. 22044
February 2016
JEL No. E0,F3,F4,G1
ABSTRACT
We explore the consequences of safe asset scarcity on aggregate demand in a stylized IS-LM/
Mundell Fleming environment. Acute safe asset scarcity forces the economy into a “safety trap”
recession. In the open economy, safe asset scarcity spreads from one country to the other via
capital flows, equalizing interest rates. Acute global safe asset scarcity forces the economy into a
global safety trap. The exchange rate becomes indeterminate but plays a crucial role in both the
distribution and the magnitude of output adjustment across countries. Policies that increase the
net supply of safe assets somewhere are output enhancing everywhere.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics E18-214
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
emmanuel.farhi@gmail.com

Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and CEPR
and also NBER
pog@econ.berkeley.edu

The chronic scarcity of safe assets has been linked to a large list of macroeconomic
illnesses. These range from Greenspan’s conundrum and the global imbalances of the mid
2000s, to the now endemic negative natural rates in most developed economies. In Caballero
and Farhi (2014) and Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2015) we provide detailed models of
the closed and open economy implications, respectively, of this scarcity. In this short paper
we present a highly stylized model, IS-LM/Mundell-Fleming style, that captures some of the
central mechanisms and implications described in those papers.
In a nutshell, in our model the safe-asset market equilibrium supplements the IS relationship and the Taylor Rule, to endogenously determine output, the interest rate, and the risk
premium. A drop in the supply of safe assets reduces output and increases the risk premium.
The central bank can offset the output reduction by lowering interest rates within a range.
When the scarcity of safe asset is acute, the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) becomes binding and
the safe asset market equilibrates via a reduction in output, akin to a liquidity trap, which
we call a safety trap to emphasize its origins in the safe asset market.
In the open economy, the scarcity of safe assets spreads from one country to the other via
the capital account. Net safe asset producers export these assets to net safe asset absorbers
until interest rates are equalized across countries. As the global scarcity of safe assets
intensifies, interest rates drop and capital flows increase to restore equilibrium in global and
local safe asset markets. Once the ZLB is reached, output becomes the adjustment variable
again. The world economy enters a regime of increased interdependence as countries cannot
use monetary policy to insulate their economies from world capital flows.
The exchange rate becomes indeterminate, but plays a crucial role in both the distribution
and the magnitude of the adjustment. Devaluations are beggar-thy-neighbor. If the currency
of the net safe asset producer country appreciates, it reduces the global scarcity of safe
assets via valuation effects. However, this comes at a significant output cost for the safe
asset producing country. Policies that increase the net supply of safe assets somewhere are
output enhancing everywhere. In contrast, policies that remove safe assets from the private

1

sector to encourage risk-taking do the opposite.

1

Closed economy

Denote y output, r the risky expected real rate of return and rs the safe real rate of return.
The economy is stationary and prices are permanently fixed so nominal and real rates of
return coincide. The standard IS-LM model considers the markets for goods and money
(which implies that the market for perfectly substitutable bonds and loans clears by Walras’
Law). We assume instead that safe and risky assets are not perfect substitutes, and consider
three markets: goods, money (or equivalently a Taylor rule) and safe assets, with the market
for risky assets clearing by Walras’ Law. We place ourselves in the cashless limit and therefore
ignore the money market, except for the fact that it imposes a ZLB constraint. The economy
is characterized by the following system:

y − ȳ = −δ (r − r̄) − δ s (rs − r̄s )
rs = max (r̂s + φ (y − ȳ) , 0)
s = ψ y y + ψ s rs − ψ ∆ (r − rs )

(IS)
(TR)
(SA)

Equation (IS) characterizes the goods market equilibrium. ȳ, r̄ and r̄s denote potential
output and the natural risky and safe expected returns. We envision a situation where δ s
is small as the private sector has limited capacity to issue safe debt to fund its projects.
Equation (TR) is a Taylor-rule type relationship: monetary authorities set the nominal
riskless interest rate in response to the output gap, where r̂s is the target nominal interest
rate. The monetary authority faces a ZLB: the safe interest rate cannot turn negative.
Equation (SA) is new. It represents equilibrium in the market for safe assets. s denotes
the supply of safe assets, considered exogenous here, and the right hand side denotes the
demand for safe assets. Both are gross, since safe assets are in zero net supply, issued

2

by safe asset suppliers to safe asset absorbers (there are no physical safe assets). A stock
interpretation of equation (SA) is possible if safe asset absorbers allocate their wealth between
money and safe assets, and the demand for the latter depends on the spread between safe
assets and money rs , the spread between risky and safe assets r−rs , and the liquidity services
of safe assets which increase with output y. Our preferred interpretation is in terms of flows,
rather than stocks: s is the net increase in the supply of safe assets, equal to the net increase
in demand over a given period. This is the relevant interpretation since safe asset markets
have a large share of ‘buy-and-hold’ private and public institutional investors driven in part
by mandates and regulation. As a result, a large part of safe asset positions are essentially
idle at high frequencies. In this context, demand increases with income y and with the return
on safe assets rs (capturing rigid income allocation and reinvestment into safe assets), and
decreases with the risk premium r − rs (capturing search for yield considerations).
The usual IS-LM analysis obtains in the limit case ψ ∆ → ∞, where the risk premium
disappears. We are interested in the opposite extreme, ψ ∆ = 0, where safe assets markets are
unresponsive to the risk premium. Going forward, we impose ψ ∆ = 0. This specification of
equation (SA) arises naturally in models with heterogeneity in risk preferences where a key
driver of safe asset demand is the change in wealth of safe asset absorbers (which increases
with y and rs ) and where the supply of safe asset is unresponsive to current conditions
because of various constraints on securitization (see e.g. Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny
(2012), Barro and Mollerus (2014), Caballero and Farhi (2014), and Caballero et al. (2015)).
Away from the ZLB. With ψ ∆ = 0, the system IS-TR-SA becomes recursive, with the
last two equations determining the safe interest rate and equilibrium output, while the IS
equation pins down the risk premium given these. Equilibrium outside the ZLB is represented
in Figure 1, which illustrates the determination of output y and the safe interest rate rs from
TR and SA.
Reductions in the target nominal interest rate r̂s shift the TR curve to the right, and
result in a decrease in the safe interest rate rs , an increase in output y, and under reasonable

3

Note: Outside the ZLB, output is at potential (ȳ) and monetary policy targets the natural safe
rate (r̄s ) [Point A]. If the natural safe rate is negative [Point B] because of excess safe asset
demand, the economy is at the ZLB and output must fall [Point C].

Figure 1: TR-SA diagram for a closed economy
parameter conditions (δ s small enough) a decrease in the risky expected return r. Similarly,
reductions in the supply of safe assets s shift the SA curve to the left and result in a decrease
in the safe interest rate rs , a reduction in output y, and an increase in the risky expected
return r.
SA determines the natural interest rate consistent with equilibrium in the safe asset
market when output is at potential: r̄s = (s − ψ y ȳ)/ψ s . Inspecting the system, the monetary
authorities can achieve potential output, y = ȳ, by choosing a target rate equal to the natural
interest rate, r̂s = r̄s , as long as r̄s ≥ 0. The risky expected rate of return is then at its natural
value r = r̄.
At the ZLB: the safety trap. Suppose now that the supply of safe assets is low enough
compared to potential output (s < ψ y ȳ) so that the natural interest rate is negative r̄s < 0.
The monetary authorities must set rs = 0 and output is pinned down by the SA condition:
y = s/ψ y < ȳ. The risky expected return r follows from the IS condition:

r = r̄ + (ȳ − y) (ψ s − δ s ψ y )(δψ s ) > r̄.

4

That is, the risky expected rate of return r and the risk premium r−rs endogenously increase
with the depth of the recession. The economy enters a ‘safety trap’ recession: equilibrium
in the safe asset market is restored through a decline in output rather than trough a more
benign reduction in interest rates.

2

Open Economy

Let’s now consider an economy with two countries, Home and Foreign. We write the home
IS curve describing equilibrium in the goods market as:

y − ȳ = −δ (r − r̄a ) − δ s (rs − r̄s,a ) − η y (y − ȳ) + η y∗ (y ∗ − ȳ ∗ ) − η e (e − ēa ) .
The first two terms are as before and can be interpreted as domestic absorption. r̄a and r̄s,a
are the home natural risky and safe expected rates of return of the economy under financial
autarky. The last three terms reflect the trade balance components of domestic aggregate
demand. e is the nominal exchange rate (equal to the real exchange rate since prices are
constant), with the convention that an increase in e is an appreciation of the home currency.
We assume the trade balance worsens with domestic output and the nominal exchange rate
e, and improves with foreign output y ∗ where stars denote foreign variables. Finally, ēa is the
natural autarky exchange rate such that trade is balanced when home and foreign output are
at potential (y = ȳ and y ∗ = ȳ ∗ ). A similar IS condition holds for the foreign country. We
assume the two countries share the same coefficients δ ∗ = δ, δ ∗s = δ s , ψ ∗y = ψ y and ψ ∗s = ψ s .
Crucially, we allow for differences in natural variables r̄a∗ , r̄s,a∗ , and ȳ ∗ .

2.1

Financial Autarky

Under financial autarky, the markets for safe assets clear separately in each country. Full
employment can be achieved by setting target interest rates r̂s and r̂s∗ equal to the autarky
natural safe interest rate r̄s,a and r̄s,a∗ , as long as the latter are positive. The risky expected
5

returns and the exchange rate are then at their natural levels r = r̄a , r∗ = r̄a∗ , and e = ēa .
If one or both natural safe rates are negative, one or both countries experiences a safety
trap with rs,a,i = 0 in country i and output determined from the SA condition as: y a,i =
si /ψ y < ȳ i . The risky rate in country i can be expressed as: ra,i = r̄a,i + (ȳ i − y a,i ) (ψ s −
δ s ψ y )/(δψ s ) > r̄a,i , and the risk premium increases with the depth of the home recession.
Finally, the exchange rate ea is such that trade is balanced: −η y (y a − ȳ) + η y∗ (y a∗ − ȳ ∗ ) −
η e (ea − ēa ) = 0. The autarky exchange rate is more appreciated (depreciated) the more
depressed is home (foreign) autarky output.

2.2

Financial Integration

Suppose now that financial markets are integrated and that home and foreign risky assets
are perfect substitute, as are home and foreign safe assets. In steady state the exchange rate
is constant so the return on risky and safe assets is equated across countries: r = r∗ and
rs = rs∗ .
Away from the ZLB. Consider first the case where each country can achieve its potential output. For a given exchange rate e, the global safe asset market clearing condition
takes the form:


se + s∗ = e ψ y ȳ + ψ s r̄s + ψ y ȳ ∗ + ψ s r̄s .
It follows that r̄s is an exchange rate-weigthed average of the natural autarky safe returns,
r̄s,a and r̄s,a∗ : r̄s (e) = r̄s,a e/(e + 1) + r̄s,a∗ /(e + 1), where r̄s (e) increases with e when Home
is relatively abundant in safe assets, i.e. r̄s,a > r̄s,a∗ . This is intuitive: If Home is relatively
abundant in safe assets, an appreciation of the home currency increases their net supply,
pushing up the global safe yield. In that case, in the integrated equilibrium Home must be
a net exporter of safe assets, i.e.:

s − ψ y ȳ − ψ s r̄s (e) > 0 > s∗ − ψ y ȳ ∗ − ψ s r̄s (e) .

6

Substituting r̄s (e) into the Home and Foreign goods market condition and imposing that
global trade is balanced, we can solve for r̄ and ē:

r̄ =

ē a
1 a∗
r̄ +
r̄
ē + 1
ē + 1

;

η e (ē − ēa ) =

δ (r̄a − r̄a∗ ) + δ s (r̄s,a − r̄s,a∗ )
ē + 1

Like the equilibrium safe return, the equilibrium risky return is the exchange rate-weighted
average of the natural autarky risky returns. The exchange rate depends on Home’s relative
abundance in risky assets (r̄a − r̄a∗ ) and in safe assets (r̄s,a − r̄s,a∗ ). If Home is sufficiently
abundant in at least one of the two assets, then the exchange rate must appreciate in the
integrated equilibrium, ē > ēa , and Home must run a trade deficit. This is intuitive: If Home
is sufficiently abundant in at least one of the two assets, it attracts net capital inflows, and
its currency appreciates under integration.
Gross and net flows differ: a country could export safe assets (r̄s,a > r̄s,a∗ ) while running
a trade surplus if δ (r̄a − r̄a∗ ) + δ s (r̄s,a − r̄s,a∗ ) < 0, which could capture the situation of
countries such as Switzerland or Germany nowadays.
Outside the ZLB, a decrease in the global supply of safe assets decreases the equilibrium
return on safe assets r̄s (for δ s small enough). The currency of the country whose safe asset
supply decreases depreciates. Via valuation effects, this mitigates the initial decline in safe
asset supply and helps restore equilibrium on the global market for these assets. The global
risk premium r̄ − r̄s increases and output remains unchanged.
At the ZLB: the global safety trap. Consider now what happens when the natural
risk free rate r̄s (ē) falls below 0. The ZLB constraint requires rs = 0 and the equilibrium
conditions become:

(1 + η y )(y − ȳ) = −δ (r − r̄a ) + δ s r̄s,a + η y∗ (y ∗ − ȳ ∗ ) − η e (e − ēa ) ,
(1 + η ∗y∗ )(y ∗ − ȳ ∗ ) = −δ (r − r̄a∗ ) + δ s r̄s,a∗ + η ∗y (y − ȳ) + η ∗e (e − ēa ) ,
e s + s∗ = ψ y (e y + y ∗ ) .

7

This is a system of three equations in four unknowns (y, y ∗ , r, e), so there is a fundamental
indeterminacy. In the global safety trap, total output needs to fall to equilibrate the market
for safe assets, but it is indeterminate how much of this fall should occur at home or in
foreign. The exchange rate pins down the distribution of output reductions, with a more
depreciated exchange rate associated with a smaller output reduction at Home and a larger
one in Foreign.
We can index these equilibria by the value of the exchange rate. To fix ideas, consider
the case where both r̄s,a < 0 and r̄s,a∗ < 0 so that each country is in a safety trap under
financial autarky. We can rewrite the equilibrium conditions in deviation from autarky:

e (y − y a ) + (y ∗ − y a∗ ) = 0


(y − y a ) 1 + η y + η ∗y − (y ∗ − y a∗ ) 1 + η ∗y∗ + η y∗ = δ (ra − ra∗ ) − (η e + η ∗e ) (e − ea )

(1)
(2)

Equation (1) says that home output can increase above its autarky level (y > y a ) only if
foreign output decreases below it (y ∗ < y a∗ ). Equations (1)-(2) together imply that home
(foreign) output decreases below (increases above) autarky when the exchange rate e exceeds
ê such that: (η e + η ∗e )(ê − ea ) = δ(ra − ra∗ ). Figure 2 illustrates graphically the role of the
exchange rate and the potential for currency wars. At point A, e = ê and the global
economy achieves the autarky levels of output y = y a and y ∗ = y a∗ . As the exchange rate
depreciates below ê, schedule (1) rotates counterclockwise while schedule (2) shifts right:
home output increases, foreign output decreases and home’s trade balance improves. For a
sufficiently depreciated exchange rate, Home achieves potential output (point C) at which
point it escapes the safety trap at the expense of the foreign country.
While outside the ZLB (in the limit δ s ≈ 0) the scarcity of safe assets did not affect
output, the exchange rate, or the trade balance, at the ZLB this is no longer true and the
scarcity of safe assets depresses output globally, with the distribution of output reductions,
and therefore trade balances, pinned down by the exchange rate.

8

Note: When e = ê, each country achieves its autarky output (y a , y a∗ ) [point A] . When e < ê
(e > ê), home output increases (decreases) and foreign output increases (decreases). If the
exchange rate is sufficiently depreciated (appreciated), Home (Foreign) escapes the safety trap
(point C and point B respectively). χ = 1 + η y + η ∗y and χ∗ = 1 + η ∗y∗ + η y∗ .

Figure 2: Currency Wars in the Global Safety Trap

3

Some Policy Remarks

In the safety trap world, any policy that expands safe asset supply anywhere has expansionary
effects everywhere and reduces risk premia. Public debt issuance is expansionary, to the
extent that it is safe, and that future taxation does not curtail the private sector’s ability
to issue safe assets. The early QE programs swapping risky for safe assets belong to this
category. So do policies that boost private securitization capacity (bank recapitalizations,
support to securitization markets in the form of purchases of securitized products, etc.).
Operation twist type policies that swap super safe (negative beta) long term government
bonds for safe (zero beta) short term government bonds or reserves do not, because they
reduce the global supply of safe assets (see Caballero and Farhi (2014)).
Fiscal stimulus anywhere (increases in government spending enter as positive aggregate
demand shifters in the IS curves) also stimulates output everywhere, but via its impact
on safe assets rather than through the standard IS shift in the IS-LM model. When fiscal
stimulus is financed by taxes that do not reduce pledgeable income and hence the private
supply of safe assets, global output increases because of a reduction in safe asset demand at
9

any givel level of output (increases in taxes reduce disposable income and act as negative safe
asset demand shifters in the global SA curve). When fiscal stimulus is (safe) debt financed
instead, global output increases because it corresponds to an increase in safe asset supply at
any givel level of output as above. In both cases, there are opposing effects on risk premia
from the increase in government spending net of taxes (which increases risk premia) and
from the increase in global output (which lowers risk premia).
Exchange rate policies and capital account policies have negative spillovers and increase
risk premia. The exchange rate is indeterminate, but a big player (such as a central bank)
can still in principle set the exchange rate at any desired level, thereby pinning down the
equilibrium, by standing ready to exchange home for foreign currency at the target level in
unlimited amounts. In this context, devaluations are beggar-thy-neighbor, increasing output
in the devaluing country and reducing it abroad. Similarly a net safe asset producer can be
tempted to impose taxes on safe capital inflows, or even to close its capital account, in order
to insulate its economy from the contractionary consequences of safe asset scarcity.

References
Barro, Robert J. and Andrew Mollerus, “Safe Assets,” NBER Working Papers 20652,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc October 2014.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Emmanuel Farhi, “The Safety Trap,” Working Paper 19927,
National Bureau of Economic Research February 2014.
,
, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars
at the ZLB.,” Working Paper 21670, National Bureau of Economic Research October
2015.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Neglected risks, financial
innovation, and financial fragility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 104 (3),
452–468.

10

