                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ESTIMATING SOCIAL PREFERENCES AND GIFT EXCHANGE AT WORK

                                         Stefano DellaVigna
                                             John A. List
                                         Ulrike Malmendier
                                            Gautam Rao

                                        Working Paper 22043
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22043


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016




We thank James Andreoni, Supreet Kaur, Constanca Esteves-Sorenson, Johannes Hermle, Rosario
Macera, Klaus Schmidt, Dmitry Taubinsky, and the audiences at Bonn, Munich, Zurich, the ASSA
2016 Conference and the SITE Conference on Experimental Economics for useful comments. We
also thank Debbie Blair, Alec Brandon, Natalie Cox, Johannes Hermle, Justin Holz, David Novgorodsky,
Waldo Ojeda, Avner Shlain, Jessica Shui, Ferenc Szucs, Jonas Tungodden, and Brian Wheaton for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Stefano DellaVigna, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating Social Preferences and Gift Exchange at Work
Stefano DellaVigna, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 22043
February 2016
JEL No. C93,D64

                                              ABSTRACT

We design a model-based field experiment to estimate the nature and magnitude of workers’ social
preferences towards their employers. We hire 446 workers for a one-time task. Within worker, we
vary (i) piece rates; (ii) whether the work has payoffs only for the worker, or also for the employer;
and (iii) the return to the employer. We then introduce a surprise increase or decrease in pay (‘gifts’)
from the employer. We find that workers have substantial baseline social preferences towards their
employers, even in the absence of repeated-game incentives. Consistent with models of warm glow
or social norms, but not of pure altruism, workers exert substantially more effort when their work is
consequential to their employer, but are insensitive to the precise return to the employer. Turning to
reciprocity, we find little evidence of a response to unexpected positive (or negative) gifts from the
employer. Our structural estimates of the social preferences suggest that, if anything, positive reciprocity
in response to monetary ‘gifts’ may be larger than negative reciprocity. We revisit the results of previous
field experiments on gift exchange using our model and derive a one-parameter expression for the
implied reciprocity in these experiments.


Stefano DellaVigna                                   Ulrike Malmendier
University of California, Berkeley                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics                              549 Evans Hall # 3880
549 Evans Hall #3880                                 University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                             and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu                           ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

John A. List                                         Gautam Rao
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                Harvard University
1126 East 59th                                       Littauer M-30
Chicago, IL 60637                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                             and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu                                   grao@fas.harvard.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/502
1       Introduction
What motivates workers? Incentives at the workplace, including career concerns, play a large
role. Yet, the power of incentives is limited by the boundaries of what can be measured. Many
jobs do not involve piece rates or other outcome-contingent pay.
   Even when incentives are muted, workers may work hard because they care about their
contribution to the firm. For this reason, Akerlof and Kranton (2005) and Besley and Ghatak
(2005) make the case that organizations should select workers with pro-social preferences. But
what is the strength and nature of this motivation? Understanding it better is important for
workplace productivity and organizational design.
   The literature points to examples of the role of workers’ social preferences towards their
employers. Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1986) provide survey-based evidence on the im-
portance of fairness in wage setting. Krueger and Mas (2004) chronicle a striking case of
negative reciprocity at work: a break-down in trust between employers and employees leads to
employee retaliation and production of defective goods leading to hundreds of lives lost.
   Overall, however, there is little systematic field evidence about the nature of social prefer-
ences towards employers.1 In particular, do workers’ social preferences take into account the
employer payoﬀs, as in pure altruism models à la Becker (1972)? In this case, workers work
harder when their eﬀort is of higher value to the employer. Or is the right model one akin to
warm glow à la Andreoni (1989, 1990)? In that case, workers value contributing something to
the employer, but are insensitive to the actual employer payoﬀ. Also, does extra employer gen-
erosity matter, as in gift exchange models à la Akerlof (1982)? Conversely, is there a response
to ungenerous employer behavior, as suggested by the Krueger and Mas (2004) findings?
   Our paper showcases a model-based field experiment designed to estimate the nature and
shape of social preferences at work. We build on gift exchange field experiments à la Gneezy
and List (2006). In these experiments, employees are hired for a one-time task, to shut down
repeated-game incentives. Employees in diﬀerent treatments are then exposed to diﬀerent em-
ployer actions, such as surprise pay raises (Gneezy and List, 2006), pay cuts (Kube, Marechal,
and Puppe, 2013), and in-kind gifts (Kube, Marechal, and Puppe, 2012). The diﬀerences in
productivity across the treatments provide evidence about gift exchange and reciprocity.
   We build on the important lessons of these experiments, but closely link the design to a
simple model of social preferences, such that the experimental results permit us to estimate
the underlying social preference parameters. In addition, we evaluate the importance of social
preferences even in the absence of any gifts from the employer.
    1
     There is a large literature examining social preference in the laboratory where subjects assume the role
of firms and workers. In addition, an extensive literature studies horizontal, as opposed to vertical, social
preferences at the workplace, i.e. social preference between workers, e.g. Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005),
Cohn et al. (2011), Hjort (2014).



                                                       1
   How does the focus on parameter estimation aﬀect the experimental design? We show
that previous field experiments, while providing very valuable qualitative evidence on social
preferences at work, did not allow for estimation of the social preferences.2 In particular, two
elements were missing from the design.
    First, the experiments did not specify the value to the employer of the worker’s eﬀort:
in tasks such data entry, it is unclear how much the employer benefits. In a model of pure
altruism towards the employer, the value of the work produced plays a critical role: holding
all else constant, employee eﬀort increases in the value of the eﬀort. Consider an alternative
model, which we label ‘warm glow’, in which the return to the employer does not matter. Note
that we use the term ‘warm glow’ as a placeholder for any motive that increases a worker’s
utility from exerting eﬀort on behalf of the employer, independent of the returns generated for
the employer. This could be a positive feeling from doing meaningful work, adhering to a social
norm of working hard, or signalling pro-sociality. The important distinction from altruism is
the non-dependence of eﬀort on the employer’s actual utility. This distinction could not be
tested in prior experiments, since the value of eﬀort was unobserved and held constant.
   Second, a key unobservable is the cost of eﬀort. Assume for example that an unexpected
pay increase leads to 20 percent higher eﬀort, as is the case initially in Gneezy and List (2006).
The increased eﬀort could reflect 20 percent higher altruism towards the firm, under a cost
function with unit elasticity. Alternatively, it could reflect a 100 percent higher altruism under
an inelastic cost function with elasticity 0.2. Without information on the curvature of the cost
function, it is impossible to tell. Yet, the two estimates have very diﬀerent implications for the
quantitative importance of social preferences in workplace settings.
    We design a field experiment to address both issues, while maintaining several of the advan-
tages of previous experiments. We hire workers for a one-time 6-hour task to prepare mailing
envelopes for multiple charities. To address the first issue, we explicitly inform the workers
about the average per-envelope return to the charity (the employer) based on previous fund-
raising returns. Furthermore, we vary this return, informing workers (truthfully) that some
envelopes raise money for a cause with a one-to-one fundraising match, and thus on average
have twice the return. Finally, in some periods–paid training sessions–the workers fold prac-
tice envelopes which are not used by the charity, and thus have no return to the employer. We
thus assume that this work does not generate any warm glow or altruism.
   We address the second issue–the unknown cost of eﬀort function–by varying the piece
rate. Workers sometimes receive a lump-sum pay, while at other times they work for one of
two piece rates. Observing the optimal eﬀort for diﬀerent piece rates allows us to back out the
marginal cost and thus the curvature of the cost of eﬀort function.
   Our design goal is to keep the advantageous features of the gift-exchange experiments in
the field, while allowing for variation in the return to the firm and in the worker’s piece rate.
  2
      Lab experiments on gift exchange, in contrast, did not suﬀer from these shortcomings, as we discuss below.


                                                        2
The ultimate design is a hybrid within-between experiment. Each worker goes through ten
20-minute rounds of folding envelopes for an employer. The rounds diﬀer in the piece rate and
in the return to the employer, hence the within-subject variation. To make the changes more
plausible, the workers fold envelopes for three charities, each with a diﬀerent compensation
scheme. A first charity pays a lump-sum $7 for 20 minutes, a second charity pays a pure piece
rate of 20c per envelope, and a third charity pays a combination with $3.50 lump-sum and a
10c piece rate. The compensation schemes are designed to result in equivalent payoﬀs for a
worker of average productivity (35 envelopes in 20 minutes). To limit any gift response, the
compensation for the diﬀerent rounds is announced at the beginning of the experiment. In
addition, we vary the return to the employer by having rounds with a donor match, as well as
rounds in which the employer does not benefit from the eﬀort (training rounds).
   The between-subject part of the experiment takes place in the final 2 (out of 10) rounds.
All participants work again for a charity that previously paid a $7 flat pay (for 20 minutes of
work), but they now work under diﬀerent conditions. In the control group, the charity pays
again $7 for each of the last two rounds. In the positive monetary gift group (as in Gneezy
and List, 2006), the charity that used to pay $7 now pays $14 per round. In the in-kind gift
group (as in Kube, Marechal, and Puppe, 2012) the charity pays again $7, but in addition
provides a gift-wrapped thermos of the value of $14. In the negative monetary gift group (as
in Kube, Marechal, and Puppe, 2013), the charity pays only $3 per round. Importantly, all
the gifts–and more generally all payments to workers–are paid for by the employers, and the
returns to worker eﬀort (the raised donations) also go directly to the employer.3
   The combination of within- and between-subject structure increases statistical power. The
within-subject variation in the first eight rounds identifies the sensitivity to private incentives
and to the employer’s return and thus pins down baseline social preferences. The between-
subject variation in the final two rounds provides evidence on positive and negative reciprocity:
whether the initial social preferences change in response to changes in the employers’ generosity.
   This gift exchange experiment is to our knowledge the largest run so far, with 446 workers.
As such, the emphasis on model-based estimation does not come at the expense of precision in
the reduced-form results. Having said that, our field experiment is not as natural as, say, an
uninterrupted 6-hour job coding books under the same pay scheme. We acknowledge this design
cost, but also emphasize that it yields as a benefit the identification of the social preferences.
   The theoretical model, experimental design, and a pre-analysis plan including the structural
model were registered at the AEA RCT Registry in November 2014, after a quarter of the
data had been gathered and analyzed. To our knowledge, this may be the first social science
experiment to pre-register a detailed structural model.
   3
    As we tell the subjects (truthfully), the Becker Center at the University of Chicago is collaborating with
the charities and facilitating the employment, while not paying for the work. The one exception is the two paid
training sessions, which by design are paid by the Becker Center.



                                                      3
    Turning to the results, we first characterize the evidence from the initial rounds. Produc-
tivity is clearly sensitive to incentives: moving from a 0c piece rate to a 20c piece rate increases
output by 4 envelopes out of 35, a highly statistically significant 12 percent increase.
    We have two key results on social preferences. First, worker eﬀort increases by 3.5 envelopes
(a 10 percent increase) when the envelopes are utilized by the charity compared to when they
are not used, holding constant the piece rate. This suggests some form of social preferences:
workers do not just care about earning money, but value that the work counts for the employer.
Second, a doubling of the employer return in the form of a one-to-one donor match leads to
a very modest productivity increase of 0.6 envelopes (1.6 percent), a diﬀerence that is not
statistically significant. These findings are more consistent with a warm glow model than with
pure altruism.
   We estimate social preference models on the data from these first eight rounds. Workers
choose optimal eﬀort taking into account their private return (the piece rate), the cost of eﬀort,
and the return to the employer through the social preferences. We allow for pure altruism as
well warm glow. The cost of eﬀort function allows for individual fixed eﬀects, learning by
doing, and a stochastic component. Building on Shearer (2004) and Andreoni and Sprenger
(2012), we estimate the model with non-linear least squares. Furthermore, we extend these
and related papers by considering two classes of cost of eﬀort functions, power and exponential.
    The estimation results support the warm glow model. In a specification allowing for both
warm glow and pure altruism, all the weight is on the warm glow parameters. In terms of
magnitudes, the workers weight the firm’s average return about 0.4 as much as their private
payoﬀs. The cost of eﬀort is estimated to be inelastic, with a (precisely estimated) elasticity
of 0.1. The results are not sensitive to the assumptions about the cost of eﬀort function.
    We use these estimated social preferences to compute the optimal piece rate. In the absence
of social preferences, piece rates are critical to incentivize workers. In contrast, the estimated
warm glow in the experiment is strong enough that, holding constant the flat pay, the optimal
piece rate is zero. This echoes results by Besley and Ghatak (2005), Bellemare and Shearer
(2011), and Englmaier and Leider (2012) that incentives and social preferences are substitutes
for motivating workers.
    Next, we turn to the gift exchange treatments in the last two rounds. We find very limited
eﬀects of the gift treatments on productivity. In particular, we estimate no impact of the
negative gift (a wage cut) and a slight negative impact of the in-kind gift. We find suggestive
evidence that the positive monetary gift treatment leads to a small increase in output in the
first round after the gift, but not in the final round. The gift eﬀects are not larger when the
return to the firm is higher, a prediction of the pure altruism model.
  The estimated eﬀects, which are smaller than in most previous papers, are precisely esti-
mated thanks to the large sample size and the ability to control for individual productivity.
We can reject that the negative gift decreases output by more than 5 percent, compared to a 20


                                                 4
percent decrease in Kube et al. (2013). Similarly, we can reject that the in-kind gift increases
output by more than 2 percent, compared to a 25 percent increase in Kube et al. (2012).
    We fit our model to the data and, not surprisingly, estimate relatively small reciprocity
parameters. We measure reciprocity as a shift in the social preferences toward the employer
due to kind (or unkind) employer behavior. The negative gift treatment is estimated to lower
the warm glow coeﬃcient (estimated at about 0.40) by only 0.01 to 0.07 (depending on spec-
ification). The estimated reciprocity eﬀect is larger (though not significant) for the positive
gift at a 0.05 to 0.20 increase in warm glow. Hence, our data points to, if anything, stronger
positive than negative reciprocity in response to monetary ‘gifts’, though the results ought to
be taken with caution given the small eﬀect sizes.
    What explains these small gift eﬀects? We consider four possibilities and argue that neither
appears to explain the results. First, our gift treatments may not have triggered the required
surprise and mood response necessary to trigger reciprocity. We use a debriefing survey to
show that the workers in fact do report the expected increases (or decreases) in happiness and
surprise from receiving the gifts. Second, the worker eﬀort towards the end of the experiment
may have become habitual and thus unresponsive to inputs. Counter to this scenario, subjects
are highly responsive to piece rate changes even in the later rounds. Third, the gifts may not be
suﬃciently large to induce gift exchange. However, the positive monetary and in-kind gifts are
of similar value (in absolute terms) as used previously. The negative gift treatment, which more
than halves pay for the last two rounds (from $7 to $3), implies a smaller pay reduction than in
previous papers only as a share of total earnings (12 percent versus 33 percent). Fourth, a set
of other explanations pointed out by Esteves-Sorenson (2015), such as peer eﬀects, recruitment
at above-average wages, and small sample size, do not apply to our setting.
    We suggest two explanations for the results. The first is simply that previous estimates of
gift exchange eﬀects may have overestimated the strength of reciprocity at work. Consistent
with this interpretation, Esteves-Sorenson (2015) also fail to find an eﬀect in a well-powered
gift exchange field experiment. A second explanation is that the employee social preferences
are, to a first approximation, set at first contact. Gift treatments, under this explanation, are
more eﬀective when introduced initially, as in the previous experiments, as opposed to during
an ongoing work relationship, as in our experiment. Under either interpretation, gift exchange
in the workplace is likely to be of more limited application than initially conceived.4
   We also discuss an application of our framework to previous gift exchange field experiments.
Estimating social preferences in these experiments is infeasible, given missing design elements.
However, one can derive a measure of reciprocity–the proportional change in social preferences
   4
    We leave it to future research to separate out the two explanations. After having already completed the
largest gift exchange field experiment to date, we attempted to recruit more workers for an additional field
experiment with the traditional between-subject structure. However, we could not recruit enough subjects from
the same population to guarantee adequate power for the test.



                                                     5
towards the employer due to the gift–with more limited information: the elasticity of eﬀort
with respect to incentives (assuming a cost of eﬀort function with constant elasticity). We
thus revisit some previous experiments and compute the implied reciprocity for calibrated
values of the elasticity. For elasticity values as in our task, some previous papers imply very
large reciprocity, such as a 400 percent increase in social preferences with a gift. The calibrated
reciprocity falls to a 40-50 percent increase if the elasticity is five times larger than we estimate.
Future experiments may want to incorporate the elasticity estimation in the design, as we do.5
   This paper relates to the literatures on social preferences at work, providing evidence on
workers’ vertical social preferences towards their employers, complementing a larger literature
about horizontal social preferences between co-workers (e.g. Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul,
2005, Charness and Kuhn, 2007; Cohn et al., 2014, Hjort, 2014; Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani,
2015). It also relates to the literature on gift exchange in the field, as outlined above. The main
contribution of the paper is a novel design that allows for estimation not only of reciprocal
response to a ‘gift’, but also of baseline social preferences.6
   The field experimental literature we contribute to itself builds on a series of laboratory
experiments on labor markets and gift exchange, starting from Fehr, Kirchsteiger and Reidl
(1998). These experiments endow ‘workers’ with a ‘cost of eﬀort’ function (a monetary transfer)
and also inform subjects of how their ‘eﬀort’ aﬀects the payoﬀs of the other player (the ‘firm’).
Our field experiment methodologically builds a bridge towards this lab design by estimating
the cost of eﬀort and specifying the impact on the employer payoﬀ. Our paper relates also to
the literature on reciprocity (Fehr and Gächter 2000; Charness and Rabin 2002; Dufwenberg
and Kirchsteiger 2004; Falk and Fischbacher 2006).
   The paper also relates to a small number of papers estimating parameters in real-eﬀort
experiments, typically assuming a power cost of eﬀort function (e.g., Augenblick, Niederle,
and Sprenger, 2012; Gill and Prowse, 2012; Augenblick and Rabin, 2015). We show that using
an alternative exponential cost of eﬀort function does not aﬀect the results in our case, but
may well matter when the experimental variation in observed eﬀort is larger.
   Finally, the paper relates to a growing literature on structural behavioral economics (Laib-
son, Maxted, Repetto, and Tobacman, 2015; Conlin, O’Donoghue, and Vogelsang, 2007;
DellaVigna, Malmendier, and List, 2012; Barseghyan, Molinari, O’Donoghue, and Teitelbaum,
2013; DellaVigna, Malmendier, List, and Rao, 2015).
   5
     Esteves-Sorenson (2015) similarly compares the eﬀect of a (positive) monetary gift with the eﬀect of a
piece rate, and find significant response to a piece rate but insignificant gift eﬀects. The experiment in Esteves-
Sorenson (2015) is not designed to estimate parameters given that there is only one (convex) piece rate treatment,
and the return to the employer is not made clear to the subjects.
   6
     Bellemare and Shearer (2011) is the only previous paper on gift exchange in the field with parameter
estimation which we are aware of.




                                                        6
2        A Simple Model
Worker  in each round  chooses optimal eﬀort  as a function of pay incentives and cost of
eﬀort. In addition, the worker has social preferences towards the employer and thus cares about
the employer’s payoﬀ. For simplicity, we assume risk neutrality as well as additive separability
between rounds . This allows us to write the worker’s problem separately for each round :

                     max ( ) =  +    −  ( ) +  (      )    (1)
                      
                            ≥ 0

   The first component of the utility function captures the monetary payoﬀ from exerting
eﬀort  : a lump-sum payment  ≥ 0 and a piece rate   ≥ 0 (where  stands for worker).
The payment scheme (    ) varies by round and thus is indexed by .
     The second component is the cost of eﬀort  ( ), which is allowed to diﬀer across
individuals  (to capture diﬀerences in individual ability) and over rounds  (to capture potential
learning and tiredness).7 For any  and , we assume the regularity conditions  0 ()  0,
 00 ()  0, and lim→∞  0 () = ∞, guaranteeing the existence of a unique solution.
    The third component captures how the worker internalizes the return to the employer,
 , of each unit of eﬀort  . In the experiment,  corresponds to the average donation
raised per envelope mailed when the employer is a charity, and the average revenue raised per
advertisement mailed when the employer is a grocery store. The per-unit return  varies by
round , since in some rounds a match increases the return  for the charity. The total return
to the employer is  + ( −   ) , the sum of a lump-sum profit (or loss term)  from
the fixed costs of employing the worker, and the variable return from eﬀort ( −   ) .
(Notice that the variable cost of labor needs to be subtracted from the return, and thus the
social preference term  may depend on the piece rate  ).
    The worker cares about the payoﬀ to the employer with a social preference coeﬃcient ,
which may depend upon unexpected gifts  from the employer. We consider two special
cases: (i) altruism, where the worker takes into account the employer’s actual marginal payoﬀs,
and thus  =  ( −   ),8 and (ii) warm glow, where the worker simply derives warm glow
from doing his part by exerting eﬀort for his employer, regardless of how the eﬀort translates
into payoﬀs for the employer; thus,  = . This set-up is similar to the ones in Bellemare and
Shearer (2011) and Englmaier and Leider (2012b), among others.
    The maximization problem (1) yields the first-order condition
                                                                       ³    ´
                                      +  (      ) −  0 ∗ = 0                 (2)
    7
        In Section 4, we specify the functional forms we empirically estimate.
    8
        The fixed profit term  drops out in the maximization.



                                                          7
or
                       ∗ (      ) =  0−1 (  +  (      ))                   (3)

where  0−1 () is the inverse function of  0 () , which exists and is monotonically increasing by
the assumptions above. The second order conditions are satisfied since − 00 (∗ )  0. In the
following we will assume an interior solution.9 The optimal eﬀort ∗ is increasing in the social
preference parameter  and in the piece rate  (provided  does not decrease enough in
 ). The non-variable terms  (lump-sum pay) and  (flat profits) do not appear in the first
order condition (2) since they do not aﬀect the marginal eﬀort.
   Figure 1 presents an example for parameter values corresponding to the point estimates in
Section 6. The marginal cost curves are initially flat and then steeply increasing; compared to
the marginal cost curve near the beginning of the experiment (round 2), the curve for a later
round (round 6) is shifted to the right to reflect increased productivity over time. The lower
marginal benefit curve with no piece rate ( = 0) equals the social preference parameter .
The second, higher curve includes in addition a piece rate of 20 cents ( = 2). At the first
marginal curve, the 20 cent piece rate increases output from 28 to 30 units.
   Altruism. Under pure altruism, the worker’s social preference utility is ( −  ) .
An altruistic worker values each dollar the employer makes (through their eﬀort) the same
as  dollars in their own pocket. Capturing reciprocity models, the altruism parameter 
towards the employer may depend on the receipt of a gift from the employer. Thus, the social
preference term is  = ( + 1    )( −   ) and the first-order condition becomes
                                                                             ³   ´
                            + ( +   1  )( −   ) −  0 ∗ = 0

    Warm Glow. Under warm glow, workers do not take into account or care about the
employer payoﬀ, but instead care about the eﬀort they put in:  = . This can be interpreted
as individuals deriving utility from the process of helping rather than the actual utility of the
receiver. This case is inspired by the idea of warm glow proposed by Andreoni (1989 and 1990),
where donors derive utility from giving, but not necessarily from the public good itself.10 This
specification also captures, in reduced form, a social norm to put in eﬀort for an employer,
signalling (Benabou and Tirole, 2006), or a utility from exerting eﬀort doing meaningful work
(Ariely, Kamenica and Prelec 2008). As before, we allow for warm glow to change as a result
of receiving an unanticipated gift. Thus, the first-order condition under warm-glow is
                                                                    ³    ´
                                   + ( +   1  ) −  0 ∗ = 0
     9
      A suﬃcient condition to ensure an interior solution is  0 (0) = 0 and   0. While one of the assumed cost
of eﬀort functions will not satisfy this assumption, in practice zero eﬀort is not observed in our experiment.
   10
      The warm glow could also depend on the return to the firm, in which case it would be indistinguishable
from pure altruism in our setting.




                                                        8
      Altruism and Warm Glow. Allowing for both components, the first order condition is
                                                                                                   ³      ´
                 + ( +   1  )( −   ) + ( +   1  ) −  0 ∗ = 0

The altruism and warm glow can be distinguished only if the return to the charity  varies.
   Estimation from Standard Gift Exchange Experiment. Consider a gift exchange
experiment à la Gneezy and List (2006). For the combined altruism and warm glow case,
taking into account that in these experiments there is no piece rate, the optimal eﬀorts are:

                            ∗ =  0−1 ( + )                  and                                      (4)
                                ∗  =  0−1 (( +   )  + ( +   )) 

    Can one back out the social preference parameters from the observed eﬀort  and
  ? As expression (4) clarifies, two crucial pieces of information are missing. First, we do
not know what workers assume the return to the charity  to be, since they are not informed
of this. Second, the econometrician does not know the cost of eﬀort function  (). Hence, it
is impossible to identify the social preference parameters.
    It is helpful to consider the special case with pure altruism and a power cost function:
 () = 1+  (1 + ). This function is characterized by a constant elasticity 1 with respect
to the return to eﬀort.11 The two solutions then reduce to:
                                    µ         ¶1                          µ                      ¶1
                                                                             ( +   ) 
                      ∗   =                    and     ∗    =                                  .
                                                                                     
By dividing through and inverting, we obtain
                                                             Ã                  !1
                                               +            ∗ 
                                                         =                                                     (5)
                                                                ∗

    While we cannot back out the altruism parameters without knowledge of the return  , we
can infer the proportional increase in altruism ( +  ), provided one knows the curvature
. In the simple quadratic case ( = 1), an observed x percent increase in eﬀort due to a gift
implies an x percent increase in altruism. But for higher curvature (  1), the underlying
increase in altruism is higher than x percent. Thus the elasticity to the return to eﬀort 1
plays a key role in mapping from observed eﬀort to the underlying preferences.
    The power cost function has the special feature of constant elasticity. A plausible alternative
is that the elasticity decreases as eﬀort increases. A function with this feature is the exponential
     The first order condition is  (∗ ) =  (in our case equal to  +  ( −  ) for the altruism case). Thus,
     11

 = ()1 where  is the return per unit of eﬀort. Then ∗  = (1) ∗ ()1−1 and the elasticity is
 ∗

 = (1) ∗ ()1−1  ()−1 = 1.




                                                             9
cost function,  () =  exp () .12 In this case, the solutions are
                                   µ       ¶                              µ                  ¶
                              1                                  1     ( +   ) 
                  ∗ =     log            and ∗  =          log                        .
                                                                             
We can transform the solution and divide through to obtain
                                     h ³                   ´i       ( +   )
                                exp  ∗  − ∗         =                                          (6)
                                                                        
    Expression (6) highlights another implication. Consider an experiment with a positive gift
treatment, which increases output by x units, and a negative gift treatment, which decreases
output by x units. Would these equal-sized impacts of the gifts on eﬀort imply that positive
reciprocity has the same magnitude as negative reciprocity? Expression (6) shows that it is
not the case. Because of the steep curvature of the exponential function, the x unit increase for
the positive gift would require a larger proportional change in altruism (positive reciprocity)
compared to the corresponding change in altruism (negative reciprocity) for the negative gift.
Intuitively, it is harder to increase eﬀort at the margin than to reduce it.
    Estimation from Generalized Gift Exchange Experiment. What design would then
allow for estimation of social preferences? As outlined above, one needs to measure the return
to the employer,  , and to identify the parameters of the cost of eﬀort function,  and .
    The first part is easy to accomplish, as one can simply inform the subjects of the return 
as part of the design, provided the task allows for it. Identifying the cost of eﬀort parameters 
and , instead, requires additional treatments. Unlike the standard gift exchange experiments
which do not involve a piece rate, it is useful to experimentally vary the piece rate  to
identify the cost of eﬀort function. From (3) notice that
                                                                µ              ¶
                                 ∗    0−1 ( + )     
                                     =                 1+                                                  (7)
                                                     
Expression (7) shows that variation in piece rate  helps pin down the curvature of the cost
of eﬀort function. Notice, however, that the cost of eﬀort function will be identified jointly
with the social preferences, given that  features in (7). For the altruism case, the parameter
 appears also in the term in parenthesis since  = − (an altruistic worker cares that
the piece rate comes out of the employer’s pocket and reduces their return). In the warm glow
case,  = 0 but nonetheless  features in the argument of the function  0−1 .
   Thus, it is useful to also observe the worker in a training period, in which the work does
not benefit the firm and in which the incentive  is paid by a third party. In this case we
can assume  = 0, and the eﬀort of the worker is driven solely by piece rate incentives.13
  12
     The first order condition is  exp (∗ ) =  where  is the return per unit of eﬀort (in our case equal to
 +  ( −  ) for the altruism case). Thus, ∗ = (1) log (). Then ∗  = (1) ∗ ()  and the
elasticity is  = (1) ∗  ((1) log ()) = 1 log () .
  13
     An implicit assumption, typical in the experimental literature on social preferences, is that the social
preferences do not extend to this third party (the experimenter).


                                                      10
   The key test to distinguish warm glow from altruism is whether worker eﬀort responds to
changes in the return to the employer  . Consider the expression:

                                           ∗    0−1 ( + ) 
                                               =                                                               (8)
                                                            

Under warm glow,  = 0 and thus the optimal eﬀort does not depend on the return to
the charity: ∗  = 0 In the case of altruism, instead,  =  and thus the response
of worker eﬀort to the return to the charity plays a key role in identifying altruism (see also
Englmaier and Leider, 2012b). For the altruism case, combining (7) and (8) yields

                                                ∗ ∗    
                                                       =     .                                                 (9)
                                                    1−
The ratio of the response to the employer’s return  and the response to the piece rate 
identifies the altruism . Thus, variation in the return  plays an important role in the design.


3         Experimental Design
Motivation. We designed the experiment with two goals in mind. The first goal was to
maintain the advantageous features of the field experiments on gift exchange: (i) workers work
on a real-eﬀort task (like cataloging library books); (ii) the task allows for a natural measure of
eﬀort (like the number of books coded); (iii) recruitment into a one-time task avoids confounds
from repeated game incentives; (iv) workers are assigned randomly into a gift treatment or a
control group to causally estimate the eﬀect of a gift on productivity.
    The second goal is to allow for identification of the social preferences, which the previous
experiments do not. To achieve this, as Section 2 explains, we wanted to (i) (truthfully) inform
workers of the value of their task to the employer,  ; (ii) vary the piece rate  oﬀered to the
workers without triggering a gift eﬀect; (iii) vary (truthfully) the return to the employer  ;
(iv) have treatments when the firm does not benefit from the worker’s marginal productivity
(the ‘training’ periods); (v) maximize the power of the study to identify the parameters.
    To our mind, the design which best accomplishes these goals combines between-subject and
within-subject variation. In keeping with previous experiments, we randomize between subjects
the assignment into the gift or control treatments. We instead randomize within subject other
aspects of the design to maximize power, allowing us to estimate individual-specific diﬀerences
in the cost of eﬀort. Subjects work through several rounds of a real-eﬀort task. Across the
rounds, the piece rate and the return to the charity are varied in a pre-announced fashion.
The order of the rounds varies across individuals to separately estimate learning-by-doing (or
tiredness) over the course of the day.14 Then, in the final rounds, there is an unexpected ‘gift’
    14
         Varying the order of the rounds also helps control for potential eﬀort-momentum eﬀects identified by DeJar-


                                                           11
from the employer (depending on the treatment). Thus, the within-person variation takes place
before the gift treatments, so the response to the gift cannot confound the other treatments.
    The next design choice involved finding a task for which we could plausibly convey, and vary,
the value of eﬀort to the employer,  . Coding of library books, for example, does not lend
itself readily to such purpose. We decided to partner with multiple charities to assign subjects
to prepare envelopes for fund-raising mail campaigns.15 Since similar campaigns have been
done, we could convey the average employer return to the workers. Furthermore, the return
could plausibly be higher for envelopes for which a donor (truthfully) pledged to match the
raised funds. To check whether there was anything special about having a charity as employer,
one of the rounds involved stuﬃng advertisement mailers for a firm (a grocery store).16
    Finally, we wanted to generate plausible variation in piece rate  in the initial rounds,
without triggering gift eﬀects. For this purpose, subjects stuﬀ envelopes for three diﬀerent
charities, each oﬀering diﬀerent piece rates. To minimize the gift eﬀects from such piece rate
variation, the associated lump-sum pay keeps the total earnings constant for a person of average
productivity (about 35 envelopes per 20 minutes). Thus, the pay packages are ($7 fixed pay, no
piece rate), ($3.5, 10c piece rate), and (no fixed pay, 20c piece rate). To further minimize the
potential for triggering gift exchange, the pay scheme for the first eight rounds was announced
at the beginning of the day’s work, thus allowing expectations to settle. The pay scheme for
the final two rounds, where the gift will take place, are indicated as ‘TBD’.
    We should be clear that the design features which allow for estimation of social preferences
are not entirely without cost, even as we did our best to minimize the trade-oﬀs. The most
important issue is that the changing payment schemes over the workday surely must feel
less natural to the workers than the simpler design of previous experiments. Nonetheless,
we think that it is worthwhile to have at least some of the field experiments structured to
allow for parameter estimation (Card, DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2013), to complement
other experiments which have a more natural structure, but do not allow for estimation. The
emphasis on parameter estimation led to new predictions (such as comparing the eﬀect of
returns to the worker and the employer) and allows us to measure the strength and nature of
the underlying preferences, as well as implications for optimal pay schemes.
   Design. The detailed design is as follows. We hire temporary workers for a single day’s
employment (about 6 hours of work) through ads on Craigslist.com. The ads make it clear that
the job is a one-time opportunity, and we exclude anyone who attempts to sign up a second
nette (2015): namely, high eﬀort in the previous round carries over to some extent to the next round. DeJarnette
(2015) estimates eﬀort momentum eﬀects that largely decay within 15 minutes and thus would have limited
impact in our setting, given the 10-minute break between rounds.
  15
     Al-Ubaidly, Anderson, Gneezy, and List (2015) use a similar task in a gift exchange field experiment.
  16
     We did not make the grocery store our main employer because we could not find a compelling way to
truthfully vary the return to the employer.




                                                      12
time.17 This recruitment ensures that the sample covers a broader age range, as we document
below. The work takes place on Saturdays and Sundays on the University of Chicago campus.
After showing up at work, the participants are taken to a classroom where a research assistant
explains the nature of the work following a script. The Becker Center at the University of
Chicago is presented as partnering with the employers — the charities — to facilitate the work.
The participants also receive a sheet indicating a timeline with the pay conditions for the ten
rounds of work, except for rounds 9 and 10 which are reported as TBD.
    The workers prepare mailers by folding and placing materials in envelopes, working their
way through a mailing list. The task is simple but requires attention to match the materials.
The workers do the task for 20 minutes, take a 10-minute break, then move on to the next batch
of letters for another 20 minutes, and so on for ten rounds. During the 10-minute break, the
research assistants count the envelopes produced by each participant and check the accuracy of
five of the envelopes per worker. The envelopes include fund-raising material for three charities
(Respond Now, Breakthrough Urban Ministries, and the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago) for
8 rounds and an advertising campaign for a local grocery store for the other 2 rounds.
    Figure 2a shows Order A, the first of two orders which we randomize between. In the first
four rounds of Order A, the participants fold envelopes at the 10-cent piece rate (and $3.50
flat pay), but with diﬀerent treatments. The first round is a training period. We tell the
participants that they ‘will earn a fixed amount of $3.50 plus $0.10 per envelope completed
during this training. [...] The training is paid for by the Becker Center. We will be discarding
all of the envelopes prepared in this training session.’ (There is no deception in the experiment
and the envelopes are discarded as announced). Thus, the employer — the charity — does not
directly benefit from the productivity. The training rounds are presented as necessary to ensure
that the actual mail solicitations be accurately prepared in the following rounds.18
   In rounds 2 and 3, the workers stuﬀ envelopes for charity 1 for a 10 cent piece rate: ‘As
mentioned before, [Charity Name] will be paying for your work. The pay is $3.50 plus $0.10
per envelope completed, as noted on your schedule.’ In round 2, but not in round 3, there is a
higher return to the employer due to a donor match: ‘Thanks to an anonymous donor, [Charity
Name] has received a matching grant that will match every dollar raised by these letters 1 to
1 up to $2,000 total. A number of such matching grant campaigns have been run by charities
similar to [Charity Name], and historically, charities like [Charity Name] have yielded roughly
$0.60 per mailer with such campaigns, including the match. Given that [Charity Name] is
oﬀering a $0.10 per-envelope payment today, it expects to get roughly $0.50 for each additional
envelope that you prepare during this session.’ Notice that we make plain to the workers the
  17
     A typical ad read: ‘The Becker Friedman Institute is seeking individuals to help prepare letters for fundraising
and advertising campaigns. No experience necessary. Employment is for six hours over a single day THIS
weekend. [...] Employees can expect to earn around $60 for the day.’
  18
     We assume that the Becker Center, which pays the training round piece rate, does not enter the social
preference utility of the workers.


                                                         13
return net of the piece rate. In round 3, there is the same piece rate, but no match.19 In round
4, the workers stuﬀ envelopes for a grocery store at the same 10-cent piece rate and with a
similar stated 30-cent return to the employer.
    After a 50-minute lunch break, the workers restart with a new training period (round 5)
on the material for Charity 2, which pays 20 cents per envelopes.20 Next, they engage in
consequential work for Charity 2 in round 6 at the same 20-cent piece rate. In rounds 7 and 8,
they then stuﬀ envelopes for Charity 3 at the 0-cent piece rate, with a charity match in round
8. In rounds 9 and 10, the gift exchange randomization takes place, as we discuss below.
    Figure 2b shows the treatments for Order B. Other than for the training rounds, which
for logical reasons had to precede the other treatments, the two orders are mirror images of
each other: round 8 in the order A becomes round 2 in the order B, round 7 becomes round
3, and so on. While the two training sessions remain in rounds 1 and 5, we do switch the pay
schemes in the training period between the two orders. The randomization of the order allows
us to observe each treatment in two diﬀerent positions and thus disentangle the eﬀect of the
treatments from confounding eﬀects due to learning and tiredness over the course of the day.21
    The arrows in Figures 2a and 2b illustrate four planned comparisons between the rounds
(which we pre-registered)22 for the reduced-form results. First, comparing rounds 6 and 7 in
order A (3 and 4 in order B) illustrates the impact of the piece rate change from 0 cent to 20
cents. By design, these treatments are contiguous to minimize the impact of learning by doing
or tiredness. There is an additional comparison with the 10-cent piece rate in round 3 in order
A (round 7 in order B), though the treatments are not contiguous. Second, comparing round
5 and round 6 provides an estimate of the eﬀect of whether the eﬀort counts for the employer,
that is the diﬀerence between the envelopes being used for the charity and the envelopes being
discarded (in the training round). This comparison provides evidence on the magnitude of the
social preferences. Third, the comparison between rounds 7 and 8 provides evidence on the
impact of the return to the employer, shedding light on the nature of the social preferences
  19
     The script says: ‘A number of such campaigns have been run by charities similar to [Charity Name], and
historically, these charities have yielded roughly $0.30 per mailer with such campaigns. Taking account of
[Charity Name]’s per-envelope payment for your help today, it expects to get roughly $0.20 for each additional
envelope that you prepare during this session’.
  20
     This second training session is justified to the workers by the (slight) diﬀerence in materials for the diﬀerent
employer, as well as by restarting after a break.
  21
     We considered a full randomization of the order of the treatments, as opposed to just two orders. We decided
against it on two grounds. First, the implementation would have been diﬃcult. Second, the choice of just two
orders allowed us to maximize power by placing next to each other treatments we intended to compare, like
match and no-match (for same piece rate) or training and “real“ work (with same piece rate). This minimizes
the impact of the counfounding factor of productivity changes over time.
  22
     In the pre-registration we emphasize equally comparisons taking place in rounds 1-4 and in rounds 5-10.
For example, the eﬀect of training can also be estimated comparing rounds 1 and 2. However, the steep oberved
learning by doing in rounds 1-4 confounds these comparisons. Thus, we focus on rounds 5-10 for the reduced
form results. The structural estimates use all the variation in the data, including the early periods.


                                                         14
(altruism vs. warm glow). Fourth, the comparison between rounds 3 and 4 in order A (6 and
7 in order B) identify the diﬀerence between working for a grocery store versus for a charity.
   In the final two rounds, round 9 and 10, we implement the between-subject gift treatments.
At the beginning of the experiment, we indicated to subjects that in rounds 9 and 10 they
would work once again for the charity that previously paid the ($7, $0-piece rate). After the
eighth round, we split the workers into separate rooms, one for each gift treatment.23 Once in
the room, we read to them the script for their relevant gift treatment.
  Control. In this treatment, we inform subjects that “in this session and the next, [Charity
name] will pay $7 just as it paid in a previous session.”
  Positive Monetary Gift. We inform subjects that “in this session and the next, [Charity
name] will pay $14 instead of the standard $7 that it paid in a previous session.”
    Negative Monetary Gift. We inform subjects that “in this session and the next, [Charity
name] will pay $3 instead of the standard $7 that it paid in a previous session.” We follow Kube
et al. (2013) in providing no explanation for the wage change.
    Positive In-Kind Gift. We tell subjects that “in this session and the next, [Charity
name] will pay $7 as it paid in a previous session. As a token of appreciation, the charity is
also giving you this thermos with a retail value of $14.” We then oﬀer them a gift-wrapped
thermos with the name of the charity on it to make clear the gift is coming from the employer.
This treatment is modelled on Kube et al. (2012), including the expression of appreciation.
    After the announcement of the gift, the workers fold envelopes for rounds 9 and 10, allowing
us to test for (quick) decay of the eﬀect of the gift on productivity. One of the two rounds has
a donor match raising the return to 60 cents. If a positive gift increases the altruism parameter
, the resulting increase in eﬀort should be larger when the employer return is higher.
   After the final treatment, we conduct a short debriefing survey, thank the subjects, pay
them according to their accumulated earnings, and walk them to an exit. Participants assigned
to diﬀerent treatments are walked to diﬀerent exists, minimizing the chance of a meeting.
    Randomization. The experimental design involves three crossed between-session random-
izations. The first randomization is into order A or B. The second is the assignment (into three
orders) of the charities to the role of Charity 1, 2, and 3. The third is whether the charity
match is in round 9 or in round 10. This produces 2x3x2=12 combinations. The order of the
12 types of sessions was randomly drawn at the beginning of the study, and then we looped
through the 12 sessions six times. On each day that the experiment is run, we run either one
or two sessions depending on the number of responses to the advertisement.
    The final randomization, to the gift treatments, is made at the individual level within a
session. We stratify on the pre-lunch performance to maximize statistical power.
  23
    We inform the workers that ‘we will now have to split into a few rooms because our room reservation has
expired.’




                                                    15
    Data. We ran 24 sessions between October 2013 and January 2014 for a total of 131
subjects.24 We then stopped to estimate the model on the first round of data and ensure that
the design that we had settled on based on simulations worked appropriately. On November
21, 2014, we registered the design, including the model, the treatments and randomization,
the structural estimation, and the envisioned number of sessions (up to 72 in total, which is
what we ended up collecting). The only design change between the first and the second round
of data collection was the addition of the in-kind gift treatment which we did not run initially.
Between November 2014 and May 2015, we ran 49 sessions for a total of 319 subjects.25
   After excluding 4 subjects who left the experiment early, the final sample includes 446
workers, the largest sample size that we are aware of among field experiments on gift exchange.
    Summary Statistics. The sample (Column 1 of Table 1) is 52 percent female, covers
a wide age range, and overrepresents unemployed individuals. Column 2 tests if these de-
mographic variables and two additional self-reported variables predict eﬀort, as measured by
the average output over the ten rounds. Productivity is higher for employed individuals and
females, as well as for 25-34 years olds relative to both younger and older participants. Using
this specification, we form an index of predicted productivity based on demographics, which
we then use to test for balance.
    Covariate Balance. In Columns 3-6 we examine the randomization with respect to each
covariate separately (Panel A), as well as with respect to the index of predicted eﬀort (Panel
B). In Column 3, we regress the indicator for Order A on the various demographics. We
find a statistically significant relationship with the female indicator, with the indicator for
older workers and with self-reported donations. These relationships, which can emerge by
chance, do not appear to reflect imbalance of higher-productivity workers into order A or B:
Order A is somewhat overrepresented in males (who have lower productivity) and workers 55
years and older (who have somewhat higher productivity). Indeed, the regression using the
index of productivity formed based on demographics (Panel B) indicates only a minor degree
(t=0.4) of selection of higher predicted-eﬀort individuals into Order A. The randomization into
the various gift treatments (Columns 4 to 6) reveals no systematic patterns, not surprisingly
since the assignment to the gift treatments was stratified on performance in rounds 1-4. The
assignment into the diﬀerent charity orders is similarly orthogonal to observables. Thus, there is
no evidence overall of covariate imbalance, except to a limited extent for the order assignment.
Particularly given the presence of individual fixed eﬀects in the structural estimation, any
small degree of imbalance is unlikely to have substantive implications.
  24
     In September and October 2013, we run 4 sessions with a pilot design. We used the data from the 17
subjects in this pilot to set the pay rate, since we aim to equate on average earnings across the three diﬀerent
piece rates. We are not otherwise using this pilot data in the paper.
  25
     There actually are 73 sessions because in one of the sessions one of the letter materials was shown incorrectly,
and the RA opted to repeat the session. In the spirit of intent-to-treat and transparency, we also retain this
session, thus the 73 sessions.


                                                         16
4        Structural Estimation
To estimate the model, we build on Shearer (2004) and Andreoni and Sprenger (2012) and
specify an error term that allows us to estimate the model by non-linear least squares.
   Cost of Eﬀort. We assume that workers maximize (1) with the following specification for
the cost function  ( ) associated with eﬀort  by worker  in round :

                          ( ) =  ( ) ∗ ( ) ∗ exp  () ∗ (− ∗  )                     (10)

    The first term in (10) is the cost of eﬀort function  (), which we consider in two families,
power, as used in some previous literature, and exponential. The power cost function is  () =
1+  (1 + ), with   0 denoting the inverse of the elasticity of eﬀort to the return to eﬀort.
In the exponential specification, the cost function is  () = exp ( )  with   0. Both cost
functions satisfy the desired properties  0 ()  0,  00 ()  0, and lim→∞  0 () = ∞.26
   The second term is the individual fixed eﬀect: the higher is   the lower the average
productivity. We exponentiate the cost so that the individual term exp ( ) is never negative.
    The third term, exp  ()  captures the evolution of the cost of eﬀort over time: for example,
learning by doing entails a declining  (). As leading approach we use indicators for the
diﬀerent rounds, but for robustness we also use polynomials. For the indicator approach, we
cannot dummy out every round, since that would take out the comparison to the training
rounds which are always in rounds 1 and 5. We allow for indicators 2 , 3 , and 4 for rounds
2, 3 and 4, 5−8 for rounds 5-8 and 9−10 for rounds 9-10. This specification is motivated by
the overall flatness of the output function from round 5 on; by assuming a constant cost from
round 5 to round 8, we can identify oﬀ, among others, the impact of training (rounds 5 versus
6). The indicator 9−10 ensures that the estimated gift eﬀects are not biased by some change
in the cost of eﬀort in the last two rounds, and eﬀectively captures the productivity in the
Control group (no gift) in rounds 9 and 10.27 In the alternative polynomial approach, we allow
for a quadratic function  () = 1  + 2 2 and similarly for a cubic.
     The fourth term introduces the error term: we assume  to be normally distributed with
 ∼  (0 2 ), which implies that exp (−) has a lognormal distribution. A lognormal distri-
bution avoids a negative error term that would imply negative marginal cost of eﬀort.
     The exponential cost function does not satisfy the property  0 (0) = 0, allowing for the possibility of optimal
    26

eﬀort at the zero corner. In our case we can neglect this given the high average mean eﬀort and the fact that
the lowest eﬀort ever observed in any round is 7 envelopes.
  27
     Our leading indicator function  () in the pre-registration diﬀers in two ways. First, we restricted the
coeﬃcient on 2 to equal half of the coeﬃcient on 3 , since our earlier estimates sugested that we could not
estimate separately a coeﬃcient on 2 . Since our results imply that we can estimate it (though we do not reject
the one-half restriction), we allow for a more general specification. Second, we assume the same indicator for
rounds 5 to 10. After the registration, we realized that allowing for a separate indicator for rounds 9-10 is more
parallel to the experimental design, allowing for a control group for the gift treatments. We show that adopting
the pre-registered specification leads to similar results.


                                                         17
    Non-Linear Least Squares Derivation. Given these assumptions, we can return to the
first-order condition (2). For the power cost of eﬀort function, we obtain

                  +  (     ) − ( ) ∗ exp [ +  () −  ∗  ] = 0

Taking the second term to the right hand side and taking logs, we obtain

             log (  +  (     )) =  log ( ) +  +  () −  ∗  = 0

Solving out for log ( )  we obtain the estimating equation

                                1
                log ( ) =     [log (  +  (      )) −  −  ()] +     (11)
                                
    We estimate equation (11) with a non-linear least squares regression. Equation (11) high-
lights the advantage of specifying costs as in (10): the fixed eﬀects  can be interpreted as
individual diﬀerences in (minus) log eﬀort, and similarly  () is interpretable as changes over
the rounds in (minus) log eﬀort. This equation also makes clear that 1 is the elasticity of
eﬀort  with respect to the return of eﬀort, captured by  + .
   Similarly, we derive the first order condition for the exponential cost of eﬀort function:
                            1
                    =     [log (  +  (      )) −  −  ()] +         (12)
                            
The exponential cost function leads to the same NLS specification, except with eﬀort  as
dependent variable. We thus consider the reduced form eﬀect both on eﬀort and on log eﬀort.
    Structural Estimation in Real-Eﬀort Experiments. It is worth highlighting here a
methodological contribution to the literature on real-eﬀort task experiments, where variation
in incentives is sometimes used, as here, to estimate the cost of eﬀort function. The papers we
locate all use variants of a power cost of eﬀort function: Augenblick, Niederle, Sprenger (2015)
and Augenblick and Rabin (2015) use a power function with a (fixed) intercept () = ( + ) .
Gill and Prowse (2012) estimate a model of disappointment aversion with quadratic cost, a
special case of power cost with unit elasticity.
   We show above that one can easily extend the estimation to an exponential cost function.
Unlike the power function, the exponential function is not characterized by constant elasticity
and thus provides a useful alternative. Intuitively, the choice of cost function could matter a
great deal when the variation in incentives is large.
   Estimation. We use Stata’s nl program for estimation, which employs the iterative Gauss-
Newton method to converge to a solution, using starting values from a uniform distribution
over a range of plausible parameter values. The convergence properties are generally very
good. The standard errors for the parameter estimates are clustered by session.



                                                      18
5        Evidence on Baseline Social Preferences
We first analyze the evidence on baseline social preferences from rounds 1 to 8. In Section 6,
we then analyze the gift exchange response in rounds 9 and 10.

5.1      Treatment Comparisons
Figure 3 plots average output by round for the two orders. The confidence intervals, as else-
where in the paper, are clustered at the session level to account for correlation within a worker
over time and across workers within a session.28 In Appendix Figures we provide the corre-
sponding plots using log output as measure of eﬀort.
    There is substantial learning by doing: the average number of envelopes stuﬀed within 20
minutes increases from about 25 envelopes in round 1 to about 35 in round 4, a 40 percent
increase. From round 5 on, after the lunch break, there are no more obvious gains (nor losses)
in productivity, though the average output varies significantly in response to the treatments.
   A second clear pattern is the response to piece rate. For example, the only two instances in
which productivity decreases substantially from one round to the next are cases of piece rate
decreases: rounds 6 to 7 in order A (20c to 0c) and rounds 8 to 9 in order B (10c to 0c).
   Turning to the treatments indicative of social preferences, the figure shows a marked re-
sponse to whether envelopes are used or discarded (holding constant the piece rate paid),
comparing rounds 5 and 6. We observe instead a very small impact of changes in employer
return due to a match: the productivity is similar in rounds 7 and 8.
    The pattern across rounds and between orders in general lines up well with what one
would expect. One exception is the comparison across order A and B in rounds 1 and 4: the
productivity is higher in order A despite lower incentives than in order B (10c versus 20c).
An imbalance in worker ability does not appear to account for much of this diﬀerence, since
Table 1 provides very limited evidence of selection of more productive workers into order A.
Furthermore, in the only two rounds in which the two orders have the same treatments and are
thus comparable, rounds 9 and 10, the productivity is very similar across the orders. Instead,
it appears that workers work harder for a firm (the grocery) than for a charity.
    Eﬀect of piece rate. Figure 4a presents the evidence on piece rate variation, comparing
the rounds highlighted in Figure 2. The figure shows a very strong response to increasing
the piece rate from 0c to 20c — an increase of 4 envelopes, or 12 percent, a highly significant
diﬀerence. Importantly, the piece rate eﬀect is not confounded by an income eﬀect, since the
flat pay is proportionally lower for the higher piece rate. Figure 4a also provides a comparison
to the 10c piece rate, though the rounds being compared are not contiguous in this case.
    28
    Clustering at the session level produces very similar results to clustering at the individual level, indicating
that the within-session correlation of errors is small.



                                                        19
    Eﬀect of consequences for employer. The second comparison, in Figure 4b, highlights
the impact of consequences to the employer: we compare round 4, when the envelopes are
discarded (since it is a training round) to round 5, when the envelopes are sent; notice that
the worker piece rate is held constant. This comparison aims to test whether workers display
social preferences towards the employer, or more generally whether they care that their work
is consequential and has meaning as in Ariely et al. (2008). Productivity is 3.5 envelopes (10
percent) higher when the letters are used, a diﬀerence nearly as large as the one induced by a
20c piece rate increase. The diﬀerence is even larger in the other training round, comparing
rounds 1 and 2, but improvements in productivity over time bias that comparison upward.
The structural model utilizes all the rounds and controls for learning across rounds.
    Eﬀect of return to employer. The third comparison, in Figure 4c, examines the impact
of the precise employer return: do workers work more when the return from their eﬀort is
higher (due to a match on the resulting donations)? The answer is largely no: the higher
match rate leads to a statistically insignificant increase in the number of envelopes stuﬀed of
just 0.6 envelopes (1.7 percent), an eﬀect size much smaller than the impact of piece rate or of
consequential work. This evidence suggests that a warm glow model is likely to better capture
the social preferences at work compared to a pure altruism model.
    Eﬀect of Charities and Firm. Appendix Figure 1a shows that the eﬀort provided does
not diﬀer sizably between the three charities. The charity assignment is randomized, so this
comparison holds constant the variation in other treatments. Thus, in most of the paper,
we pool across the charities. Appendix Figure 1b compares the eﬀort when the employer
is a charity versus when it is a firm (a grocery store), holding constant the return to the
employer and the piece rate. The eﬀort is actually somewhat higher for the firm compared to
the charities. This suggests, at the least, that the substantial baseline social preferences we
identify towards charities as employers may not over-estimate the social preferences towards
employers in general.
    Overall, we document three main results. First, worker eﬀort is clearly sensitive to private
incentives. Second, workers appear to have substantial social preferences towards employers,
since they exert more eﬀort when their work is directly useful to the employers (i.e. when
the envelopes they produce are actually mailed out). Third, the social preferences are most
likely of the warm-glow type, rather than pure altruism, given the very limited response to the
higher return to the employer, conditional on the work being used at all.

5.2   Structural Estimates
To estimate the social preferences, and to utilize all the information, we estimate the model
in Section 4 using data from the first eight rounds. (We include the data from the final two
rounds when estimating gift exchange eﬀects in Section 6).


                                              20
    As we discussed in Section 4, the first-order conditions for optimal eﬀort imply that we can
estimate the model with non-linear least squares, allowing for individual fixed eﬀects and for
learning or tiredness over time. The specification is not an OLS regression just because the
marginal benefit of eﬀort appears in log format as log ( + ). Furthermore, the two cost
functions–power and exponential–reduce to the same specification, but with diﬀerent depen-
dent variables: log productivity for the power function and productivity for the exponential
function.
    Estimates. Column 1 in Table 2 shows the results for the pure altruism case. The social
preference weight  equals  ( −  ): the worker places value  on the net marginal return
to the employer. The estimated altruism ̂ across the three charities is comparable, ranging
from 020 to 028. The weight on the grocery store is significantly higher, capturing the higher
productivity for the firm (Figure 3).29 The curvature of the cost function is high at 11.3,
implying an elasticity of eﬀort to the value of work of 1113 = 09. The inelastic cost function
is not surprising: in a fixed amount of time, it is hard to increase productivity much.
    To highlight the identification, recall from (9) that in a pure altruism model to a first
approximation the altruism coeﬃcient is pinned down by the ratio of the response to the
employer return and the response to the piece rate: (∗  )(∗  ) =  (1 − ). In
our setting, eﬀort increases by 0.6 envelopes for a 30-cent increase in the employer return; thus,
∗  ' 02. In contrast, eﬀort increases by 4 envelopes in response to a 20-cent increase
in the piece rate; thus, ∗  ' 2 It follows that  is approximately 0.11. Why is the
estimated  then larger? The issue is that for an  of about .1 the model badly undermatches
the eﬀect of going from training to a normal period. Moving from the 20-cent training (round
5 in order A) to a standard 20-cent period (round 6 in order A), equation (11) implies that log
output should increase by
                                                   1
                     log (=6 ) − log (=5 ) =     [log (2 +  (3 − 2)) − log (2)] 
                                                   
since the return to the employer in round 6 equals 0.3 (the raw return) minus the piece rate, 0.2.
For an  ' 1 the right-hand side equals approximately −1 [log (105)] ' 005 log points, that
is, a half percent increase in output. In the data, the output increase is instead 3.5 envelopes,
or about 0.1 log points. Thus, the altruism model struggles to capture both the response to
match and to training, as we further highlight below.
  29
     The diﬀerence in altruism weight  between the charity employers and the firm may appear surprisingly
large. One factor that biases upward the estimated altruism weight towards the grocery store is the fact that
for the grocery store we only run a condition with normal return (30 cents) for the employer, while for the
charities we also have conditions with higher return (60 cents). Since the workers do not respond to the higher
return, the estimated altruism for the charities is compressed downward, while this is not the case for the firm.
Consistent with this, the diﬀerence in social preference weight is much smaller in the warm glow case, which
assumes an average return to the employer. As a second factor, given how inelastic the production function is,
it takes a large increase in social preference to match even a quite small change in output.


                                                       21
    Column 2 in Table 2 shows the warm glow results. In this specification, the worker cares
about the average return to the employer, which we set to 0.3, not the actual return  −  .
Thus,  = 3, where  is the warm glow weight. The workers exhibit significant warm glow,
putting weight on the employer equal to about half the weight put on private payoﬀs. The
estimated curvature  of the cost of eﬀort function is similar to the one with altruism.
    To assess the identification of the warm glow model, recall that this model does not predict
any response to the charity match, consistent with the data. As far as the response to training,
it predicts a response of
                                                    1
                      log (=6 ) − log (=5 ) =     [log (2 + 3) − log (2)] 
                                                    
For the estimated ̂ ' 4 the right hand side equals −1 log (16) = 05 a predicted 5 percent
increase in output from round 5 to 6. Thus, the warm glow model comes much closer to
capturing the eﬀect of the training.
    How do we compare quantitatively the fit of the altruism and warm glow models? The
explanatory power 2 of the two models, which have the same number of parameters, is higher
for the warm glow case at .8377 compared to .8350 for altruism. This diﬀerence may seem
small, but one ought to keep in mind that (i) most of the variation is explained by the individual
fixed eﬀects and (ii) the fit of the two models eﬀectively only diﬀers in rounds with high returns
to the employer and in the training rounds, and thus diﬀerences in fit cannot be large.
    For a second comparison, we nest the two models and allow for both altruism and warm-
glow in Column 3. The models are separately identified because of the variation in return to the
employer and the presence of a training period. (As such, we cannot estimate two coeﬃcients
for the grocery store, since we do not vary the return there.) The results are striking: the data
does not reject the null of no altruism towards any of the three charities, while the warm glow
weights are very similar to the ones in Column 2.
    The specifications so far follow the assumption of power cost of eﬀort function. In Columns
4-6 we present the results assuming a cost of eﬀort function with declining elasticity, the
exponential function. The implied NLS specification is the same as in Columns 1-3 except
that the dependent variable is number of envelopes prepared in the round, as opposed to the
log. The results for the two specifications are nearly identical. Thus, the identification of the
baseline social preferences is not sensitive to the exact assumptions about the cost of eﬀort.
    In Table 3, we present a set of robustness checks, adopting as benchmark the specification
with warm glow and altruism for both power and exponential cost functions. First, we examine
alternative modelling of the learning by doing: instead of set of indicators, we use a polynomial
in the round number, quadratic in Columns 1 and 4 and cubic in Columns 2 and 5. The results
are similar, supporting the warm glow model. Next, we use an alternative assumption for the
training periods. Instead of assuming that during training periods the workers have no social
preferences (since the letters are not used), we allow for warm glow, restricted to be half the

                                                    22
size as in the periods where output is used. Under this alternative, the estimated warm glow is
higher: it now takes a higher lever of warm glow to match the observed output increase from
training to a real production period. There is also some evidence of pure altruism, although
the altruism coeﬃcients are smaller than the warm glow ones.
    Quality of Fit. In Figures 5a-c we compare the observed patterns with the predictions
of the altruism and warm glow models. Specifically, for the exponential cost specifications
(Columns 4-5 of Table 2), we compute the predicted eﬀort and average across the relevant
observations. While both models fit well the response to incentives (Figure 5a), the altruism
model has trouble fitting the combination of a large response to the training (Figure 5b) and a
small response to the match rate (Figure 5c). The last piece of evidence would imply a small
altruism parameter , but then the model predicts a training eﬀect that is too small relative to
the data. The warm glow model instead predicts no response to the match rate by assumption
and matches the training eﬀect with a higher level of warm glow .
   Optimal Piece Rate. What are the implications of the estimated social preferences? As a
step to address the question, we simulate the counterfactual productivity as we vary incentives.
In particular, we increase the piece rate from 0 cents (per envelope) to a higher piece rate,
holding constant the flat pay. We do the simulation for an individual with average cost .
    Consider first the no-warm-glow case ( = 0). At zero piece rate, the worker puts zero
eﬀort; as such, introducing a piece rate has dramatic impacts on output (blue continuous line
in Figure 6a), and thus on profits (blue continuous line in Figure 6b). The optimal piece rate
is 3 cents, as higher piece rates, while yielding higher output, do not pay for themselves.
    Consider then an individual with our estimated warm glow (̂ = 4). Eﬀort is quite high
even with no piece rate and it increases slowly with the piece rate increases (green dotted
line in Figure 6a); thus, the profit rate is monotonically decreasing in the piece rate, as the
productivity increases for a higher piece rate do not pay oﬀ enough.
   Why the diﬀerence? Given the warm glow, the worker already puts in the productivity
associated with small or moderate marginal costs, stopping only where the marginal cost of
eﬀort is elevated. A higher piece rate pushes the individual to tackle these extra envelopes
as well, but given the high curvature, the productivity gains are small. More generally, the
warm glow ensures that the employee takes care of the low-marginal-cost tasks, the ones that
otherwise it would take incentives to address. Examples in typical workplaces include reporting
a defect in a product or introducing briefly a new worker to a production line.
    Does this result depend critically on the magnitude of the estimated warm glow? The red
lines in Figures 6a-b show that this is not the case. For an employee with only one tenth the
estimated warm glow as in our estimates ( = 05), the shape of the profit function is similar
as for our estimated warm glow level (although in this case the optimal piece rate is interior).
It does not take much social preference for the workers to take care of the low-marginal-cost
tasks which, at least in our estimate, would do most of the work towards profit maximization.


                                              23
    This argument is consistent with the emphasis of Akerlof and Kranton (2008) and Besley
and Ghatak (2005) that it is critical for firms to recruit workers that believe in the mission of
the firm. It also reflects the theoretical results of Englmaier and Leider (2012) that incentives
and social preferences are largely substitutes in motivating workers: one really needs one of the
two, not necessarily both. Having said that, an obvious caveat is that the results may diﬀer
significantly in other settings where, for example, the marginal increment in productivity due
to extra incentives may be high, even with social preferences.


6     Evidence on Gift Exchange and Reciprocity
After considering the evidence on baseline social preferences towards the employer, we now
examine the evidence for reciprocity in response to unexpectedly generous, or ungenerous,
behavior by the employer. In reciprocity models, the social preference weight that the person
places on another person is aﬀected by kind, or unkind, actions of the other person. In our
setting, we do not model the underlying reciprocity model, but we capture its key property,
which we measure as a shift in the warm glow weight in response to a ‘gift’.
    Following the literature, we randomize subjects into either a control group which receives
the expected wage, or treatments groups which get more, or less, than expected. Unlike in
previous papers, in our design the gift exchange treatments come after the other treatments
discussed above. This allows us to benchmark gift-exchange eﬀects to piece-rate incentives and
thus obtain parameter estimates for both baseline social preferences and reciprocal response.

6.1   Treatment Comparisons
After round 8, subjects are randomized into four treatments and sent to separate rooms (Figure
2). All subjects once again work for a charity that previously paid $7 for 20 minutes.
   In the control group, the charity once again pays the $7 flat pay in rounds 9 and 10, therefore
plausibly matching expectations (as we document below with a debriefing survey).
    The positive monetary gift group, modeled upon Gneezy and List (2006) and the following
literature, is told that the charity which used to pay $7 will now pay $14 in rounds 9 and 10,
a doubling of pay and a $14 monetary ‘gift’ relative to expectations. Since subjects earn an
average of $70 overall, as a share of total earnings this constitutes a 20 percent increase. The
pay increase is presented in a neutral manner, as described in Section 3 above.
    The negative monetary gift group, modeled upon Kube, Marechal, and Puppe (2013), is
told that the charity which used to pay $7 will now only pay $3 per round, less than half of
before. This constitutes a $8 monetary cut over the two final rounds, and a 12 percent reduction
as fraction of overall earnings. Following the literature, no specific reason or justification is
provided for this pay cut.


                                               24
    The positive in-kind group, modeled upon Kube, Marechal, and Puppe (2012), is told that as
a token of the charity’s appreciation, they will receive a gift-wrapped thermos from the charity
on top of the $7, for an additional value of $14. Thus, the cost of the gift to the employer is the
same in the positive in-kind and monetary gift treatments. Kube, Marechal, and Puppe (2012)
find that the in-kind gift is more eﬀective at triggering gift exchange, presumably because it is
perceived to be a kinder gesture. The in-kind gift treatment was not run in the first 24 sessions
and thus has a somewhat smaller sample size.
    Figure 7a shows the results.30 Compared to the control group, the positive gift treatment
produces 0.45 additional envelopes, a diﬀerence that is not significant. The negative monetary
gift treatment has an even smaller eﬀect, keeping productivity essentially constant compared
to the control group. Finally, the in-kind gift actually leads to a decrease of productivity of 1.15
envelopes, although the diﬀerence is not significant. Overall, these results suggest very limited
gift-exchange reciprocity — both positive and negative — by workers towards the employer.
   Controls. Panel A of Table 4 shows the treatment eﬀects in regression form in Column 1.
In Columns 2 and 3, we add as a control the average previous productivity of a worker across
rounds 1 through 8 (Column 2) and across rounds 5 through 8 (Column 3). Controlling for
past performance raises the R2 substantially. Since the specification in Column 3 has higher
explanatory power, we use it for the subsequent analysis with controls.
    Figure 7b plots the coeﬃcients from Column 3. The addition of controls lowers the standard
errors by about a quarter, without essentially changing the point estimates. We do not find any
significant eﬀect of the gift treatments, and in fact we can reject relatively small gift eﬀects. We
can reject that a negative gift lowers eﬀort by more than 1.6 envelopes, a 4.4 percent decrease,
a much smaller eﬀect than the 20 percent decrease in Kube et al. (2013). We can also reject
that the in-kind gift increases productivity by more than 0.7 envelopes, a 2 percent increase,
again much smaller than the approximately 25 percent increases in Gneezy and List (2006)
and in Kube et al. (2012).
   Panel B of Table 4 displays the results using log output as a measure, the specification
implied by a power cost function. The pattern of results is very similar.
    Decay. To examine the decay of gift eﬀects over time, we pre-registered a comparison of
rounds 9 and 10. To the extent that the gift exchange eﬀects are very short-lived, the eﬀects
should be stronger in round 9 than in round 10. Figure 7c shows this comparison. While there
is no discernible pattern for the negative gift and the in-kind gift treatments, for the positive
monetary gift treatment there is an initial 1 envelope (3 percent) increase in round 9, with
no eﬀect instead in round 10. Columns 4 and 5 in Table 3 show the regression results. After
controlling for average performance in rounds 5-8, the positive gift treatment is associated with
an increase of 1.3 envelopes in round 9, a statistically significant increase, with no eﬀect in
round 10. These patterns are parallel using log output as dependent variable (Panel B).
 30
      Appendix Figures 4a-d show that the results are parallel using log output.


                                                       25
    This evidence of a gift eﬀect with rapid decay could be related to the finding of Gneezy
and List (2006) of positive gift exchange which decays over time. That being said, the eﬀect
in our setting is much smaller (3 percent versus 30 percent) and the rate of decay is faster (30
minutes versus 90 minutes). Overall, there is suggestive evidence on an initial positive eﬀect
in the positive gift treatment, with no evidence of gift eﬀects for the other treatments.
    Match. A second pre-registered comparison is the interaction with the return to the firm.
The return to the charity was doubled due to the presence of a match in either round 9 or
round 10 (depending on the randomization). We can thus test whether reciprocity is responsive
to the return to the employer, although the power of the test is limited given the overall null
eﬀect of the gifts. Figure 7d and Columns 6 and 7 in Table 4 show that there is no eﬀect of the
match on the response to the gifts. This evidence is consistent with the evidence on baseline
social preferences suggesting little scope for the precise return to the employer.
    Heterogeneity. The estimates so far provide evidence only on the average impact of the
gifts, which could mask substantial heterogeneity. Figure 8 plots the CDF of productivity in
rounds 9 and 10 for the various treatments. To enhance power, we plot the residual of output,
controlling for average output in rounds 5-8. While the diﬀerences between the treatments are
small, there are hints of an output increase with the positive gift at lower quantiles.

6.2   Structural Estimates
We now estimate the social preferences on the full data set (rounds 1 to 10). Relative to the
examination of baseline social preferences in Tables 2 and 3, the key addition is the estimation
of how much the social preference parameters shift (if at all) in response to the gift treatments.
These parameters capture reciprocity models which posit that the social preferences depend on
how an individual is treated (Fehr and Gächter 2000; Charness and Rabin 2002; Dufwenberg
and Kirchsteiger 2004; Falk and Fischbacher 2006). Whether reciprocity is intention-based
or action-based, a reciprocal worker who receives a surprisingly generous treatment from the
employer is likely to display more positive social preferences towards the employer.
   We make the following additional assumptions. First, given the strong support for the
warm glow model for baseline social preferences, we assume that social preferences are of the
warm glow type. Second, since the results on baseline social preferences suggest similar social
preferences across the three charities, we assume the same warm glow across the charities.
   Table 5 displays the results for power cost (Columns 1-3) and exponential cost functions
(Columns 4-6). In addition to the specification with indicators for the various rounds (Columns
1 and 4), we also estimate a quadratic (Columns 2 and 5) and a cubic polynomial (Columns
3 and 6) in the number of rounds. The three specifications for the learning by doing have
similar explanatory power. Appendix Figure 5 plots the implied productivity shift over time
        £         ¤
− (1) ̄ +  () for an individual of average ability  for the three specifications, showing


                                               26
quite similar estimated time eﬀects. Thus, it is not surprising that the results on baseline
social preferences and curvature of the cost of eﬀort are quite similar across the specifications,
and are parallel to the estimates of baseline social preferences (Table 2).
    Turning to the reciprocity parameters, we do not find statistically significant evidence of
reciprocity for any of the gift treatments. The magnitudes, however, diﬀer across the types of
gift, in ways consistent with the reduced-form results. For the positive monetary treatments,
there is an increase in warm glow ranging from .05 to .20. The latter estimate is sizeable,
constituting a 50 percent increase over the baseline warm glow coeﬃcient of .4.
    How can a small increase of .6 envelopes (a 2 percent increase) in the reduced form translate
into a 50 percent increase in warm glow? This is a case where the link to the model is
important: given the inelastic cost of eﬀort function, even small increases in eﬀort imply
sizeable (if imprecisely estimated) shifts in the underlying social preference motivations.
    The estimates for the negative gift treatment are smaller in absolute value, ranging from
-.01 to -.08, consistent with the very small reduced-form estimates. Finally, the in-kind gift
treatment is associated to a decrease in the warm glow parameter, ranging from -0.07 to -0.12.
    In Table 6, we consider robustness checks to the results for both the power and exponential
cost function. In Columns 1 and 4, we consider an alternative specification for the pre-registered
round indicators, yielding similar results.31 Next, motivated by the observed decay of the gift
eﬀects in Gneezy and List (2009), we allow for the warm glow eﬀect of a gift,   , to decay.
Namely, the warm glow parameter for round 10 equals    with  = 1 indicating no decay
and  = 0 indicating full decay.32 As Columns 2 and 5 show, the estimates indicate substantial
decay (̂ = 23) and a larger and statistically significant eﬀect of the positive monetary gift
(̂  = 37). This is consistent with the reduced form results in Table 4 and Figure 7c of a
decay of the positive monetary gift response (though not for the other gift treatments). Finally,
as a last robustness check, in Columns 3 and 6 we present estimates assuming pure altruism,
rather than warm glow. The model has trouble converging, but at least for the exponential
cost function reports qualitatively similar conclusions.
   Finally, we report the fit of the model across all ten rounds. As in Figures 5a-c, we take the
exponential cost specifications for either warm glow (Columns 4 of Table 5) or altruism (Column
6 of Table 6), compute the predicted eﬀort and average across the relevant observations in a
round-order. We in particular average across the diﬀerent gift treatments in rounds 9-10.
Figure 9 shows that the model overall does well in fitting the data.
  31
     Namely, the specification restricts the indicator for round 2 to equal 1/2 the indicator for round 3. Further-
more, the specification does not allow for a separate indicator for rounds 9-10, requiring it to equal the indicator
for rounds 5-8.
  32
     We pre-registered this specification with decay. In light of the small gift eﬀects, we report this specification
but in the benchmark specification we restrict  = 1.




                                                         27
7    Discussion and Conclusion
In this Section, we take stock of the results and discuss them in the context of the literature.
   Baseline Social Preferences. A key finding in the paper is the support for a ‘warm
glow’-type model, as opposed to a model of pure altruism towards the employer. The sizeable
magnitude of the estimated warm glow implies that social preferences can play an impor-
tant role as motivators at work, and have the potential to substitute for incentives, at least
when incentives are hard to design or apply, for example due to multi-tasking or observability
problems. The theme that social preferences towards employers may be of importance in the
workplace is a classical one. However, we are aware of little previous field evidence pinning
down the features of such social preferences, let alone obtaining structural estimates.
    An important theme to return to is the interpretation in terms of warm glow. Clearly, our
model of ‘warm glow’ is not a fully specified model. We see it as a simple alternative to the
pure-altruism model that is typically used to model workplace social preferences (e.g. Bandiera,
Barankay, and Rasul, 2006 and Hjort 2014). The warm glow model could be capturing norms
in the workplace (‘one needs to put in eﬀort’) or value placed on ‘meaningful’ eﬀort (Ariely,
Kamenica and Prelec 2008). We see the model in the paper as a starting point to better
understand social preferences in the workplace.
    A related issue is the role of the training rounds, which play an important role for the
estimates of social preferences. We assume that in the training rounds, in which the envelopes
are discarded, the workers are working only because of the piece rate compensation. It is
certainly possible that social preferences might still be active during training, since workers
may reason that working harder in the training will prepare them to do good work for the
employer in the following rounds. In Columns 3 and 6 of Table 3, we estimate a version of this
alternative model, assuming that social preferences partially apply also in the training rounds.
The social preference estimates are altered, as expected, but the overall pattern is similar.
    Another issue is the fact that the employers are charities. While a fraction of the population
works for non-profits, employment under a profit-seeking employer is clearly more common.
Would our results extrapolate to this situation? We chose charities as employers not out of
a preference, but because it was the employer for which we could most plausibly convey, and
vary, the return to eﬀort. One concern in regard to this choice is that employees may work
extra hard for a charity compared to a corporate employer. Thus, we included a round of
working for a grocery store for comparison. To our surprise, the workers work at least as hard
for the grocery store, which suggests that the estimates for warm glow are not necessarily
overestimates of what we would find for corporate jobs, though only follow-up work will tell.
    Gift Exchange. Turning to Section 6 on gift exchange, a sizeable literature exists on
gift exchange experiments in the field (partly surveyed in Esteves-Sorenson, 2015), even if the
findings are not typically translated into the underlying social preferences. Our results diﬀer


                                               28
from some previous papers which find larger impacts from some of the gift treatments.
    What explains the small gift eﬀects for all three treatments in our setting? We consider
four leading possibilities and argue that they do not appear to explain the results. A first
possibility is that our gift treatments did not trigger the required surprise and mood response
to induce reciprocation. To address this important concern, we use a short debriefing survey.
For the last 65 workers33 , we ask ‘How did the pay in the last two periods make you feel?
(Check all that apply) [ ] No particular reaction [ ] It made me happy [ ] Felt more motivated
and energetic [ ] It was what I expected [ ] Surprised, it was more than I expected [ ] Surprised,
it was less than I expected [ ] Felt unhappy [ ] Felt insulted [ ] It was unfair.’ We code the
share that report being happy or unhappy, as well as the share reporting a positive surprise
or a negative surprise. As Figures 10a and 10b show, in the positive gift treatments 70 to 80
percent of subjects report positive mood, compared to 20 percent in the control group and
5 percent in the negative gift group. The results are similar for positive surprise, and are
reversed for unhappiness and negative surprise, as expected. Thus, the null results of the gifts
on productivity are not due to lack of a ‘first stage’ on emotions and perceptions.
    A second possibility is that worker eﬀort towards the end of the experiment becomes ha-
bitual and unresponsive to incentives. We test for this hypothesis by examining the response
to piece rate variation in the last rounds. As Figure 3 shows, in Order A there is a 3-envelope
reduction in output from round 8 to round 9 as the piece rate decreases from 10c to 0c. There
is no such change in Order B, where the piece rate stays at 0c. Thus, subjects are highly
responsive to motivation even in the later rounds.
    A third explanation is that the gifts were of smaller magnitude compared to previous papers.
However, the positive monetary gift and the in-kind gift have approximately the same absolute
value as those used previously. The negative gift treatment more than halves the pay for the
last two rounds (from $7 to $3); the pay reduction is smaller than in previous papers only if
considered as share of total earnings (12 percent versus 33 percent in Kube et al., 2013). Given
our point estimate of essentially zero on the negative gift treatment, extrapolating linearly to
a 33 percent does not generate substantial eﬀects in our setting.
    A fourth set of explanations consists of various confounders, such as those pointed out by
Esteves-Sorenson (2015). None of the confounders applies to our study. In particular, subjects
are recruited at market wages (avoiding a positive selection of workers hired at above-average
wage), there are no peer eﬀects by design as subjects are split into rooms, nor are there issues
with sample size, as ours is the largest gift exchange field experiment run to date. Further,
previous papers have pointed out that gift exchange may not occur if workers do not have a
clear channel to reciprocate (Englmaier and Leider 2012) or do not know the return to the
employer. Neither applies in our case.
  33
    We are thankful to Uri Simonsohn and Eldar Shafir for suggesting the addition of the question and making
suggestions on the wording.


                                                    29
    We suggest two explanations for the gift exchange results. The first is that gift exchange
eﬀects are simply of smaller magnitude than found in some of the earlier papers. Indeed,
Esteves-Sorenson (2015) similarly fails to find an eﬀect from a positive gift exchange treatment
in a large-sample field experiment. A second explanation is that the social preferences towards
the employer are, to a first approximation, set at first contact. Gift treatments, under this ex-
planation, are more eﬀective when introduced initially, as in previous experiments, as opposed
to during an ongoing work relationship, as in our experiment.34 Under either interpretation,
gift exchange in the workplace is likely to be of more limited impact than initially conceived.
Still, our experiment documents substantial baseline social preferences at work, even in the
absence of any gifts.
    Calibration to Previous Gift Exchange Experiments. We also present an alternative
approach to relate our estimates to previous experiments on gift exchange in the field. As we
discussed, previous experiments were not designed to estimate social preference parameters.
However, as the model in Section 2 shows, one can derive a measure of reciprocity, provided we
know one key variable — the curvature of the eﬀort function. Using (5), under a power cost of
eﬀort function, we can derive the proportional increase in warm glow ( +   ) due to the
gift. This measure of reciprocity equals (∗  ∗ ) , where  controls the curvature of the
cost of eﬀort function, and thus the inverse of the elasticity of eﬀort with respect to incentives.
While we do not observe the elasticity from the previous experiments, we conjecture that the
elasticity would be comparable to that in our task. After all, the previous literature, like us,
uses measures of quantity produced in a fixed amount of time, making it hard to dramatically
increase production in response to increased incentives or motivation. Provided a calibration
for , we can revisit some previous experiments and compute the implied reciprocity (that is,
the implied proportional change in social preferences).
    Table 7 shows the results for some classical papers in the literature. For elasticity values
as in our task, some previous papers imply very large reciprocity eﬀects, such as a 400 or 700
percent increase in social preferences with a positive gift, and an 88 percent decrease with a
negative gift. The calibrated reciprocity falls to a 40-50 percent increase only if the elasticity
is assumed to be five times larger than in our experiment.
    We hope that future experiments will consider incorporating the estimation of the elasticity
in the design, as we do.




  34
     We leave it to future research to separate out the two explanations. We attempted to recruit more workers
for an additional field experiment with the traditional between-subject structure. However, we could not recruit
enough subjects from the same population to guarantee adequate power for the test.


                                                      30
References
 [1] Akerlof, George A. 1982. “Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange”, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 97 (4): 543-569.
 [2] Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2005. “Identity and the Economics of Orga-
     nizations” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 9-32.
 [3] Al-Ubaydli, Omar, Steﬀen Andersen, Uri Gneezy and John A. List. 2015. “Carrots That
     Look Like Sticks: Toward an Understanding of Multitasking Incentive Schemes” Southern
     Economic Journal, Vol. 81, pp. 538-561.
 [4] Andreoni, James. 1989. “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ri-
     cardian Equivalence.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(6), 1447-1458.
 [5] Andreoni, James. 1990. Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of
     Warm-Glow Giving. The Economic Journal, 100(401), 464-477.
 [6] Andreoni, James and Charles Sprenger. 2012. ”Estimating Time Preferences from Convex
     Budgets,” American Economic Review, vol. 102(7), pages 3333-56.
 [7] Ariely, Daniel, Emir Kamenica, Drazen Prelec. 2008. “Man’s search for meaning: The case
     of Legos” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Volume 67, Issues 3—4, Pages
     671—677.
 [8] Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle and Charles Sprenger. 2015. “Working Over Time: Dy-
     namic Inconsistency in Real Eﬀort Tasks ” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130 (3):
     1067-1115.
 [9] Augenblick, Ned and Matthew Rabin. 2015. “An Experiment on Time Preference and
     Misprediction in Unpleasant Tasks” Working paper.
[10] Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay and Imran Rasul. 2005. “Social Preferences and the
     Response to Incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     Vol. 120, No. 3, pp. 917-962.
[11] Barseghyan, Levon, Francesca Molinari, Ted O’Donoghue, and Joshua C. Teitelbaum.
     2013. “The nature of risk preferences: Evidence from insurance choices.” American Eco-
     nomic Review 103, no. 6 (2013): 2499-2529.
[12] Becker, Gary S. 1974. “A Theory of Social Interactions” Journal of Political Economy,
     82(6), 1063-1093.
[13] Bellemare, C. and B.S. Shearer (2011) “On the Relevance and Composition of Gifts within
     the Firm: Evidence from Field Experiments,” International Economic Review, Vol. 52(3),
     pp. 855-882.
[14] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2006. “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior” American
     Economic Review, 96(5), 1652-1678.
[15] Besley, Tim and Ghatak, Maitreesh (2005) “Competition and incentives with motivated
     agents”. American Economic Review, 95 (3). pp. 616-636.
[16] Breza, Emily, Supreet Kaur, and Yogita Shamdasani. 2015. “The Morale Eﬀects of Pay
     Inequality” Working paper.



                                            31
[17] Card, David, Stefano DellaVigna, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2011. “The Role of Theory in
     Field Experiments”. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), pp. 39-62.
[18] Charness, Gary and Peter Kuhn. 2007. “Does Pay Inequality Aﬀect Worker Eﬀort? Ex-
     perimental Evidence”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 693-723.
[19] Cohn, Alain, Ernst Fehr, Benedikt Herrmann and Frédéric Schneider. 2014. “Social Com-
     parison And Eﬀort Provision: Evidence From A Field Experiment”, Journal of the Euro-
     pean Economic Association ,pp. 877—898.
[20] Cohn, Alain, Ernst Fehr, and Lorenz Goette. Forthcoming. “Fair Wages and Eﬀort: Evi-
     dence from a Field Experiment”, Management Science.
[21] Conlin, Michael, Ted O’Donoghue, and Timothy J. Vogelsang. 2007. “Projection Bias in
     Catalog Orders.” American Economic Review, 97(4), 1217-1249.
[22] DeJarnette, Patrick. 2015. “Eﬀort Momentum.” working paper.
[23] DellaVigna, Stefano, List, John. A., and Malmendier, Ulrike. (2012). “Testing for Altruism
     and Social Pressure in Charitable Giving.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 1-56.
[24] DellaVigna, Stefano, List, John. A., Malmendier, Ulrike, and Gautam Rao (2015). “Voting
     to Tell Others.” working paper.
[25] Englmaier, Florian and Stephen Leider. 2012a.“Contractual and Organizational Structure
     with Reciprocal Agents” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2012, vol. 4, issue
     2, pp. 146-83.
[26] Englmaier, Florian and Stephen Leider. 2012b.“Managerial Payoﬀ and Gift Exchange in
     the Field” Working paper.
[27] Charness, Gary, and Matthew Rabin. 2002. ”Understanding social preferences with simple
     tests.” Quarterly journal of Economics: 817-869.
[28] Esteves-Sorenson, Constanca. 2015. “Gift Exchange in the Workplace: Addressing the
     Conflicting Evidence with a Careful Test ” Working paper.
[29] Dufwenberg, Martin, and Georg Kirchsteiger. 2004. ”A theory of sequential reciprocity.”
     Games and economic behavior 47.2: 268-298.
[30] Falk, Armin, and Urs Fischbacher. 2006. ”A theory of reciprocity.” Games and economic
     behavior 54.2: 293-315.
[31] Fehr, Ernst, Georg Kirchsteiger, and Arno Riedl. 1998. ”Gift exchange and reciprocity in
     competitive experimental markets.” European Economic Review 42.1: 1-34.
[32] Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter, 2000. “Fairness and Retaliation - The Economics of
     Reciprocity”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, 159-181.
[33] Gill, David and Victoria Prowse. 2012. “A structural analysis of disappointment aversion
     in a real eﬀort competition” American Economic Review, 102(1), 469-503.
[34] Gilchrist, Duncan S., Michael Luca, and Deepak Malhotra. Forthcoming. “When 3+14:
     Gift Structure and Reciprocity in the Field.” Management Science.
[35] Uri Gneezy and John A List. 2006. “Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for
     Gift Exchange in Labor Markets Using Field Experiments” Econometrica, Volume 74,
     Issue 5, pages 1365—1384.

                                              32
[36] Hjort, Jonas. 2014. “Ethnic Divisions and Production in Firms”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, vol.129, no. 4, pp. 1899-1946.
[37] Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch and Richard Thaler. 1986. “Fairness as a Constraint
     on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market” American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No.
     4, pp. 728-741.
[38] Krueger, Alan B. and Alexandre Mas. 2004. “Strikes, Scabs, And Tread Separations:
     Labor Strife And The Production Of Defective Bridgestone/Firestone Tires,” Journal of
     Political Economy, v112(2), 253-289.
[39] Kube, Sebastian, Michel André Maréchal and Clemens Puppe. 2012 “The Currency of
     Reciprocity: Gift Exchange in the Workplace” American Economic Review, Vol. 102, No.
     4, pp. 1644-1662.
[40] Kube, Sebastian, Michel André Maréchal and Clemens Puppe. 2013. “Do Wage Cuts
     Damage Work Morale? Evidence From A Natural Field Experiment”, Journal of the
     European Economic Association Volume 11, Issue 4, pages 853—870.
[41] Laibson, David, Peter Maxted, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2015. “Estimat-
     ing Discount Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle,” Working paper.
[42] Shearer, Bruce. 2004. “Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentives: Evidence from a Field
     Experiment” Review of Economic Studies, 71 (2): 513-534.




                                           33
        Figure 1. Example of Equilibrium Effort Determination – Marginal Benefit and Marginal Cost




Notes: Figure 1 illustrates the equilibrium effort determined as the intersection of the relevant MC and MB curves. The plot is made for the
parameters corresponding to the benchmark structural estimates in Table 2. We take the parameters from Column 2 in Table 2, taking the average
warm glow across the three charities, assuming an individual with an average fixed effect k, and assuming the learning by doing as in periods 5-
8. The MC curves plot the marginal cost of effort for different effort levels, in the specific case using the power cost of effort function, for a subject
of average productivity and for an average realization of the error term. (Both subject fixed effects and the realization of the error term shift the
marginal cost curve) The marginal cost of effort shifts out for later rounds (round 6 versus round 2 in the figure) to capture learning by doing (see
Figure 3). The MB curve captures the marginal benefit for the subject which equals the sum of the private benefit (the piece rate) and the social
preferences towards the employer. The figure plots two cases, piece rate of 0c (in which case the marginal benefit equals just the warm glow)
and piece rate of 20c (in which case the marginal benefit equals the warm glow plus 20 cents).




                                                                           34
                                 Figure 2. Design: 10 Rounds of Experiment, Order A and B




Notes: Figure 2 displays the sequence of the 10 experimental rounds of envelope preparation, each of which lasting 20 minutes. Between each
round there is a 10 minute break, except between rounds 4 and 5 when there is a longer break for lunch. Subjects are randomized across sessions
into Order A or Order B, as well as into three assignments of charities to be Charity 1, 2, and 3. In rounds 9 and 10, subjects are split within session
into four gift exchange treatments (in the first 24 experimental sessions we did not run the in-kind gift treatment). Depending on randomized
session assignment, either session 9 or session 10 involves a charity match (high return for the employer). The arrows indicate the main
experimental comparisons evaluated in Figure 4a-c and in Appendix Figure 1a-b.




                                                                          35
                                  Figure 3. Average Effort over the 10 Rounds, by Order




Notes: Figure 3 displays the average output (number of envelopes folded within a 20-minute round) in a round. The figure indicates 95%
confidence intervals computed clustering by session, thus allowing for correlation of errors among subjects in a session. Subjects are randomized
into Order A or Order B. See Figure 2 for more detailed labeling of the 10 rounds in each order. The output for rounds 9 and 10 averages across
the gift treatments displayed in Figure 2. The figure indicates clear learning by doing in rounds 1-4, with average output about stable since, but
highly responsive to variation in piece rate in and training (envelopes not used by the employer).




                                                                       36
                                          Figure 4. Key Experimental Results on Social Preferences (pre-gift)
           Figure 4a. Variation in Piece Rate                                     Figure 4b. Consequences to the Employer




Figure 4c. Variation in Return to Employer (Match)




Notes: Figures 4a-c display key comparisons of average output (number of envelopes folded within a 20-minute round) across rounds, as outlined by the arrows in Figure 2. The comparisons average
across order A and B. Figure 4a compares the piece rates for 0c, 10c, and 20c (respectively, rounds 7, 3, and 6 in Order A and rounds 3, 7, and 4 in order B). Figure 4b compares the impact of envelopes
being used (rounds 5 and 6). Figure 4c compares the impact of high return to the employer (charity match) (rounds 7 and 8). The figures indicate 95% confidence intervals computed clustering by
session.


                                                                                                  37
                                          Figure 5. Fit of warm Glow versus Altruism Model, Key Experimental Comparisons

           Figure 5a. Variation in Piece Rate, Fit                                                            Figure 5b. Consequences to the Employer, Fit




Figure 5c. Variation in Return to Employer (Match), Fit




Notes: Figures 5a-c display key comparisons of average output (number of envelopes folded within a 20-minute round) across rounds outlined by the arrows in Figure 2 and summarized in Figure 4a-c.
In addition to the evidence produced in Figures 4a-c, the figures also indicate the average prediction for the model estimated with altruism (Table 2, Column 4) or with warm glow (Table 2, Column 5).
We use the specification with the exponential cost function since the output variable here is number of envelopes, as opposed to log number of envelopes.


                                                                                                 38
                              Figure 6. Optimal Piece Rate for Estimated Social Preferences
                                        Figure 6a. Effort as Function of Piece Rate




                                        Figure 6b. Profit Rate as Function of Piece Rate




Notes: Figure 6 takes the estimated parameters in the warm-glow specification and predicts the implied effort e* (Figure 6a) and profit rate e*(Pf-
Pw) (Figure 6b), for different levels of the piece rate Pw. Specifically, the plots examine the impact on profits of increasing the piece rate holding
constant all else (including the lump-sum pay). We take the parameters from Column 2 in Table 2, taking the average warm glow across the three
charities, assuming an individual with an average fixed effect k, and assuming the learning by doing as in periods 5-8. The continuous blue line
indicates the counterfactual for the case with no social preferences. In this case, effort and thus profits steeply increase initially with a higher
piece rate as output steeply responds to incentives, then profits start declining as the extra productivity effect of piece rates is not worth any
more the extra wage payment. The dotted green line indicates the curves for the estimated warm glow and shows that with social preferences
the optimal piece rate is zero, as social preferences already motivate workers enough. The dashed red line shows that even if the warm glow
were only about one tenth of the estimated one, holding all other parameters the same, the optimal piece rate would still be barely above zero.


                                                                         39
                                                                               Figure 7. Gift Exchange Effects
Figure 7a. Effect of Gift Treatments (No Controls)                                             Figure 7b. Effect of Gift Treatments (With Controls)




Figure 7c. Evidence on Decay of Gift Effects                                              Figure 7d. Interaction with Return to Employer




Notes: Figures 7a-d presents the key results for the gift exchange treatments in rounds 9 and 10 (see Figure 2). The Figures include 95% confidence intervals obtained after clustering for session. Figure
7a plots the average output (number of envelopes stuffed in 20 minutes) for the four treatments. Figure 7b presents the regression-adjusted coefficients after controlling for average productivity in
rounds 5-8 (Table 4, Column 3). Figure 7c splits the treatment comparison of Figure 7a into round 9 and 10 to examine the impact of possible decay of gift effects. Figure 7d splits the results by return
to the firm: in either round 9 or round 10 (depending on the randomization) the employer earns a higher return due to a charity match.


                                                                                                   40
                                                                  Figure 8. Heterogeneity in Gift Exchange Effects




Notes: Figure 8 presents the cumulative distribution function of the effort measure for rounds 9 and 10, controlling for average productivity in rounds 5-8. More precisely, we regress productivity in
rounds 9 and 10 on average productivity in rounds 5-8, take the residuals and average the two residuals for each worker, and plot them.



                                                                                                 41
               Figure 9. Fit of warm Glow versus Altruism Model, All 10 Rounds, Order A and B




Notes: Figure 9 displays the average output (number of envelopes folded within a 20-minute round) in a round for Order A and Order B, together
with the predicted output according to the warm glow model (Column 4 in Table 5) and according to the altruism model (Column 6 in Table 6).
See Figure 2 for more detailed labeling of the 10 rounds in each order. The output for rounds 9 and 10 averages across the gift treatments
displayed in Figure 2.




                                                                     42
                                         Figure 10. Effect of Gifts on Worker Happiness and Surprise
Figure 10a. Fraction Stating a Happy or Unhappy Reaction                       Figure10. Fraction Stating Positive or Negative Surprise




Notes: Figures 10a-b present the average response to a short debriefing questionnaire administered after the end of the experiment. The sample size includes 65 subjects, since the questions were
only asked for the last 65 subjects in the experiments. Figure 10a presents the fraction that indicates being happy and the fraction that indicates being unhappy for each of the various treatments.
Figure 10b indicates the fraction stating a positive surprise versus negative surprise (with the other categories being “as expected” or “none”). For the in-kind treatment, the bar shows the fraction
that reported being surprised (we did not ask for the share with negative surprise).




                                                                                                   43
                                                            Table 1. Summary Statistics and Covariate Balance

      Specification:                                                                                                            OLS Regressions
                                                            Summary                 Output
                                                            Statistics             Predictors                                            Checks of Randomization
                                                                                                              Indicator for            Indicator for  Indicator for                     Indicator for
      Dep. Var.:                                                               Average Output                   Order A                Positive Gift  Negative Gift                     In-Kind Gift
                                                                    (1)              (2)                           (3)                      (4)            (5)                               (6)
Panel A. Individual Demographics
Is employed (self-reported)                                    0.397                 2.022**                         0.070                    0.025                   0.012                  -0.045
                                                              (0.490)                (0.799)                       (0.050)                  (0.047)                 (0.044)                 (0.039)
Female                                                         0.522                 2.535***                     -0.099**                    0.040                  -0.010                  0.011
                                                              (0.500)                (0.691)                       (0.049)                  (0.043)                 (0.044)                 (0.036)
Age 25-34                                                      0.361                 2.959***                        0.062                  -0.110*                  -0.005                  0.063
                                                              (0.481)                (0.875)                       (0.058)                  (0.060)                 (0.052)                 (0.048)
Age 35-44                                                      0.191                  0.989                          0.039                  -0.122*                  -0.063                  0.052
                                                              (0.393)                (1.184)                       (0.068)                  (0.067)                 (0.064)                 (0.054)
Age 45-54                                                      0.128                 -2.122*                        -0.035                   -0.082                -0.160**                  0.083
                                                              (0.334)                (1.256)                       (0.093)                  (0.082)                 (0.066)                 (0.057)
Age 55+                                                        0.058                  1.305                        0.243**                   -0.002                 -0.012                  -0.021
                                                              (0.235)                (1.753)                       (0.100)                  (0.111)                 (0.120)                 (0.069)
Has donated to charity                                         0.691                  0.183                       -0.131**                    0.004                 -0.000                   0.026
   (self-reported)                                            (0.463)                (0.946)                       (0.059)                  (0.057)                 (0.048)                 (0.043)
Has volunteered before                                         0.843                  1.159                          0.096                   -0.043                  0.042                   0.056
   (self-reported)                                            (0.364)                (1.051)                       (0.065)                  (0.060)                 (0.070)                 (0.056)

Mean of Dependent Variable                                                             35.19                       0.491                     0.276                   0.283                   0.175

R squared                                                                             0.097                        0.038                    0.017                    0.015                   0.013
N                                                             N = 446                N = 446                      N = 446                  N = 446                  N = 446                 N = 446
Panel B. Index of Demographics
Predicted Effort Based on                                                                                           0.004                   -0.001                   0.013                   0.001
   Demographics (Col. 2)                                                                                           (0.010)                  (0.008)                 (0.008)                 (0.007)
R squared                                                                                                          0.000                    0.000                    0.005                   0.000
N                                                                                                                 N = 446                  N = 446                  N = 446                 N = 446
Notes: Column 1 in Panel A reports summary statistics on the sample of 446 participants in the experiment. Column 2 in Panel A reports the estimates of an OLS regression of average output (over the 10
rounds) on subject characteristics. Based on the estimate in Column 2 we form an index of predicted productivity based on demographics which we use in Panel B. In Columns 3-6 of Panels A and B we
regress the assignment to different conditions (order A/B and assignment to the different gift treatments) on the subject characteristics (Panel A) and on the index of characteristics (Panel B). The standard
errors are clustered at the session level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                                                                      44
    Table 2. Estimation of Baseline Social Preferences, Non-Linear Least Squares

                                                          Log (Number of Envelopes in                          Number of Envelopes in a
Dependent Variable:                                               a Round)                                             Round
                                                            (1)      (2)       (3)                              (4)      (5)      (6)
Baseline Social Preferences:
    Altruism towards Charity B                             0.195***                          -0.046           0.218***                        -0.010
                                                           (0.051)                          (0.049)           (0.046)                         (0.044)
    Altruism towards Charity RN                            0.214***                          -0.035           0.240***                        -0.003
                                                           (0.050)                          (0.055)           (0.050)                         (0.048)
    Altruism towards Charity RIC                           0.282***                          0.068           0.302***                          0.115
                                                           (0.057)                          (0.082)          (0.049)                          (0.072)
    Altruism towards Grocery Store                         0.761***                                           0.736***
                                                           (0.091)                                            (0.079)

    Warm Glow towards Charity B                                            0.400***        0.463***                          0.418***        0.427***
                                                                           (0.077)         (0.100)                           (0.074)         (0.094)
    Warm Glow towards Charity RN                                           0.427***        0.474***                          0.449***        0.447***
                                                                           (0.073)         (0.085)                           (0.079)         (0.082)
    Warm Glow towards Charity RIC                                          0.505***        0.422***                          0.521***        0.369***
                                                                           (0.080)         (0.108)                           (0.074)         (0.096)
    Warm Glow towards Grocery                                              0.720***        0.727***                          0.715***        0.690***
    Store                                                                  (0.073)         (0.081)                           (0.074)         (0.075)

Incidental Parameters:
    Cost Function Curvature (s)                            11.268*** 9.476*** 9.535***      0.296*** 0.264***                                0.258***
                                                            (1.481)  (0.734)    (0.829)     (0.031)     (0.018)                              (0.019)
    Cost of Effort Function:                                          Power                           Exponential
    Type of timetrend                                                    Indicators for Rounds 2, 3, 4, 5-8
    Std. Deviation of Error Term                             0.131    0.130      0.130       3.987       3.947                                 3.944
    Std. Dev. of Individual f.e.s *(1/s)                     0.248    0.248      0.248       8.134       8.148                                 8.160
R Squared                                                   0.8350          0.8377          0.8379            0.8505          0.8535          0.8537
N                                                            3568            3568            3568              3568            3568            3568
Notes: Specifications are from non-linear least squares regressions as in Section 4, with each observation being a worker-round combination. The
sample is restricted to the first 8 rounds. The dependent variable is the log of the number of envelopes produced in that round in Columns 1-3 and is the
number of envelopes produced in Columns 4-6. The specifications in Columns 1 and 4 allow for pure altruism towards the firm, in which the worker puts
weight alpha on the return to the employer. The specifications in Columns 2 and 5 allow for a form of warm glow, that is, the worker puts a weight on the
employer, but on the average return (30 cents per envelope), not the actual return (which varies by round). The specifications in Columns 3 and 6 include
both altruism and warm glow coefficients, except for the grocery store for which there is no variation in return and thus one cannot separate altruism from
warm glow. All specifications include fixed effects for worker i as well as indicators for rounds 2, 3, 4, and 5-8. The standard deviations listed are the
standard deviation of the error term and the standard deviation of the individual fixed effects divided by the curvature s . The latter ratio indicates the
variation in the individual productivity. The standard errors are clustered at the session level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at




                                                                           45
                            Table 3. Estimation of Baseline Social Preferences, Robustness

Dependent Variable:                                                   Log (Number of Envelopes)                             Number of Envelopes in a Round
                                                                      (1)      (2)         (3)                                (4)       (5)          (6)
Baseline Social Preferences:
  Altruism towards Charity B                                         -0.029      -0.091**             0.082*                  -0.027           -0.071**             0.090**
                                                                    (0.052)       (0.036)             (0.047)                (0.038)            (0.030)             (0.042)
    Altruism towards Charity RN                                      -0.018     -0.107***             0.138**                -0.030           -0.089***            0.139***
                                                                    (0.057)      (0.032)              (0.055)                (0.038)           (0.030)             (0.051)
    Altruism towards Charity RIC                                     0.100        -0.066             0.223***                 0.086            -0.023              0.232***
                                                                    (0.103)       (0.073)            (0.060)                 (0.082)           (0.068)             (0.053)

    Warm Glow towards Charity B                                 0.397***         0.274***            0.883***               0.334***          0.259***             0.854***
                                                                (0.087)          (0.083)             (0.108)                (0.071)           (0.067)              (0.106)
    Warm Glow towards Charity RN                                0.401***         0.299***            0.840***               0.355***          0.292***             0.821***
                                                                (0.080)          (0.077)             (0.109)                (0.069)           (0.070)              (0.113)
    Warm Glow towards Charity RIC                               0.354***         0.314***            0.786***               0.293***          0.270***             0.752***
                                                                (0.118)          (0.108)             (0.113)                (0.097)           (0.092)              (0.110)
   Warm Glow towards Grocery                                    0.586***         0.650***            1.232***               0.541***          0.579***             1.176***
   Store                                                        (0.072)          (0.117)             (0.100)                (0.069)           (0.096)              (0.103)
Incidental Parameters:
    Cost Function Curvature (s)                                10.866*** 15.689***   3.654***                               0.323***   0.413***     0.105***
                                                                (0.896)   (1.984)     (0.245)                               (0.025)     (0.044)      (0.006)
    Cost of Effort Function:                                                Power                                                      Exponential
                                                              Quadratic Cubic in Indicators for                            Quadratic Cubic in Indicators for
    Type of timetrend                                         in Rounds Rounds      2, 3, 4, 5-8                           in Rounds Rounds        2, 3, 4, 5-8
                                                                                   Partial Warm                                                  Partial Warm
                                                                                   Glow During                                                    Glow During
    Specification                                                   Benchmark        Training                                    Benchmark          Training
    Std. Deviation of Error Term                                 0.130     0.129       0.129                                  3.930      3.900        3.908
    Std. Dev. of Individual f.e.s *(1/s)                         0.248     0.248       0.248                                  8.137      8.157        8.158
R Squared                                                           0.8374        0.8411               0.8406                0.8548            0.8570               0.8564
N                                                                    3568          3568                 3568                  3568              3568                 3568
Notes: Specifications are from non-linear least squares regressions as in specification in Section 4, with each observation being a worker-round combination. The sample
is restricted to the first 8 rounds. The dependent variable is the log of the number of envelopes produced in that round in Columns 1-3 and is the number of envelopes
produced in Columns 4-6. The specifications in Columns 1 and 4 allow for a quadratic function in the round number, while the specifications in Columns 2 and 5 allow for a
cubic function in the round. The specifications in Columns 3 and 6 include indicators for rounds 2, 3, 4, and 5-8 and also assume that there is warm glow (but not altruism)
even in the training rounds, assumed to be half the size as in the periods in which the envelopes are used. All specifications allow for both pure altruism towards the firm
and a form of warm glow, that is, the worker puts a weight on the employer, but on the average return (30 cents per envelope), not the actual return (which varies by
round). All specifications include fixed effects for worker i. The standard deviations listed are the standard deviation of the error term and the standard deviation of the
individual fixed effects divided by the curvature s. The latter ratio indicates the variation in the individual productivity. The standard errors are clustered at the session level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                        46
                                         Table 4. Reduced-Form Effects of Gift Treatments

      Specification:                                                                         OLS Regressions
      Dependent Variable:                                                                Output in Rounds 9 and 10
      Panel A. Measure of Output:                                           Number of Envelopes Stuffed in 20 Minutes
      Sample:                                                    Rounds 9 and 10                     Round 9 Round 10                    Match         No Match
                                                              (1)      (2)      (3)                      (4)     (5)                       (6)            (7)
Positive (monetary) gift                                     0.448    0.903    0.603                  1.350**  -0.145                     0.428          0.778
   Treatment                                               (0.966) (0.737) (0.729)                    (0.636) (0.904)                    (0.801)        (0.771)
Negative (monetary) gift                                    -0.046   -0.014   -0.047                   0.226  -0.321                      0.133         -0.227
   Treatment                                               (0.953) (0.745) (0.754)                    (0.738) (0.949)                    (0.840)        (0.859)
Positive In-kind (Thermos) gift                             -1.152   -1.011   -1.090                   -1.024 -1.155                     -0.924         -1.256
   Treatment                                               (1.242) (0.973) (0.927)                    (0.907) (1.080)                    (1.013)        (0.977)
Average Output Measure                                               0.867***
   In Rounds 1-8                                                     (0.028)
Average Output Measure                                                      0.815***                  0.833***        0.797***          0.834***         0.796***
   In Rounds 5-8                                                            (0.027)                   (0.024)         (0.035)           (0.032)          (0.028)
Constant                                                 36.613*** 6.223*** 5.149***                  4.446***        5.852***          4.537***         5.761***
                                                          (0.709) (1.045) (1.118)                     (1.022)         (1.459)           (1.313)          (1.192)
R squared                                                  0.003      0.585         0.608              0.668           0.556              0.622           0.595
N                                                         N = 892    N = 892       N = 892            N = 446         N = 446            N = 446         N = 446
   Panel B. Measure of Output:                                         Log of Number of Envelopes Stuffed in 20 Minutes
Positive (monetary) gift                                     0.006    0.026    0.015      0.039**    -0.008       0.008                                    0.023
   Treatment                                               (0.028)   (0.022) (0.021)      (0.018)   (0.027)     (0.023)                                   (0.023)
Negative (monetary) gift                                    -0.017    -0.012   -0.018      -0.009   -0.027       -0.010                                   -0.026
   Treatment                                               (0.035)   (0.031) (0.031)      (0.031)   (0.035)     (0.032)                                   (0.035)
Positive In-kind (Thermos) gift                             -0.040    -0.029   -0.033      -0.027   -0.039       -0.030                                   -0.036
   Treatment                                               (0.037)   (0.029) (0.028)      (0.026)   (0.034)     (0.031)                                   (0.029)
Average Output Measure                                               0.782***
   In Rounds 1-8                                                     (0.028)
Average Output Measure                                                      0.831***                  0.851***        0.812***          0.843***         0.820***
   In Rounds 5-8                                                            (0.030)                   (0.029)         (0.036)           (0.031)          (0.034)
Constant                                                  3.572*** 0.826*** 0.561***                  0.490***        0.631***          0.523***         0.599***
                                                          (0.020) (0.099) (0.110)                     (0.108)         (0.130)           (0.112)          (0.125)

R squared                                                  0.003      0.483         0.519              0.574           0.473              0.535           0.505
N                                                         N = 892    N = 892       N = 892            N = 446         N = 446            N = 446         N = 446

Notes: Estimates from an OLS regression of output (Panel A) and log output (Panel B) in the final two rounds (Rounds 9 and 10) on the gift treatments. The omitted
category is a Control treatment with no "gift" (pay is the same as previously experienced with the same charity). The standard errors are clustered at the session level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                  47
                    Table 5. Estimation of Social Preferences with Gift Treatments, Non-Linear Least Squares

Dependent Variable:                                                                 Log (No. Envelopes in a Round)                                  Number of Envelopes in a Round
                                                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)                                    (4)          (5)          (6)
Baseline Social Preferences:
    Warm Glow towards Charity                                                      0.443***            0.405***            0.343***                0.462***              0.337***             0.307***
                                                                                   (0.063)             (0.043)             (0.043)                 (0.065)               (0.032)              (0.035)
    Warm Glow towards Grocery Store                                                0.720***            0.632***            0.539***                0.716***              0.551***             0.506***
                                                                                   (0.072)             (0.064)             (0.062)                 (0.073)               (0.058)              (0.062)
Reciprocal Social Preferences:
    Warm Glow Change -- Positive Monetary Gift                                      0.151               0.200*               0.086                   0.135                0.098                0.053
                                                                                   (0.128)              (0.114)             (0.089)                 (0.121)              (0.085)              (0.075)
    Warm Glow Change -- Negative Gift                                               -0.042              -0.016              -0.076                  -0.001               -0.018               -0.047
                                                                                   (0.123)              (0.125)             (0.093)                 (0.095)              (0.072)              (0.061)
    Warm Glow Change -- In-Kind Gift                                                -0.095              -0.074              -0.118                  -0.106               -0.103               -0.118*
                                                                                   (0.104)              (0.097)             (0.072)                 (0.099)              (0.072)              (0.060)
Incidental Parameters:
   Cost Function Curvature (s)                                                     9.440***           10.637***           11.366***                0.263***              0.316***             0.329***
                                                                                   (0.737)             (0.835)             (0.894)                 (0.018)               (0.024)              (0.025)
    Cost of Effort Function:                                                                    Power                                                                Exponential
                                                                               Indicators for Quadratic in                 Cubic in            Indicators for        Quadratic in             Cubic in
    Type of timetrend                                                             Rounds       Rounds                      Rounds                 Rounds               Rounds                 Rounds
    Std. Deviation of Error Term                                                   0.144        0.144                       0.144                  4.318                4.308                  4.302
    Std. Dev. of Individual f.e.s *(1/s)                                           0.241        0.241                       0.241                  8.014                8.015                  8.008
R Squared                                                                           0.7915              0.7908              0.7923                  0.8184                0.8192               0.8197
N                                                                                    4460                4460                4460                    4460                  4460                 4460
Notes: Specifications are from non-linear least squares regressions as in specification in Section 4, with each observation being a worker-round combination. The sample includes all 10 rounds. The
dependent variable is the log of the number of envelopes produced in that round in Columns 1-3 and is the number of envelopes produced in Columns 4-6. All specifications include fixed effects for worker
i. Columns 1 and 4 also include indicators for rounds 2, 3, 4, 5-8, and 9-10. Columns 2 and 5 include a quadratic polynomial in the round. Columns 3 and 6 include a cubic polynomial in the round. The
standard deviations listed are the standard deviation of the error term and the standard deviation of the individual fixed effects divided by the curvature s. The latter ratio indicates the variation in the
individual productivity. The standard errors are clustered at the session level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                        48
                                      Table 6. Estimation of Social Preferences with Gift Treatments, Robustness
Dependent Variable:                                                                    Log (No. Envelopes in a Round)                                    Number of Envelopes in a Round
                                                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)                                     (4)          (5)          (6)
Baseline Social Preferences:
  Social Preferences towards Charity                                                0.457***              0.444***                  na                  0.447***              0.463***             0.187***
                                                                                    (0.057)               (0.063)                                       (0.055)               (0.065)              (0.043)
    Social Preferences towards Grocery Store                                        0.732***              0.720***                  na                  0.704***              0.716***             0.797***
                                                                                    (0.068)               (0.072)                                       (0.065)               (0.073)              (0.108)
Reciprocal Social Preferences:
    Social Pref. Change -- Positive Monetary Gift                                     0.065                0.374**                  na                    0.041                0.314**               0.092
                                                                                     (0.082)               (0.149)                                       (0.071)               (0.137)              (0.087)
    Social Pref. Change -- Negative Gift                                              -0.099                0.032                   na                    -0.068                0.067                -0.001
                                                                                     (0.096)               (0.135)                                       (0.067)               (0.100)              (0.060)
    Social Pref. Change -- In-Kind Gift                                              -0.144*                -0.044                  na                  -0.152**               -0.079                -0.062
                                                                                     (0.080)               (0.099)                                       (0.074)               (0.089)              (0.056)
   Estimated Persistence of Social Preferences                                                              0.233                   na                                          0.246
   From Round 9 to 10                                                                                      (0.251)                                                             (0.248)
Incidental Parameters:
   Cost Function Curvature (s)                                                      9.039***              9.439***                  na                  0.257***              0.263***             0.410***
                                                                                    (0.648)               (0.738)                                       (0.017)               (0.018)              (0.052)
    Cost of Effort Function:                                                                               Power                                                           Exponential
                                                                                   Alternative                                                        Alternative
                                                                                     Round  Standard Round Indicators                                   Round   Standard Round Indicators
    Type of timetrend                                                              Indicators
                                                                                            (rounds 2, 3, 4, 5-8, 9-10)                               Indicators(rounds 2, 3, 4, 5-8, 9-10)
                                                                                            Estimated        Altruism                                            Estimated       Altruism
                                                                                 Benchmark Decay of Gift (instead of                                 Benchmark Decay of Gift (instead of
    Specification                                                               (Warm Glow)    Effect      warm glow)                               (Warm Glow)    Effect      warm glow)
    Std. Deviation of Error Term                                                   0.144       0.144                                                   4.321       4.315          4.365
    Std. Dev. of Individual f.e.s *(1/s)                                           0.241       0.241                                                   7.995       8.012          8.013
R Squared                                                                            0.7912                0.7918                                        0.8182                0.8187               0.8144
N                                                                                     4460                  4460                                          4460                  4460                 4460
Notes: Specifications are from non-linear least squares regressions as in specification in Section 4, with each observation being a worker-round combination. The sample includes all 10 rounds. The
dependent variable is the log of the number of envelopes produced in that round in Columns 1-3 and is the number of envelopes produced in Columns 4-6. All specifications include fixed effects for worker i.
Columns 1 and 4 also include indicators for rounds 2, 3, 4, 5-10. The estimated coefficient on round 2 is restricted to equal one half of the estimated coefficient in round 3. Columns 2 and 5 allow for a decay of
the warm glow gift parameter in round 10, to equal delta*a_gift. Thus, delta=1 indicates no decay, delta=0 indicates full decay. The delta does not apply to round 9. Columns 3 and 6 estimate a model with pure
altruism instead of warm glow. The model in Column 3 did not converge. The standard deviations listed are the standard deviation of the error term and the standard deviation of the individual fixed effects
divided by the curvature s. The latter ratio indicates the variation in the individual productivity. The standard errors are clustered at the session level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                                                                             49
          Table 7. Calibration of Implied Reciprocity Effects in Select Gift Exchange Papers
                                                                                                                   % Effort            Implied Percent Altruism
                                                                Gift in Treament                 Task              Change              Change (Reciprocity) Due
                                                                   Condition                   Assigned            With Gift                    to Gift
                                                                        (1)                       (2)                 (3)                (4)       (5)      (6)
Panel A. Findings from this paper:
    DellaVigna, List, Malmendier, Rao                          Pay Increase from                                        2%                 34%                .            .
    (2016)                                                         $7 to $14                   Folding
                                                                Pay Decrease                   Charity                 -2%                  -9%               .            .
                                                                 from $7 to $3                Envelopes
                                                                 Gift of Thermos                                       -3%                 -21%               .            .

Assumption about Cost Function:                                                                                                            Power Cost Function
  Estimated Curvature s                                                                                                                9.4(0.9)***
  Implied Elasticity                                                                                                                       0.11
Panel B. Selected Previous Findings on Gift Exchange in Field:
    Gneezy and List (2006)                                     Pay Increase from Library Book      27%                                    846%            230%          61%
    Study 1                                                       $12 to $20        Coding    (first 90 min)
    Gneezy and List (2006)                                     Pay Increase from Door-to-door      72%                                   16267%          1405%         196%
    Study 2                                                       $10 to $20     Fundraising (first 3 hours)

    Kube, Marechal, and Puppe (2012)                                                         Library Book              25%                715%            205%          56%
    Non-monetary gift condition                                  Gift of Thermos                Coding
    Kube, Marechal, and Puppe (2012)                           7 Euro raise (from Library Book                          5%                 58%             28%          10%
    Monetary gift condition                                       36 euro pay)       Coding
    Kube, Marechal, and Puppe (2013)                           Pay cut from 15 to Library Book                        -20%                 -88%           -67%         -36%
                                                                  10 euro/hr         Coding
    Gilchrist, Luca, and Malhotra                              Pay increase from  Entering                             18%                374%            129%          39%
    (forthcoming)                                                   $3 to $4     CAPTCHAs
    Cohn, Fehr, and Goette (2014)                              Pay increase from Newspaper                              3%                 32%             16%           6%
                                                                 22 to 27 ChF    Distribution
    Esteves-Sorenson (2015)                                    Pay Increase from                                        2%                 20%             10%           4%
                                                                  $12 to $20                  Enter data

Assumptions about Cost Function:                                                                                                            Power Cost Function
    Assumed Curvature s                                                                                                                     9.4             5.0          2.0
    Implied Elasticity                                                                                                                     0.11            0.20         0.50
Notes: Table 7 revisits some of the findings in the previous gift exchange experiments in the field, with summary of the key gift treatments and findings in Columns 1-3.
Panel A summarizes the effects from this paper: Column 2 reports the findings from Table 4, Column 3, Panel B (on log output). Column 3 reports the results from Table 5,
Column 1, taking the ratio of the estimated warm glow change to baseline warm glow. For example, for the positive monetary gift .151/.443=34%. In Pnel B we revisit some
classic experiments on gift exchange in the field. In Columns 4-6 we compute the implied percent increase in altruism or warm glow implied by the effort increase (or
decrease), for a calibrated value of the elasticity of effort. The calibration holds for a power cost of effort function, which is characterized by constant elasticity. Column 4
uses the elasticity estimated for our task (Table 5, Column 1). Columns 5 and 6 report the results assuming higher elasticities.




                                                                                      50
                             Appendix Figures 1a-b. Additional Experimental Findings
                          Appendix Figure 1a. Effort Provided For Three Different Charities




                       Appendix Figure 1b. Charity Employer versus Grocery Store Employer




Notes: Appendix Figure 1a-b displays additional experimental results on average output (number of envelopes folded within a 20-minute round).
Appendix Figure 1a compares productivity across the three different charities used in the experiment. The charities are randomized in a rotating
way to take the role of Charity 1, 2, and 3. The comparison uses output in all rounds except for the training rounds. Appendix Figure 1b compares
output when producing for a charity versus for a firm (a grocery store) holding constant the piece rate at 10 cents and holding constant the
perceived return to the employer at 30 cents per envelope. The rounds compared are outlined in Figure 1. The figures indicate 95% confidence
intervals computed clustering by session.




                                                                      51
                   Appendix Figure 2. Average Effort over the 10 Rounds, by Order, Log Output




Notes: Appendix Figure 2 displays the mean of the output measure across subjects, where the output measure is the log of the number of
envelopes folded within a 20-minute round. The figure indicates 95% confidence intervals computed clustering by session, thus allowing for
correlation of errors among subjects in a session. Subjects are randomized into Order A or Order B. See Figure 2 for more detailed labeling of the
10 rounds in each order. The output for rounds 9 and 10 averages across the gift treatments displayed in Figure 2. The figure indicates clear
learning by doing in rounds 1-4, with average output about stable since, but highly responsive to variation in piece rate in and training (envelopes
not used by the employer).




                                                                        52
                            Appendix Figure 3. Key Experimental Results on Social Preferences (pre-gift), Log Output
          Appendix Figure 3a. Variation in Piece Rate                  Appendix Figure 3b. Consequences to the Employer




Appendix Figure 3c. Variation in Return to Employer (Match)




Notes: Appendix Figures 3a-c display key comparisons of average low output (log of number of envelopes folded within a 20-minute round) across rounds outlined by the arrows in Figure 2. The
comparisons average across order A and B. Appendix Figure 3a compares the piece rates for 0c, 10c, and 20c. Appendix Figure 3b compares the impact of envelopes being used (rounds 5 and 6).
Appendix Figure 3c compares the impact of high return to the employer (charity match) (rounds 7 and 8). The figures indicate 95% confidence intervals computed clustering by session.




                                                                                            53
                                             Appendix Figure 4. Gift Exchange Effects, Log Output
Appendix Figure 4a. Effect of Gift Treatments (No Controls)            Appendix Figure 4b. Effect of Gift Treatments (With Controls)




Appendix Figure 4c. Evidence on Decay of Gift Effects                                               Appendix Figure 4d. Interaction with Return to Employer




Notes: Appendix Figures 4a-d presents the key results for the gift exchange treatments in rounds 9 and 10 (see Figure 1) using log output in each round as the key variable. The Figures include 95%
confidence intervals obtained after clustering for session. Appendix Figure 4a plots the average output (number of envelopes stuffed in 20 minutes) for the four treatments. Appendix Figure 4b presents
the regression-adjusted coefficients after controlling for average productivity in rounds 5-8 (Table 4, Column 3). Appendix Figure 4c splits the treatment comparison of Appendix Figure 4a into round 9
and 10 to examine the impact of possible decay of gift effects. Appendix Figure 4d splits the results by return to the firm: in either round 9 or round 10 (depending on the randomization) the employer
earns a higher return due to a charity match.


                                                                                                  54
                         Appendix Figure 5. Estimated Productivity Effects, Different Models




Notes: Appendix Figure 5 plots the estimated (1/s)(-k-f(t)) function, that is, how the cost of effort function is estimated to change over time for
an individual with representative k. The estimated coefficients are from specifications in Table 5, respectively Column 1 (indicators for rounds),
Column 2 (quadratic polynomial), and Column 3 (cubic polynomial).




                                                                       55
