                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE LONG RUN EFFECTS OF LABOR MIGRATION ON HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION
                      IN COMMUNITIES OF ORIGIN

                                        Taryn Dinkelman
                                        Martine Mariotti

                                       Working Paper 22049
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22049


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2016




Freed Kumchulesi, Grace Kumchulesi, Ashley Wong, Lucy Xie and Zheng-Yi Yang provided
excellent research assistance for this project. We also thank officials at the Malawi National
Archives and Lucy McCann at Rhodes House Library for their invaluable assistance in data
collection. We thank Michael Clemens, Elizabeth Cascio, Alan de Brauw, Eric Edmonds, James
Fenske, David McKenzie, Caroline Theoharides, Rebecca Thornton, Steve Stillman, Dean Yang,
and seminar participants at the Australian National University, the 2014 Australian and Pacific
Economic and Business History Meetings, the 2014 Australasian Development Economics
Workshop, the 2014 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum (Development and Migration Workshops),
the 2014 Economic Demography Workshop at the Population Association of America meetings,
Georgetown University, the 2015 NBER Summer Institute (Children/Labor Studies), The 2015
World Economic History Congress, Oxford University, the Paris and Toulouse Schools of
Economics, the University of Namur and Williams College for comments. This document is an
output from a project funded by the UK Department for International Development (DFID) and
the Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) for the benefit of developing countries (GA-C2-
RA4-181). The views expressed are not necessarily those of DFID, IZA, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Taryn Dinkelman and Martine Mariotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Long Run Effects of Labor Migration on Human Capital Formation in Communities of
Origin
Taryn Dinkelman and Martine Mariotti
NBER Working Paper No. 22049
February 2016
JEL No. F22,F24,N37,O12,O15,O55

                                        ABSTRACT

We provide new evidence of one channel through which circular labor migration has long run
effects on origin communities: by raising completed human capital of the next generation. We
estimate the net effects of migration from Malawi to South African mines using newly digitized
Census and administrative data on access to mine jobs, a difference-in-differences strategy and
two opposite-signed and plausibly exogenous shocks to the option to migrate. Twenty years after
these shocks, human capital is 4.8-6.9%higher among cohorts who were eligible for schooling in
communities with the easiest access to migrant jobs.


Taryn Dinkelman
Department of Economics
H. Box 6106
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
taryn.l.dinkelman@dartmouth.edu

Martine Mariotti
Research School of Economics
H W Arndt Building 25a
Australian National University
Acton
ACT 2601
Australia
martine.mariotti@anu.edu.au
1. Introduction

Many economists recognize that migration in some form or other is conceptually one of the most direct
strategies that the poor can use to improve their living standards (Pritchett 2006, Banerjee and Duflo
2007, Clemens 2011). Indeed, temporary, or circular, migration across borders has long been a feature of
labor markets in developing countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. And, although a large body of
work documents the short run impacts of international migration and access to migrant remittances on
individual and household-level outcomes,2 considerable debate remains over whether and how migration
affects communities of origin over the long run (Lucas, 2005, Constant and Zimmerman 2013).

This paper provides the first evidence that temporary labor migration raises human capital formation in
origin communities over the long run. In order to do this, we address two empirical issues that have
constrained what researchers have been able to learn about the lasting impacts of labor migration on
growth and development outcomes in origin communities. First, there is a general lack of high quality
data on migrant and remittance flows in developing countries. Second, even with the right data in hand,
researchers confront difficult identification issues associated with comparing outcomes across high and
low migration areas (Clemens and McKenzie 2014). For example, high migration regions are likely to
differ from low migration regions in ways that are highly correlated with economic outcomes of interest
(Gibson, McKenzie and Stillman 2013). Researchers have cleverly used visa lottery designs and quasi-
experimental variation in the value of remittances deriving from unanticipated exchange rate shocks to
estimate how labor migration affects sending households in the short and medium-runs. But these designs
are not well suited to estimating long run effects of migration on entire communities of origin.

We study the long run effects of differential labor migration flows from Malawi to South Africa’s gold
mines, leveraging new data on plausibly exogenous shocks to historical international migration between
these two countries. During the twentieth century, Malawians faced historical differences in the costs of
accessing migrant jobs across space within their country, and encountered time-varying exogenous shocks
to the option to migrate for these jobs. We implement a difference-in-differences analysis by combining
newly digitized Census and administrative data that capture migrant flows at sub-national level over time
with pre-existing spatial variation in migration costs, exogenous shocks to labor migration and migrant
earnings received by sending communities, and measures of long run educational attainment in these




2
 Important recent work in this area has been done by Yang (2008), Antman (2011, 2012), Beegle, De Weerdt and
Dercon (2011), Gibson, McKenzie and Stillman (2011, 2013), Theoharides (2014) and Kosack (2015). These papers
pay careful attention to identification concerns in settings where migrants are a selected group of individuals.

                                                       2
communities. We are not aware of any other dataset that would allow a similar exploration of the impact
of migration on such long run community-level outcomes.3

Malawi provides a uniquely advantageous setting for answering our research question. Throughout the
twentieth century, it was one of the primary suppliers of unskilled male workers for the South African
Chamber of Mines. By the late 1970s, one in five Malawian men had worked abroad, typically on a series
of two-year labor contracts that diverted up to two thirds of earnings – called deferred pay – to be paid
upon return to Malawi. These men could not choose when to return, nor could they choose the amount of
deferred pay to send. By entering into an institutionalized system of circular labor migration, the
Malawian government could be certain that a large share of incomes earned abroad would return home,
and that labor resources would not be forever lost.

Our approach exploits two sides of a natural experiment that generated exogenous variation in the
opportunity to migrate internationally. In 1967, a new labor treaty eliminated historical recruiting quotas
in Malawi, leading to an immediate three-fold increase in migration to South African mines. Seven years
later, Malawi’s president banned new recruiting and recalled all mineworkers, after a mining plane crash
in April 1974 killed a group of Malawian workers. The ban only remained in place until 1977, but labor
migration never recovered to pre-1974 levels. The timing of these two events interacted with pre-existing
differences in migration costs at the district level generate differential childhood exposure to labor
migration shocks and associated migrant income. This exogenous and differential exposure forms the
basis of our identification strategy.

The first comparison in our difference-in-differences strategy estimates gaps in the human capital of
cohorts who were age-eligible for primary school after the migration expansion, between districts with
and without access to historically-placed mine recruiting stations. Our second difference uses control
cohorts who are too old to be in primary school after the migration expansion to net out any pre-existing
differences in educational attainment across recruiting and non-recruiting districts. We use newly
digitized Census data from 1977 and 1998 along with administrative data on the historical location of
recruiting stations to estimate these models, controlling for cohort and district fixed effects, and for linear
trends interacted with historical district-level covariates.




3
 It is typically impossible to capture migration prevalence at district-level in general household surveys (De Brauw,
Mueller and Lee 2013). Woodruff (2007) discusses studies that use household survey or Census data to estimate the
causal effects of current labor migration on contemporaneous outcomes in origin communities in Mexico, using
historical migration networks to instrument for current migration.

                                                          3
Our focus on long run outcomes for the community is important. Most existing research focuses on
measuring the causal impacts of migration or remittances on contemporaneous school outcomes, like
enrolment, or grade attained by the end of a specific year, for specific individuals and families, often in
households with a migrant worker. We have two distinct factors in mind regarding the long run impacts of
migration on the education profiles of communities. First, impacts of labor migration on child enrolment
in or access to school in the short run could generate long run differences in total human capital within a
community, long after the end of the migration episodes, as long as effects are large enough for specific
cohorts within the community. Second, migration shocks may have persistent impacts on origin
communities if households continue to make different schooling choices even after these shocks have
subsided. For example, families may continue to invest more in their children, and in new cohorts of
children, even after the end of labor migration. School enrolment at critical ages may also make it more
worthwhile to continue to higher levels of education. In these cases, persistence could generate larger
long run impacts of migration on education in sending communities.

We find some evidence for both types of long run impacts in Malawi. Twenty years after the migration
shocks subsided, exposed cohorts in recruiting station districts have between 0.12 and 0.18 more years of
schooling. Given low average levels of completed education in this population – 2.5 years –the impacts
we estimate represent between 4.8 and 6.9% more education. In addition, we show that out of every 100
adults in the most exposed districts and cohorts, between 1 and 2 more adults attain any primary
schooling, off a base of about 40 adults with any primary education.4 Consistently, we find that the effect
of the migration shock in the labor ban years, after all migrants return and collect their deferred pay, is
significantly larger than the effect of the migration shock during the labor expansion period, when fewer
migrants are returning to Malawi each year. The impact of the migration shock persists beyond the end of
the labor ban period, although with smaller positive impacts on the human capital attainment of the
youngest cohorts. We also find some evidence that long run impacts are largest in areas where the
opportunity cost of going to school is lowest.

Both theory and existing empirical evidence on the short run impacts of migration suggest that our results
are not obvious (Antman 2011, 2012, 2013). Researchers have found both positive and negative impacts
of labor migration on the next generation’s human capital formation, although the vast majority of this
evidence is from non-African settings.5 For example: access to remittance income from migration could


4
  Importantly, we find no differences in the size of these education impacts between males and females (results not
shown). Because mining jobs were restricted to men, it seems unlikely aspirations about earning a higher return to
this education as a future labor migrant explain these effects.
5
  For example, Cox-Edwards and Ureta (2003) and Yang (2008) show that migrant remittances increase education
spending and contemporaneous outcomes among children in El Salvador and the Philippines. Antman (2012) and

                                                         4
relax credit constraints, thereby directly reducing barriers to schooling (e.g. Yang 2008, Hanson and
Woodruff 2003). Expected wage differentials between migrant and non-migrant jobs may incentivize kids
to stay in school as the “brain gain” hypothesis suggests (Mountford 1997; for an empirical test see
Batista, Lacueste and Vicente 2012) or may undermine human capital accumulation by encouraging
school drop-out (De Brauw and Giles, 2006; Gibson, McKenzie and Stillman 2011; McKenzie and
Rapoport 2011). Losing a prime-aged adult, even temporarily, may crowd out schooling and cause
families to use child labor instead; it may also have direct negative impacts on child performance in
school. At the same time, depending on who migrates, changing bargaining power within the household
could increase or decrease investments in education (Antman 2012). At an aggregate level, large labor
migration flows may also have important effects on wages and prices in general equilibrium, generating
positive or negative spillovers for education decisions in non-migrant households in the same
communities. And while short run gains in enrolment or attendance cannot be undone, long run effects
could end up being larger, or could end up affecting new cohorts, if attainment gains cumulate and school
investments persist beyond the end of migration episodes.

In our setting, the positive impacts of labor migration on human capital investments appear to dominate
any negative impacts, and the aggregate impact of migration and migrant earnings is large enough to alter
human capital profiles of exposed cohorts in origin communities over the long run. The elasticities we
estimate for cohorts exposed during the migration shocks are quantitatively smaller than the most credible
estimates in the literature on the impact of remittances and labor demand shocks on contemporaneous
school enrolments (e.g. Yang 2008; Theoharides 2014). However, they suggest that we can generalize the
patterns of positive short run results to the long run in an African setting, despite the different context for
schooling and child labor decisions.

To motivate our empirical strategy, we first discuss the background to mine migration from Malawi and
local alternatives to migration. In Section 3, we describe the context of education in Malawi during the
pre- and post-colonial period. Section 4 describes our data while Section 5 presents the empirical strategy
and addresses potential threats to validity. Section 6 presents our results and Section 7 concludes.

2. Labor Migration from Malawi: Background and Context

Malawi has a long tradition of cross-border labor migration, facilitated by its central location in Africa,
high population densities, lack of natural resources, and few non-agricultural economic opportunities.

Hanson and Woodruff (2003) use different empirical strategies to show that parental migration to the US increases
schooling among Mexican girls. In contrast, Antman (2011) and McKenzie and Rapoport (2011) respectively show
that parental migration increases work and reduces schooling in the short run among Mexican boys, and provides an
option to migrate that reduces secondary schooling among male youth in Mexico.

                                                        5
Early in the colonial period, a bureaucratic infrastructure for labor exports was established. Our analysis
takes advantage of massive and largely unexpected fluctuations in labor exports and reverse flows of
money in the post-colonial period. This section describes the early establishment of the system of mine
labor recruitment in Malawi and the sources of exogenous shocks to migration between 1950 and 1990,
and then compares earnings from mine work with domestic earnings opportunities.

Circular labor migration from Malawi and labor migration shocks

Throughout the twentieth century, Malawians took advantage of employment opportunities in South
Africa and Rhodesia (Zimbabwe and Zambia) to boost local incomes, although demand for workers in
Rhodesia had slowed significantly by the early 1960s. To facilitate access to cheap sources of foreign
labor, the South African mining industry established a physical presence in Colonial Malawi (then
Nyasaland), opening and operating a large network of recruiting stations by the 1930s. The Witwatersrand
Native Labour Agency (WNLA, or Wenela), the South African Chamber of Mines’ centralized labor
recruitment organization, was responsible for coordinating all recruitment activities through recruiting
stations outside of South Africa (Crush et al. 1991, pg 40; Jeeves 1987).6

We collected and digitized administrative data on the location of these Wenela stations as of 1937 and
show their prevalence across the country in Figure 1. The thick black borders in the figure represent
district boundaries, the red hatched areas indicate districts with a Wenela station and unshaded areas show
sub-districts without a Wenela station.

Between 1950 and 1990, the number of Malawians working on South African gold mines rose from just
over 10,000 men per year to a high of 120,000 men per year, and back down to almost zero (see Figure
2). To put these numbers in perspective: by 1977, one in five adult males had ever worked abroad. Most
of these mineworkers were engaged on two-year contracts, after which they had to return home for some
time before being allowed to reengage for subsequent contracts (Wilson 1972, pg 68, Prothero 1974 and
Lucas 1985). The nature of these contracts meant that mine migration was longer term and circular, rather
than seasonal in nature.



6
  Decisions about where and when to set up recruiting practices in southern Africa in the first half of the 1900s were
spearheaded by the mining industry’s “labor czar”, William Gemmill (Jeeves 1987). Gemmill presided over the
expansion of Wenela into colonial Malawi during the 1920s and 1930s at a time when local agriculture was
struggling with the Great Depression and the collapse of tobacco prices. He looked towards “Tropical Areas” to
recruit labor, knowing that local employers could not compete with mine wages. (McCracken 2012, Jeeves 1987).
Wilson (1972) and Lucas (1985) provide accounts of how Wenela and the local Native Recruitment Corporation
(NRC) operated as labor monopsonists in the colonies, keeping wages low by hiring workers from Mozambique,
Northern and Southern Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Lesotho, Swaziland, Tanzania, Angola, Botswana and South Africa.

                                                          6
The costs associated with signing up for mine work were not negligible, and the complex logistics of
getting access to a mining job in South Africa involved many steps.7 A potential migrant needed to obtain
official verification of no outstanding tax obligations from the local chief; then he needed to get similar
approval from the local tax authority; following which he had to travel to a Wenela station. At the station,
he had to pass a medical examination (mainly regarding a minimum weight requirement) and get
‘attested’ (approved for travel), after which he delivered the attestation documents back to the local
district officer for processing of his foreign travel documents. The final step involved returning to the
Wenela station to await transportation to a main Wenela depot for transfer to South Africa.8

In our empirical strategy, we use spatial variation in the number of Wenela stations in a district as a proxy
for (lower) labor migration costs that are exogenous to individuals and plausibly exogenous to the district,
conditional on a set of baseline control variables. Our reading of the historical literature suggests that
decisions about location placement were made after simple visual inspection of the potential of these
areas for recruiting, without much regard to local economic conditions other than the labor supply
potential of districts. Practically, there would have been little available hard data to influence these
location decisions made in the late 1920s and early 1930s. We explore the correlates of recruiting station
placement further in Section 4.

Interacting with the spatial distribution of migration costs were two important exogenous shocks to the
opportunity to migrate to South Africa. Until 1967, national labor quotas restricted the number of workers
Wenela could recruit from Nyasaland to a few thousand workers per year. European plantation owners in
Nyasaland and in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) lobbied for these restrictions as a way to protect access
to a cheap source of labor (Paton 1995, pg 46; Jeeves 1987). Between 1946 and 1959, Wenela quota
increased from 8,500 men to 20,000 men, which represented roughly 2% of the target population of
working age males (Coleman 1972, Chirwa, 1992). However, by the 1960s opportunities for employment
in Southern Rhodesia began to decline due to circumstances in that country (Clarke 1977, p. 31-32, Paton
1995, p. 47-48) and in 1967, Malawi’s President Banda signed a new agreement with Wenela removing
all quotas on recruitment of Malawian workers (Treaty Series No. 10/1967). Figure 2 shows the 200%
increase in the number of Wenela workers in the seven years following the abolition of quotas.


7
  This section draws on original colonial documents retrieved at Malawi’s National Archives, including Governor’s
Memorandum on Labor Migrancy in Malawi (1956) and Provincial Office Memo (December 7 1961) and from
Prothero (1974).
8
  Sources suggest that health and ability of measures we only used to sort workers into jobs, and not used to screen
Malawians out of mine work entirely. Health restrictions on migrant workers were minimal and workers were
recruited for many types of jobs. Once on the mines, a simple colored shape sorting test sorted workers into
mechanical or non-mechanical jobs; a physical examination of eyesight, weight, height and stress-testing further
sorted workers into very heavy, heavy or light work (Weyl 1981: p. 16).

                                                          7
The 1967 labor agreement required Wenela to withhold two thirds of miner wages until the miners’ return
to Malawi (called deferred pay), implying that the massive increase in migration constituted a large
positive income shock to the country. This fact will be important for interpreting our results for a few
reasons. At the individual level, deferred pay, which forces a migrant to wait until returning home to
collect most of their earnings, could reduce the impact of remittances, at least during the time the migrant
is away. However, the forced savings aspect of deferred pay could also increase the total amount of
money returning to the sending region, thereby increasing the impacts of remittances. At a practical level,
we can be sure that at least two thirds of earnings returned to origin communities. Using our
administrative data, we will be able to show large increases in money inflows towards districts with
Wenela stations in both the early period (as migrants leave and return on rotating contracts), as well as
when migrants return en masse in the later period. And, since miners themselves did not choose the value
of their deferred pay, we do not need to be as concerned with the usual endogeneity problems associated
with migrant motivations about whether to and how much to remit (Lucas and Stark 1985; Yang 2011).

To get a sense of the lower bound of how much an individual returning miner could bring home with him,
we apply deferred payment shares to mine wage data (from Wilson 1972: 46 and Crush et al., 1991: 19)
and conservatively assume that voluntary remittances are zero. The total amount of income that a family
could have received from a miner returning from a two-year contract in 1969 would have been about
K276 (Malawian Kwacha), which is two-thirds of two years’ worth of mining wages. By 1973, this had
increased to K437 and by 1974 this number was K691. Converting to USD (the exchange rate during the
period was 0.83USD to K1), these amounts lie between 230USD and 832USD per trip. We compare
deferred pay earnings with local agricultural wages below.

The post-1967 labor expansion came to an abrupt halt in April 1974, when a Wenela plane transporting
miners back to Malawi crashed, killing 74 Malawian miners. In response, President Banda rescinded the
labor agreement, banned Wenela recruiting, and recalled all Malawian migrant workers (Lucas 1985;
Chirwa 1996). Between 1974 and 1977, mine employment fell dramatically (see Figure 2) from a high of
over 120,000 men to zero by 1975. The initiation of the ban entailed a lump sum payout of deferred pay
earnings for all returning miners. Wenela recruiters were able to restart operations in Malawi in 1977,
and although there was a small increase in migration after this, employment levels for Malawians never
returned to 1970 levels (see Figure 2). The South African mines had turned their strategy of recruitment
inwards, substituting local labor for what they saw as unreliable foreign supplies (Crush 1986; Crush et al
1991, pg 129, Mariotti, 2015).




                                                     8
Alternatives to labor migration: Employment in Malawi

As early as the 1940s and 1950s, the attraction of migrating to work on the South African mines was
strong. The domestic economy had always been small, with few perceived opportunities for growth.
Despite several attempts to develop large estates producing cash crops for export (first by the colonial
government, and then taken over by the post-independence Banda government, see Haviland 1953, Green
2007 and 2013 and McCracken 2012), wages in the local economy were always far below what workers
could earn on the mines.

Malawians remaining at home had essentially two, not necessarily mutually exclusive, options for work
in the agricultural sector. Workers could work for wages or as visiting tenants on the large tea, tobacco,
cotton and sugar estates. Alternatively, they could work in the peasant smallholding sector (Kydd and
Christiansen 1982) growing cash crops for export, or food crops to sell to estate laborers and visiting
tenants who had no time or land to cultivate their own food.

Under Banda’s leadership, the commercial agricultural estate sector grew substantially, underpinning
Malawi’s 6% annual growth rate from the late 1960s to the late 1970s. Employment on these estates also
increased, and since estate wage-workers typically earned more than visiting tenants and smallholders
(Chirwa 1997), this sector offered the most lucrative local alternative to mining. Yet, because estate wage
earnings were always substantially lower than potential mine earnings (Chirwa 1997), it is not clear how
the growth of opportunities for local employment and estate wages would have affected labor migration
to South Africa (Weyl 1981, Chirwa 1997). Average annual earnings on local estates were K94.4 in 1968,
about 70% of what a returning migrant received in 1969. These wages rose to K112 in 1973 and to
K126.80 in 1974, but still represented only 37% of a migrant’s deferred pay in that year (Pryor and
Chipeta 1990) due to faster growth in mine wages. Despite the growth of the estate sector immediately
after independence, many men continued to seek employment with Wenela because of low relative wages
in agriculture, challenges associated with being a visiting tenant, and the decline of the smallholding
sector.9 The absence of these mineworkers from the Malawian economy, their abrupt return in 1974, and
the substantial migrant earnings associated with each of these flows is likely to have impacted
investments in education of the next generation through several channels which we discuss next.

3. Education in Malawi in historical context


9
 Although there is debate about whether Banda wanted to stem the tide of migration to support the growth of the
estate sector, the timing of the labor recall initiated by the plane crash, was clearly unexpected. Certainly the South
African Chamber of Mines Annual Report of 1973 did not note any concerns with regard to existing labor recruiting
practices (Chamber of Mines Annual Report 1973; Paton 1995, pg 54).

                                                           9
Levels of human capital accumulation in Malawi are low, although they have been increasing over time.
Prior to independence in 1964, missionaries were responsible for education and emphasized vocational
training above literacy. Consequently, less than 6% of the population was literate in 1945. By 1964, less
than 35% of school-aged children were enrolled in primary school. Between 1959 and 1978
however, total student enrollment in primary school increased by 30% (Heyneman 1980). These increases
occurred despite a lack of investment in primary school construction. The number of primary schools did
not increase between 1960 and 1992 (Ministry of Education Annual Report 1960: 37, Table 1; Malawi
Statistical Yearbook 1995: 57). By the early 1990s, primary school enrollment had grown to 50% of the
relevant age range (http://www.childinfo.org/files/ESAR_Malawi.pdf ).

Before the mid-1990s, cost was an important constraint to attending school in Malawi. Average annual
school fees were the same across the country: around K2.75 for the first four years of primary school and
K5.75 for the next four years. We estimate that the tuition cost of sending three children to school was
around 12 % of an agricultural worker’s annual wage.10 On top of tuition, parents were responsible for
expenditures like textbooks, exercise books, writing materials and school uniforms (Heyneman 1980).
Following the introduction of universal free primary education in 1994, primary school enrollment
increased by 50%, indicating that school fees were a substantial impediment to enrollment even as late as
the 1990s (World Bank and UNICEF 2009).

Apart from the direct costs of education, outside options to work and obligations within the family raised
the opportunity costs of sending children to school. Children could work in home production, on family
farms doing subsistence farming (mlimi), or for other farmers or landlords, including owners of estates
producing tea and tobacco for export. Chirwa (1993) provides a few reasons to expect that outside options
for child workers might have differed across space in Malawi, particularly along the dimensions of access
to agricultural estate work. On agricultural estates that paid wages, children could expect to earn higher
wages than in household production or agricultural production on the family plot, where wages were often
zero. On agricultural estates with visiting tenant systems, tenant families may have required their
children’s assistance without pay, to meet landlord-specified production quotas. The shadow value of
child labor on estates would therefore have been high, especially when coupled with absentee adult males.

Both the direct and indirect costs of education played a role in the demand for education between 1950
and 1990. Table 1 uses Census data to provide some summary statistics on enrollment patterns among
children age 10 to 14 just prior to the labor migration shock period. Only 34% of these children were
enrolled in school that year. There is interesting variation across districts, though. First, enrollment is

10
     Average fertility during this period was seven to eight children per woman.

                                                           10
significantly higher in Wenela (39%) relative to non-Wenela districts (24%). These pre-existing
differences will be controlled for using district fixed effects in our empirical specification. Second, school
enrollment is lower in districts with agricultural estates (Panel B, 27%) than in districts without estates
(Panel C, 37%). These patterns are consistent with children having more alternatives to attending school
in estate than in non-estate districts.

The means in Table 1 also reflect high prevalence of child labor for this young age group in the late
1960s. Around one in five children aged 10 to 14 were working for someone else or on family farms, with
or without pay (Panel A, column 1). These shares probably underestimate the fraction of children working
since the definition of work used here excludes home production.11 The patterns of child labor across
districts with and without estates are striking. In districts with agricultural estates (Panel B), child labor
rates are high and approximately the same across Wenela and non-Wenela areas (18-19%). On the other
hand, in districts without estates (Panel C), there is a significant 5 percentage point gap in child labor
shares, with lower shares of children working in non-Wenela relative to Wenela districts (16% versus
21%). Before the labor migration shocks of the 1960s and 1970s, child labor was lowest in districts where
the opportunity cost of going to school would have been lowest: in non-Wenela, non-estate districts.
These differences in the patterns of enrollment and child labor will lead us to explore heterogeneity in the
long run effects of labor migration shocks among districts with and without agricultural estates.

4. Data and descriptive statistics

We collect and assemble data from several sources to analyze the impacts of labor migration on long run
human capital attainment. We digitize and use both district level and individual level census data on
human capital attainment and migration as well as archival records on the location of Wenela stations. We
supplement these with data from various years of the Malawian Statistical Yearbooks. This section
outlines key features of our data and highlights some of the variation in migration used in our analysis.
The Data Appendix contains further details on sample and variable construction.

Census data are from the complete 1977 and 1998 population Census’ of Malawi and cover 24 districts
across all three regions (North, Central and Southern regions). The 1998 Census is comprised of
individual level data while the 1977 data are only available at more aggregated district-five year cohort-
gender level. We collapse the 1998 data to the same district-cohort-gender groups as in the 1977 data and
match these to the 1977 data, restricting the sample to adults ages 20 to 44 (in five-year age groups) in

11
  About 11-12% of children report working in home production in the 1977 Census, the first year for which these
data exist. There are no significant differences in the prevalence of this home production work across Wenela and
non-Wenela districts, or across estate and non-estate districts.

                                                        11
1998 data. Because life expectancy in Malawi was only 46 years in the late 1990s
(http://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Malawi/Life_expectancy/), we are concerned about mortality
selection at ages over 40 affecting the composition of our sample. In Appendix 2, we use data from both
Census years to show that less educated individuals in the older cohorts attrite at higher rates from
Wenela districts relative to non-Wenela districts. Using only the 1998 data in our analysis would lead us
to construct a biased estimate of the education gap between Wenela and non-Wenela districts in these
older cohorts (which we show in that Appendix). Instead, we use the 1977 Census data to construct a
synthetic older cohort of adults, using those aged 20 to 44 in 1977 to represent the 41 to 64 year old
cohorts in 1998. Education questions are identical in both Census waves. In section 5, we describe how
we define which cohorts were age-eligible for primary school during the labor expansion years and during
the labor ban years.

To proxy for the pre-existing costs of getting access to mine work in South Africa, we collect
administrative data on the number of Wenela recruiting stations established in each district prior to 1937.
As shown in Figure 1, there are recruiting stations across the length of the country, so we can make
within-region comparisons across cohorts facing higher versus lower migration costs.

It is useful to get some insight into factors that might have driven initial station placement. Table 2
presents correlations between the number of Wenela stations at the district level and district-level
historical and geographic variables.12 First, log population density measured in 1931 is negatively
correlated with Wenela stations, although not significantly so in most cases. This could be because mine
recruiters were unwilling to compete for male labor in areas where agricultural opportunities offered good
outside options (i.e. where there were initially high densities of population on fertile land). Second,
districts at higher altitude (i.e. more likely to be free of malaria), districts without estates, and districts in
the Central region are more likely to have a Wenela station. Notably, the level of historical literacy does
not predict the number of Wenela stations in a district. The implication is that the mining industry did not
place additional value on local levels of human capital. Once region fixed effects are included, there is
very little correlation between historical and geographic variables and the historical placement of the
Wenela stations.

Our identification strategy rests on comparing outcomes across different cohorts from locations facing
substantially different costs of signing up for mine work, proxied by the presence of a local Wenela
station. Table 3 provides direct evidence that the number of Wenela stations in a district predicts
substantially higher labor outmigration and higher inflows of money in response to exogenous shocks to

12
     Results are similar using “any Wenela station” in the district as an outcome.

                                                            12
labor demand between 1966 and 1977. The first four columns show results from regressions of the total
number of circular migrants between 1967 and 1977 on the number of Wenela stations in the district,
region fixed effects, historical literacy and population density, an indicator for the presence of an
agricultural estate in the district, and the interaction of estate districts with Wenela districts. The outcome
is the difference between the number of men who had ever migrated from a district and who returned
from working abroad in the past 10 years, recorded in the 1977 Census, and the district-level stock of
male migrants captured in the 1966 Census. Since the labor ban was still in place at the time of the 1977
Census, this variable gives us a complete picture of the total number of circular migrants at the district
level between 1966 and 1977 (that is, it is a change in the stock of migrant workers).

Exposure to one more Wenela station in the district significantly raises the number of labor migrants by
1,532 men. Relative to the average change in migrants over the period (3,445) (Table 3, column 4), this is
a 44% increase in migration for each additional station. This is a very large effect: relative to the initial
mean stock of migrants in a district in 1966 (about 10,000), one additional recruiting station raises
migration by 15 percentage points. Note that education levels measured by the local literacy rate in 1945
do not predict outmigration. If anything, higher historical literacy rates suggest less migration.13

The second set of columns confirms this relationship for money flows. The outcome in columns (5) to (8)
is total deferred pay per person received by each district (using 1966 population totals) between 1966 and
1977. Deferred pay shares are set by contract, and constitute about 88% of total miner money flows back
to Malawi (own calculations using administrative data on money flows). For each additional recruiting
station, there is an additional K24 per person (enough to pay for about 8.6 years of primary school tuition)
received over the ten-year period. Our measure of deferred pay per person smooths these receipts over the
entire district; miner households would have experienced larger positive shocks to income because of the
changing opportunities to work in South Africa.

Table 4 presents summary statistics for the full sample and for districts with and without a Wenela
recruiting station along with the p value of the difference in means. In Panel A, we show means of
treatment, treatment exposure, and outcome variables at the district-cohort-gender level. 63% of districts
have at least one Wenela station and the average number of stations per district is 2.79. The fraction of
cohorts eligible for primary school in either period, and in each of the younger and older cohorts, is
balanced across Wenela and non-Wenela areas. Our sample of adults (aged 20 to 64) has a very low mean

13
  Results are similar using a modified outcome, the migrant growth rate between 1966 and 1977, which takes into
account initial migration levels in 1966. A district with one more recruiting station has 20 percentage points faster
migration growth than the average district (Table 3, column 8), or an overall migrant growth rate of almost 50%
(mean rate of migrant growth across all districts over these years 30%.

                                                          13
level of education: 2.56 years. Average education is 2.85 years in Wenela areas and only 2.07 years in
non-Wenela areas; the share of adults who have ever been to primary school is 45% in Wenela areas and
only 35% in non-Wenela areas. Both of these differences are strongly significantly different from zero
and echo the differences in child enrollment patterns seen in Table 1.

In Panel B, we show district-level summary statistics for migration and money flows, along with
historical and geographic variables from Census data from 1931, 1945, 1966 and 1977. An average
district contains about 225,000 individuals. The table shows that while high shares of working age men
report ever working aboard by 1977 (20%) in both Wenela and non-Wenela districts. However, although
migration was widespread across the country, the incidence of the migration shocks and related money
flows between 1967 and 1977 was concentrated in Wenela districts. The change in the number of men
working as migrants is much higher in Wenela districts (5,060) relative to non-Wenela districts (752), and
the migrant growth rate in Wenela areas is 46%, relative to a migrant growth rate of just 3% in non-
Wenela areas between 1966 and 1977 (p value of this difference is 0.04). Wenela districts received on
average K56 per person in deferred pay across the period, while non-Wenela districts received only 28%
of that amount. The final part of the table shows no statistically significant differences in local labor
market opportunities across Wenela and non-Wenela areas just before the labor treaty was signed in 1967.
Just over 60% of men were engaged in some form of wage work in both areas, and almost 40% were not
earning any wage. Our analysis will account for all pre-existing differences between Wenela and non-
Wenela districts by using district fixed effects.

5. Empirical Strategy

Our aim is to estimate the long run impacts of migration on the intensive margin of the next generations’
educational attainment (total years of schooling attained) and on the extensive margin (any primary
school attained). These are relevant margins of adjustment for Malawi during this period, when there
were only 50 government secondary schools across the country. Furthermore, focusing on primary
education is important since functional literacy – usually gained after four years of education – is deemed
necessary for positive returns to education in agriculture (Foster and Rosenzweig 1996; Appleton 2000).

Our identification strategy exploits variation in childhood exposure to mine labor migration shocks
induced by external labor shocks interacting with district-specific migration costs.14 We use access to
Wenela stations as shown in Figure 1 as a proxy for migration costs. Figure 3 illustrates the variation in


14
  Our use of migration shocks measured at the level of the origin community is similar to the shock used in
Theoharides (2014). In that paper, Theoharides estimates the short run impacts of labor migration demand shocks in
the Philippines on enrollments in private secondary schools, also at district-level.

                                                        14
childhood exposure to the external labor shocks using the definition of eligibility for primary school
enrollment across cohorts. We construct five-year birth cohorts for adults who are ages 20 to 64 in 1998
and have therefore completed whatever primary schooling they are likely to get.

We group cohorts into four broad categories, defining pre-treatment, early and late treatment, and post-
treatment cohorts. The oldest cohorts born between 1933 and 1953 are too old for primary school by the
start of the labor shock period, 1967. These cohorts range in age from 14 to 34 in 1967, and constitute our
natural pre-treatment (control) group. The two middle groups in Figure 3 are eligible for primary school
at some point during the labor migration shock. Cohorts born between 1954 and 1963 are eligible for
primary school during the early labor expansion period: they are aged 4 to 13 in 1967 and are the Early
Treated cohorts. Cohorts born between 1964 and 1973 are eligible for primary school during the labor
ban period, as they are all under the age of 10 in 1974. They are the Late Treated cohorts. The youngest
adult cohorts who are born between 1974 and 1978 are ineligible for primary school between 1967 and
1977: the eldest in this cohort is three years old in 1977. These youngest cohorts may experience lingering
effects of the labor migration shock, which is why we refer to this group as the Post Treatment cohort,
rather than a control cohort.

Although our definition of cohort eligibility using five-year age bins is coarse, we have good reasons for
preferring this definition relative to one that specifies a treatment assignment for each individual year of
age. In low literacy populations such as Malawi’s, age misreporting makes it difficult to measure
accurately a person’s exposure to any age-specific treatments. Using the five-year age bins softens the
impact of this misreporting on our estimates. Using these five-year bins also helps us get around the issue
that age eligibility rules for enrollment in Malawi are only loosely enforced: in 1977, 20% of those aged
15 were enrolled in some lower primary school (grades 1-5). Finally, and more practically, the 1977
Census data are only available for five-year cohorts, restricting the way we can define treatment
assignment.

An implication of using broad cohorts to define treatment is that treatment is somewhat fuzzy. This likely
attenuates our estimates of the effects of migration on education. To be specific: not everyone who is
defined to be eligible for primary school was eligible for the same length of time during the labor shock
years. For example, the oldest individuals in the early treatment cohorts would have spent less total time
exposed to the labor expansion shock than the youngest in the same cohort. The five-year age bins
average effects across these different treatment intensities.

We estimate the education impacts of the labor migration shock using the following empirical model:



                                                      15
                    ∑                  ∗                                    ∗          ′           (1)

where       is either the average years of schooling attained or the share of adults with any primary school
in each cohort-gender-district (cgd) cell.    ,    and    are sets of five-year cohort, gender, and district
fixed effects. Gd is a set of district-specific historical and geographic variables that might influence
changes in education over time: the log of historical population density measured in 1931, the share of
literate adults in 1945, and indicators for the region in which the district is located. In our full
specification, we interact each of these baseline covariates with a linear trend (Trend) (results are almost
identical when we interact these with cohort dummies instead of a linear trend, but the trend specification
uses up fewer degrees of freedom). Wenelad is a count variable of the number of historical recruiting
stations in the district (results are similar if we use an indicator for at least one Wenela station in the
district). Cohortc is a set of dummy variables for each five-year cohort for the sample aged 20 to 64 in
1998; the omitted cohort is the oldest age group, 60-64. And cgd is an idiosyncratic error term. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the district level.

To trace out the differential effects of the labor migration shock across cohorts in districts with fewer
versus more Wenela stations, we plot estimates of        on the interaction terms           ∗            .
Estimates of 45-49, 50-54, and 55-59 measure the gap in education outcomes across Wenela and non-Wenela
districts among the older control cohorts relative to the oldest cohort ineligible for primary schooling
during the labor shock years. Ideally, we want these estimates to be zero, which would tell us there is no
difference in education levels across Wenela and non-Wenela districts among cohorts eligible for primary
schooling before the labor migration shocks begin.

The main parameters of interest are the remaining c’s. Estimates of 35-39 and 40-44 measure the gap in
educational attainment across Wenela and non-Wenela districts in cohorts exposed to the labor expansion
(the Early Treated cohorts) compared with the same gap among the oldest ineligible cohorts. Estimates
of 25-29 and 30-34 measure the gap in educational attainment across Wenela and non-Wenela districts in
cohorts exposed to the labor contraction (the Late Treated cohorts), compared with the same education
gap among the oldest ineligible cohorts. Finally, the estimate of 20-24 captures any persistence in
education gaps between Wenela and non-Wenela districts among Post Treatment cohorts, relative to the
same gap amongst oldest ineligible cohorts. As noted in Section 4, because the definition of eligibility for
primary school is necessarily coarse, we will not be able to capture more subtle variation in treatment
exposure within a five-year cohort.




                                                         16
To condense results, we also present estimates from a related regression that groups five-year cohorts into
the Early Treatedc, the Late Treatedc, and the PostTreatedc cohorts:

                                     ∗                                  ∗                                  ∗
                                                             ∗          ′              (2)

In this specification, differences between 1 and 2 tell us about the relative education impacts of the labor
expansion shock versus the labor ban, while 3 tells us whether there is any persistence in the effects of
the labor migration shocks among the youngest post-treatment cohorts.

Identification of the difference-in-differences parameters in specifications (1) and (2) relies on exploiting
district-level variation in the costs of accessing mine jobs proxied by the presence of historical Wenela
recruiting stations combined with within-district level variation in age eligibility of different cohorts. In
most studies of migration, drawing causal conclusions from comparing migrant and non-migrant families
or individuals is difficult because the decision to become a migrant is seldom random. Differences in
educational outcomes of children of migrants cannot necessarily be attributed to the impact of migration,
if migrants take more risks, are poorer or more able, or simply more interested in investing in human
capital. There are several reasons why, in our setting, these sources of selection bias are less of a concern.

First, we measure outcomes at the district level and include a host of controls in equation (1) that limit
concerns about potential confounding from underlying unobservable or observable differences between
districts, from short, sharp, differential shocks to the local economy, and from differential trends across
districts.15 Region-trend interaction terms also address concerns about mean reversion in education across
districts. Most importantly, any concerns about differential education trends across Wenela and non-
Wenela districts would need to account for the inverted U-shaped pattern of coefficients that we find. It is
difficult to think of any reason for the endogenous placement of recruiting stations that would account for
this changing pattern of coefficients.

Second, we use the older pre-treatment cohorts to control for counterfactual differences in educational
attainment across Wenela and non-Wenela districts. Parallel education pre-trends in this older comparison
group (that is, estimates of 45-49, 50-54, and 55-59 that are zero) support our identification assumption that,
conditional on controls, non-Wenela districts provide a valid counterfactual for Wenela districts. Third,
migration to the mines was highly prevalent and there were migrants in every district and across all age


15
   For example, the Northern Region was the birthplace of formal schooling in Malawi (Heyneman 1980), originally
established by missionaries. Including region-specific trends helps us to account for any differences in education
trends across regions that stem from different initial conditions.

                                                        17
groups. Differences across districts in migrant flows during the labor shock years had less to do with the
characteristics of people who wanted to migrate, and more to do with how easy it was to get recruits from
areas with pre-existing Wenela stations. Fourth, Wenela imposed few selection criteria on mine recruits,
beyond requiring a physical fitness test, making it very unlikely that migrant selection on cognitive ability
drives our results. Finally, our identification strategy relies on assumptions of no differential changes in
school supply across Wenela districts: all of the effect comes from the changes in the demand-side. Since
there was no massive school expansion program established in the post-independence period (see the
discussion in Section 3), it is unlikely that changes in schooling access could confound the interpretation
of our results.

One potential threat to validity of our results arises because proximity to Wenela stations in childhood
(and hence Wenelad) could be mismeasured. Our data do not contain information on birth district at the
individual level, so we cannot be sure that a person’s current district of residence is the district in which
she went to school. This may pose problems if internal migrants have substantially more, or less,
education than the average level of education of their origin and destination districts. To address this
concern, we use information from the 1977 Census on the district, age and gender-specific prevalence of
internal migration between 1967 and 1977 to create bounds for our education estimates in equation (1). In
Appendix 2, we discuss how we implement this bounds analysis and show that our results are robust to
accounting for the two extreme types of composition effects driven by internal migration.

Conditional on our identification assumptions, 1 and 2 capture the causal effect of exposure to the
migration expansion and subsequent contraction on long run average educational attainment. We treat the
expansion and contraction separately because they entail a different combination of shocks to the local
district economy. In the earlier period between 1967 and 1974, men migrate to South Africa in increasing
numbers, send back money in the form of remittances and collect cash via deferred payments when they
circle back to Malawi after their two-year contracts. If children are required to substitute for missing male
labor during the labor expansion, and if this effect is larger than the positive income effect (IE) from
increased migrant earnings, we might see 1<0. Alternatively, 1>0 implies that the positive IE on
educational investments dominates any crowd out of education during the labor expansion years.

In the later period between April 1974 and 1977, migrants repatriate to rural Malawi and bring home
accumulated deferred pay and savings. With returning male migrants, children would no longer need to
substitute for missing male labor. And, given the size of the earnings payouts to returning migrants, the
labor ban also implied a large positive shock to current income, which should serve to increase
contemporaneous investments in education, as long as schooling is a normal good. Since there is no


                                                      18
substitution effect in operation during the later period when men are back, we expect to see 2>0. Since
migrant labor flows never recovered to pre-1974 levels (see Figure 2), a finding of 3>0 is consistent with
at least some of the overall education response to the combined labor migration shocks being a response
to a net positive income shock.

To compare with other estimates in the literature, we pursue an instrumental variables strategy (IV) to
scale our reduced form estimates in two different ways: using the total number of circular migrants from
each district between 1967 and 1977 and using the amount of mining money received by each district
between 1967 and 1977. Each measure operationalizes the idea of the migration shock in a slightly
different way. We estimate two versions of the following regression:

                              ∗                           ∗                             ∗   +

                                                                         ∗          ′                          (3)

where Md is either the total number of circular migrants from the district between 1967 and 1977 (the
same outcome used in the first four columns of Table 3), or the total deferred pay per capita flowing back
to each district over these ten years (the same outcome used in the last four columns of Table 3).16 We use
deferred pay rather than total remittances, because deferred pay shares were set by contract, and make up
the majority (over 88%) of total money flows back to Malawi. We then instrument for each of
EarlyTreatedc*Md, LateTreatedc*Md, and Post-Treatedc*Md using EarlyTreatedc*Wenelad,
LateTreatedc*Wenelad and Post-Treatedc*Wenelad. All other controls are the same. While the difference-
in-differences design already provides an estimate of the causal effects of exposure to the migration
shocks, the instrumental variables strategy is a useful a re-scaling exercise. The estimates of 1, 2 and 3
tell us how much more education is gained by each of the treatment cohorts across high and low
migration shock districts, or across high and low migrant money shock districts, controlling for
differences in education outcomes across these districts using the older ineligible cohorts.

6. Empirical Results

Figures 4 and 5 show the main results for the long run effects of labor migration shocks on education. We
plot the difference-in-differences coefficients c from specification (1) on the y-axis for each cohort on the
x-axis, for each outcome: total years of education and the share of adults with any primary schooling. The
solid line connects our point estimates, the dashed lines represent the 95% confidence intervals, and the

16
  We use the 1967 and 1977 Census to construct a measure of the number of migrants who left and returned to the
district during this ten-year period. Without data on year-by-year flows of migrants at district level, we cannot
separate out the effects of currently missing migrants from total ever migrants in this setting.

                                                        19
omitted category is the oldest cohort, age 60 to 64 in 1998. In each figure, the black line represents the
gap in educational attainment (in Figure 4) or in primary school access (in Figure 5) across Wenela and
non-Wenela districts, for each of the five-year age cohorts. The older pre-treatment cohorts include those
aged 45 to 60 in 1998 (plus the omitted group); the labor expansion cohorts are those aged 35 to 44 in
1998; the labor contraction cohorts are aged 25 to 34 in 1998; and the youngest post-treatment cohorts are
aged 20 to 24 in 1998.

Several features of these figures stand out. First, educational attainment and access to primary schooling
both jump up, starting with the 40 to 44 year old cohort comprised of children eligible for schooling at the
start of the labor expansion period. Positive gaps in educational attainment and access to primary
schooling remain large and statistically different than zero for all younger cohorts down to those aged 25
to 29, the cohort eligible for schooling at the very end of the labor contraction period. There is also a
positive difference in educational attainment and primary school access between Wenela and non-Wenela
districts among the youngest, post-treatment cohorts, although the coefficients are smaller than during the
labor ban years. The effects of the migration shock persist, although appear to wear off somewhat in the
youngest cohorts.

Second, we see that the difference in total educational attainment between Wenela and non-Wenela
districts (Figure 4) was essentially constant and zero among all of the pre-treatment cohorts. This parallel
pre-trend among the oldest control groups is reassuring, as it gives us no indication that Wenela districts
were improving before those children eligible during the labor expansion period were able to be in school.
In Figure 5, we see that Wenela districts actually had declining entry into primary school among the
oldest control cohorts, relative to non-Wenela districts. There is no reason to think that Wenela districts
were improving educational outcomes in advance of the migration shocks.

Overall, both figures show that in the space of only ten years, exposure to mining employment shocks and
concomitant migrant remittances enabled Wenela districts to overtake non-Wenela districts in their total
amount of human capital, with long-lasting effect. Two decades after mine labor opportunities
disappeared in Malawi, districts that had been most exposed to the labor shocks continued to have higher
stocks of human capital among cohorts most exposed to these shocks. Additionally, districts most
exposed to the labor shocks had persistently higher levels of human capital even among cohorts in
primary school after the end of the migration shock, although these positive education impacts shrink over
time. Adjustments occurred on both extensive and intensive margins: children going to school stayed in
school for longer, and there were more kids going to school overall, as indicated by the increase in share




                                                      20
of adults with any primary schooling. These positive primary school enrollment effects account for
between 7 and 10% of the total increase in enrollment rates between 1967 and 1978.17

Table 5 puts some numbers on these figures using the condensed specification in equation (2). The first
two columns present results for years of education attained and the next two columns show results for the
share of adults with any primary schooling. For each outcome, we show results from specifications
including district fixed effects, female and age group dummies, and then including a set of trend
interactions with baseline covariates (region fixed effects, the log of historical population density in 1931
and the share of the adult population literate in 1931). The estimates in columns 2 and 4 of Table 5 are
weighted averages of the cohort-specific effects shown in Figures 4 and 5, with the weights being the
shares of the sample in each cohort. Robust standard errors are clustered at the district level. Since there
are only 24 districts, we report significance levels throughout using the small sample t distribution.18 The
significance of our results is also robust to using randomization inference procedures to construct exact p
values (see Appendix 3 for a description and the results of this procedure). The last three lines of Table 5
present p values for tests of equality between each of the difference-in-differences parameters.

Relative to the older pre-treatment cohorts, all of the post-1967 cohorts have higher educational
attainment and are more likely to have ever been in primary school in Wenela compared with non-Wenela
districts. These effects are large and statistically significant, and follow an inverted U-shaped pattern. For
each additional Wenela station, cohorts eligible during the labor expansion gain 0.13 more years of
education and are 1.4 percentage points more likely to have ever been to school (Table 5 columns 1 and
3). For each additional Wenela station, cohorts eligible during the labor contraction have 0.2 more years
of education and are 2 percentage points more likely to have ever been to school. Among the youngest,
post-treatment cohorts, for each additional Wenela station, education is 0.17 years higher and enrollment
is 1.6 percentage points higher. Adding in trend interaction terms (Table 5 columns 2 and 4) reduces the
size of the education impacts somewhat, but the effects remain positive, robust, and significant. For each
additional Wenela station in the district, cohorts eligible for school during the labor expansion and labor
ban periods gain an additional 0.12 to 0.18 years of education and are between 1.1 and 1.6 percentage
points more likely to have ever been in primary school. These estimates represent a 4.8 to 6.9% gain in
total years of education and a 2.6 to 3.9% gain in the share with any primary school.


17
   Heyneman (1980, Table 3) provides national enrollment numbers for Malawi in 1967 and 1978. We use Census
1977 data (Table 1, Population counts) to construct the total number of children ages 5 to 19 inclusive in each of the
1966 and 1977 Census years. We estimate the primary school enrollment rate in 1967 was approximately 20%,
rising to about 35% in 1978.
18
   Relevant p values are taken from the t-distribution with degrees of freedom ranging from 23 (when there are no
other controls in the regression) to 6 (when all controls are included and the sample is restricted to estate districts).

                                                           21
The two sides of the migration shock had different impacts on educational attainment and access to
primary schooling, with the largest impacts felt by cohorts in Wenela districts who were eligible for
schooling during the labor ban period: that is, the years in which miners were forced to return to Malawi
and receive their lump sum payouts of deferred pay. In addition, the effects of the shock lingered
(although with a smaller effect) as is evidenced by the higher educational attainment among the post-
treatment cohorts.19 The last part of the table tests for the equality of outcomes across the three difference-
in-differences parameters. Regardless of the specification, we can reject the null that the effects of the
migration shock are the same among the labor ban cohorts and each of the labor expansion and post-
treatment cohorts at the 1%, 5% or 10% level. The labor ban cohorts in Wenela districts gain significantly
more education than cohorts exposed to the labor expansion and cohorts eligible for schooling after the
end of the labor ban, controlling for educational gains of similar cohorts in non-Wenela districts. This
pattern of coefficients is difficult to reconcile with any concern about placement of Wenela recruiting
stations being correlated with positive (or negative) education trends.

Our positive estimates for each of the treated cohorts (early, late and post) are consistent with labor
migration having large, positive, long run impacts on human capital profiles of sending communities. The
immediate and persistent impacts of migration on school enrollment, attendance, and grade progression
among exposed cohorts in sending communities manifest in higher overall human capital attainment
among exposed cohorts in treated communities. Whether this accumulation of human capital ultimately
translated into growth effects at district level is a natural next question which we leave for future research.
At the most basic level, we observe strong cross sectional correlations between education and measures of
household well-being. We show in Appendix 5 that Malawian households with more educated heads
accumulate significantly more assets than those with lower levels of education, regardless of the measure
of education used and controlling for a host of demographics, household characteristics, and district fixed
effects. While usual concerns about selection and measurement error caution us against interpreting the
point estimates as causal, the strong positive education gradient in household assets suggests that human
capital formation and skills learned at school are important for household well-being in Malawi.

Discussion of magnitudes

To get a better sense of how many additional migrants left Malawi during the labor expansion years, how
much money flowed back, and how these numbers translate into education impacts, we scale the


19
  Various reasons in the literature exist for this persistence. For example, increased nutrition in childhood could
have increased the returns to investing in the youngest children (Hoddinott et al 2011); or increases in savings
facilitated by remittance income could continue to relax credit constraints and finance schooling beyond the end of
the labor ban years (Ashraf, Aycinena, Martinez and Yang, forthcoming).

                                                         22
difference-in-differences results using estimates from Table 3. From this table, we know how the presence
of a recruiting station induced migration flows out of districts and money flows into districts between
1966 and 1977. Without any other controls, each Wenela station in the district induces an additional 1,138
more labor migrants and an additional K13.5 per person. From Table 5, we know that for each additional
Wenela station, eligible cohorts have between 0.13 and 0.2 years more schooling, excluding other
controls (column 1). Combining these pieces of information, we can construct an estimate of the impact
of labor migration on education. At the mean level of labor migration shock in a district (3,445), total
educational attainment increases by between 0.4 years (0.13/1,138*3,445) and 0.6 years
(0.2/1,138*3,445). Alternately, at the mean level of deferred pay per person in the district (K40), total
educational attainment increases by between 0.39 years (0.13/13,5*40) and 0.59 years (0.2/13.5*40).20

Table 6 does this re-scaling more formally, using the instrumental variables strategy in equation (3) that
controls for other potential confounders in a regression framework. For each outcome, we present IV
results including demographic and district level controls, and region-specific linear trends and trend terms
interacted with baseline population density and literacy rates. First stage regression estimates appear in
Appendix Table 1. Coefficients are presented for the mean district-level migration shock (3,445
additional men) and the mean district-level deferred pay shock per person (K40 per person).

Estimates in Table 6 indicate that at the mean level of migration in a district, human capital formation
among eligible cohorts is higher by between 0.34 and 0.48 years (column 1), and these cohorts are
between 3.2 and 4.3 percentage points more likely to have ever been to primary school (column 3).
Compared with average levels of education and enrollment, this implies an increase in education of
between 13 and 18% for the mean migration shock in a district, and an increase in any primary schooling
of between 7 and 10%. Alternatively, at the mean level of deferred pay inflows in a district, human
capital formation among eligible cohorts is higher by between 0.25 and 0.42 years (column 2) , and these
cohorts are between 1.6 and 3.8 percentage points more likely to have ever been to primary school
(column 4). All results for the early and late treatment cohorts are significant at the 1% or 5% level.

There are reasons to expect that the return of remittances and receipt of deferred pay in lump sums several
times larger than annual earnings would likely have had direct impacts on the local economy outside of
migrant households. For example, families sharing resources within an extended family network could
generate positive impacts for children of non-migrant households. Spending of this additional income
could have generated local multiplier effects. Another potential source of spillovers could be driven by


20
  This is similar to, although not exactly, the Wald estimate. The unit of observation in Table 3 is the district, while
in Table 5 it is the district-gender-cohort group.

                                                           23
equilibrium impacts on wages of left behind workers. Both the reduced form estimates of the impact of
labor migration in Table 5 as well as the IV scaled results in Table 6 tell us how differential growth in
migrant flows due to recruiting station placement affected the education profile of cohorts across the
entire district. These estimates include any spillovers of labor migration to non-migrant households.
Theoharides (2014) is the only other paper we are aware of that takes into account potential spillovers
from migrant to non-migrant households by estimating the impacts of labor migration demand shocks
measured at the local labor market level. Given her estimates, we calculate an elasticity of high school
enrollment with respect to average migrant labor demand shocks in the Philippines of 0.17. Our estimates
of the elasticity of primary school enrollment in Malawi are substantially lower: 0.07 to 0.1 (using the IV
estimates in Table 6 column 3 and dividing by the average value of the education outcome: 0.032/0.41
and 0.043/0.41).21

We can also use our re-scaled IV estimates in Table 6 to compare our results with estimates of the
elasticity of school enrollment to migrant income. In our context, the income elasticity of education is the
percent change in enrollment divided by the percent change in migrant income at district level. Dividing
the point estimates in Table 6 (column 4) by the mean of primary school enrollment variables turns these
into elasticities. The elasticity of school enrollment with respect to deferred pay income is therefore
between 0.07 and 0.09 (0.029/0.41 and 0.038/0.41) for the early and late treatment cohorts respectively.22
This elasticity is far below the most credible estimate in the literature: Yang (2008) reports that the
elasticity of school spending with respect to remittance income within migrant households in the
Philippines is 0.55. Using these estimates, we compute the elasticity of school enrollment with respect to
remittance income in that setting at 0.44. One reason for these differences could be the very different
context of outside options for child work in Malawi. In the final section, we discuss our evidence on how
these outside options may have muted the effects of labor migration on investments in human capital of
the next generation.

Exploring Mechanisms

For both education outcomes, we reject the null that 1 and 2 in specification (2) are the same at the 1%
or 5% levels (p values range from 0.01 to 0.03 in Table 5). Relative to both the Early Treated cohorts and
the Post Treated cohorts, education impacts are always statistically larger for cohorts’ eligible during the
labor contraction period, when men have returned home and immediately after they collect their lump

21
   The elasticity of 0.17 comes from an average migrant labor demand shock of 0.12 percentage points and an
enrollment effect of 1.2 percentage points off a base of 56.8 percentage points: (1.2/56.8)/0.12.
22
   Estimating a similar elasticity for the post-treatment cohorts is difficult, since it requires us to know the savings
rate for remittance income.

                                                            24
sum payouts. One interpretation of these differences is that during the labor ban period, children no longer
need to substitute for missing male labor, but the income effect still operates since men return home with
deferred earnings and savings. Under this interpretation, we could use the difference between our
estimates of 1 and 2 to back out the size of the substitution effect when labor migration is expanding. A
second interpretation is that less money returned to each district in Malawi in each year of the expansion
period than in the labor contraction period, generating a smaller impact on education outcomes. Using our
disaggregated deferred pay data, we do find that the average amount returned to each district in each year,
per capita, is around K3 in the early period and around K3.8 in the late period.

We offer two additional pieces of evidence to support the idea that there was some substitution between
male and child labor in the early labor expansion period, which was not present in the later labor ban
period. First, we examine how our difference-in-differences estimates from Table 5 vary across districts
with greater versus fewer outside opportunities for child labor. Specifically, we look for treatment effect
heterogeneity across districts with and without agricultural estates. Second, we ask directly whether there
are contemporaneous impacts of the labor migration shock on the prevalence of child labor that differs
across Wenela and non-Wenela districts, using data from 1968 and 1977 that bracket the massive shocks
to migration. Because splitting the sample into estate and non-estate districts generates small subsamples
for testing, these results are necessarily suggestive.

As Section 3 outlines, children in rural Malawi may have worked in the home, on the family farm, or on
estates. Especially in the case of estates, where tenant farmers were required to satisfy annual quotas of
output to protect their land rights, the value of additional child labor would have been higher than in areas
without estates throughout the twentieth century. And, since the estate sector was booming in the late
1960s and early 1970s, the value of child labor in these districts would have been even higher during the
time of the two migration shocks. Thus, we expect the effects of labor migration on human capital to
depend on these differences in local agricultural production technology.

Table 7 shows just these relationships. We estimate versions of equation (2) using the district level dataset
from the combined 1977 and 1998 Census. We split the sample into districts with and without large tea,
tobacco, sugar or cotton estates. Although all areas experience the positive impacts of the migration
shocks on educational attainment, effects are largest among eligible cohorts in high exposure (Wenela)
districts without large agricultural estates. In these districts, cohorts eligible for primary school between
1967 and 1977 have between 0.15 and 0.22 more years of education and are between 1.4 and 2.1
percentage points more likely to be in school. In contrast, point estimates for the sample of estate districts
are almost always smaller than for the non-estate sample.


                                                         25
Table 8 presents direct evidence on the contemporaneous effects of these labor migration shocks on the
prevalence of child labor. We regress the share of children aged 10 to 14 years working in 1968 or in
1977 on a 1977 year dummy, the number of Wenela stations in the district, the interaction of the 1977
dummy with number of stations, district fixed effects, and a range of demographic characteristics. These
regressions allow us to ask: did child labor among children aged 10 to 14 change differentially across
districts with and without Wenela stations between 1968 and 1977? The results indicate that it did. For
the full sample, districts with Wenela stations experienced a 1 percentage point decline in child labor
among children aged 10 to 14 relative to districts without Wenela stations (Table 8 column 1). This
decline only happens in the non-estate districts, where child labor declined by 1.3 percentage points.
Among estate districts, the picture is very different. The share of children working rose by almost 20
percentage points in Wenela relative to non-Wenela districts. These effects make sense in the wake of the
massive migration shocks of the 1960s and 1970s, and simultaneous growth in the estate sector.23

Putting the results of Tables 7 and 8 together suggests that the local technology of production influenced
the way in which circular labor migration affected families left behind. Exposure to mine employment
shocks affected long run educational attainment differently in estate and non-estate districts. At the same
time, exposure to these labor migration shocks differentially raised child labor in Wenela relative to non-
Wenela districts, but only within estate areas. In non-estate areas, exposure to the labor migration shocks
lowered rates of child labor over the 10-year period. We interpret this as evidence that where child labor
was less prevalent and arguably less valuable, (i.e. in non-estate districts), circular labor migration and
concomitant money flows substantially increased investments in schooling. The effects of this migration
on education of treated cohorts were muted in estate districts, where child labor was a potentially valuable
input into production, and even possibly a substitute for missing male labor.

7. Conclusions

Circular migration has long been considered one of the most immediate ways out of poverty for families,
and potentially for whole sending communities. Despite its prevalence in most African labor markets,
there is scant empirical evidence on this type of migration due to challenging identification concerns and
data limitations. Our paper uses newly collected administrative data on exogenously determined access to
migration opportunities and two waves of newly digitized Census data to provide direct evidence on one
of the channels through which this migration can positively affect the lives of those left behind.



23
  We are unaware of any historical data that would allow us to test the direct impact of the labor expansion and
contraction on child wages. However, such a test would likely be uninformative: the historical literature suggests
that children were not earning market wages when employed in home production or on estates.

                                                         26
We show that the massive and unanticipated expansion and contraction of employment of Malawian men
on South African mines over a ten-year period had lasting effects on human capital formation in rural
communities of origin. This new evidence from Africa shows that the positive income effects of labor
migration on the demand for education outweigh any potential negative substitution effects of this
migration on the demand for child time in the labor market. However, there is some indication these long
run impacts of labor migration on human capital accumulation of the next generation are muted, the
higher the shadow value of child work is in a region. There is also some evidence that the effects persist
beyond the end of the shock, although at a declining rate.

Our findings have broad relevance. The increase in educational attainment between 1967 and 1977
reflected in long run adult education outcomes twenty years later shows the extent to which a colonial era
institution continues to play a role in Malawi’s economy, long after independence and the end of formal
recruiting. These lessons are relevant for many countries with historical, bilateral guest worker programs
including Germany and Turkey (the Gastarbeiterprogramm), the US and Mexico (the Bracero program)
and all Southern African countries that were part of the pre-and post-colonial labor reservoir cultivated by
the South African mines. Given the scale of the circular migration we document in Malawi, it is
surprising that there is so little empirical evidence on the long run effects on sending economies of these
labor recruitment institutions.24 The lessons we learn from this important yet little documented period in
the economic history of Africa also have considerable relevance for existing and future planned guest
worker programs in many low-income countries (Gibson, McKenzie and Rohorua 2013). Although some
details of these modern programs may differ (e.g. deferred pay in worker contracts), modern guest worker
programs also have limited-time work contracts, in-built circularity in migration flows and periodic labor
bans that mirror the Malawian experience.25 The evidence in this paper suggests that there is scope for
modern guest worker programs to have positive, and importantly, long-lasting impacts on human capital
formation in communities of origin.




24
  Lucas (1985) and Lucas (1987) are exceptions focusing on cross-country comparisons to get at aggregate effects.
25
  Malawi has developed a new guest worker program that has drawn significant controversy (Mponda 2013). Labor
bans have recently occurred in Nepal http://www.cnn.com/2012/08/09/world/meast/nepal-migrant-
workers/index.html.

                                                       27
References

Antman, Francisca M., 2011 “The intergenerational effects of paternal migration on schooling and work:
   What can we learn from children’s time allocations?”, Journal of Development Economics, No. 96:
   200-208.
Antman, Francisca M., 2012 “Gender, Educational Attainment, and the Impact of Parental Migration on
   Children Left Behind”, Journal of Population Economics, Vol. 25 (4): 1187-1214.
Antman, Francisca M., 2013 “The impact of migration on family left behind”, in International Handbook
   of Migration, edited by Amelie Constant and Klaus Zimmerman. Edward Elgar. Ch. 16: 293-308
Appleton, Simon, 2000 “Education and Health at the household level in sub-Saharan Africa” Explaining
   African Economic Growth Performance Conference Series, CID Working Paper 33
Ashraf, Nava, Diego Aycinena, Claudia Martínez A., and Dean Yang, forthcoming “Savings in
   Transnational Households: A Field Experiment Among Migrants from El Salvador” Review of
   Economics and Statistics
Batista, Catia, Aitor Lacueste and Pedro C. Vicente, 2012 “Testing the ‘brain gain’ hypothesis: Micro
   evidence from Cape Verde”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 97: 32-45
Beegle, Kathleen, Joachim De Weerdt, Stefan Dercon, 2011 “Migration and economic mobility in
   Tanzania: Evidence from a tracking survey” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 9 (3): 1010-
   1033
Chamber of Mines of South Africa, 1973 Annual Report, Johannesburg.
Chirwa, Ephraim W. and Mirriam M. Matita, 2009 “The rate of return on education in Malawi”,
   Department of Economics Working Paper Number 2009/01, University of Malawi, Chancellor
   College
Chirwa, Wiseman Chijere, 1992 “‘TEBA is power’: Rural labour, migrancy and fishing in Malawi, 1890s
   – 1985” Ph.D thesis, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario
Chirwa, Wiseman Chijere, 1993 “Child and youth labour on the Nyasaland Plantations 1890-1953”,
   Journal of Southern African Studies, Vol. 19 (4): 662-680
Chirwa, Wiseman Chijere, 1996 “The Malawi Government and South African Labour Recruiters, 1974-
   1992”, Journal of Modern African Studies Vol. 34 (4): 623-642
Chirwa, Wiseman Chijere, 1997 “’No TEBA…Forget TEBA’: The Plight of Malawian Ex-migrant
   Workers to South Africa, 1988-1994”, International Migration Review Vol. 31 (3): 628 -654
Clarke, Duncan. G., 1977 Agricultural and Plantation Workers in Rhodesia: A Report on conditions of
   labour and subsistence. Mambo Press.
Clemens, Michael A., 2011 “Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?” Journal
   of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 25 (3): 83-106
Clemens, Michael and David McKenzie, 2014 “Why don’t remittances appear to affect growth?” World
   Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6856
Coleman, G., 1972 “International Labour Migration from Malawi, 1875-1966”, Journal of Social Science,
   Vol. 2: 31-46
Constant, Amelie F. and Klaus F. Zimmerman, 2013 “The economics of circular migration”, in
   International Handbook of Migration, edited by Constant, Amelie and Klaus Zimmerman. Edward
   Elgar Publishers. Ch. 3: 55-74
Cox Edwards, Alejandra and Manuelita Ureta, 2003 “International Migration, Remittances and
   Schooling: Evidence from El Salvador,” Journal of Development Economics in Vol. 72 (2): 429–461
Crush, Jonathan. S., 1986 “The Extrusion of Foreign Labour from the South African Gold Mining
   Industry” Geoforum Vol. 17 (2): 161-172
Crush, Jonathan. S., Alan Jeeves and David Yudelman, 1991 South Africa’s Labor Empire. Westview
   Press
De Brauw, Alan and John Giles, 2006 “Migrant Opportunity and the Educational Attainment of Youth in
   Rural China”, IZA Discussion Papers No. 2326


                                                 28
De Brauw, Alan, Valerie Mueller, and Hak Lim Lee, 2013 “The role of rural-urban migration in the
   structural transformation of sub-Saharan Africa” World Development, in press
Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig, 1996 “Technical Change and Human-Capital Returns and
   Investments: Evidence from the Green Revolution”, American Economic Review, Vol. 86 (4): 931-53
Gibson, John, David McKenzie and Steven Stillman, 2011 “The impacts of international migration on
   remaining household members: Omnibus results from a migration lottery program”, Review of
   Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93 (4): 1297–1318
Gibson, John, David McKenzie and Steven Stillman, 2013 “Accounting for selectivity and duration-
   dependent heterogeneity when estimating the impact of emigration on incomes and poverty in sending
   areas”, Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 61 (2): 247-280
Gibson, John, David McKenzie and Halahingano Rohorua, 2013 “Development impacts of seasonal and
   temporary migration: A review of evidence from the Pacific and Southeast Asia”, CREAM Discussion
   Paper Series No. 08/13
Green, Erik, 2007 “Modern Agricultural History in Malawi: Perspectives on Policy Choices”, African
   Studies Review Vol. 50 (3): 143–67
Green, Erik, 2013 “Land Concentration, Institutional Control and African Agency–Growth and
   Stagnation of European Tobacco Farming in Shire Highlands, c 1900 –1940”, in E. Hillbom and
   P.Svensson (eds.) Agricultural Transformations and Global History, pp.229–262. London: Routledge
Government of Nyasaland, 1961 “Aide Memoire on WENELA activities, Provincial Reports, PCN1-21-
   16”, Zomba National Archives
Hanson, Gordon and Christopher Woodruff, 2003 “Emigration and educational attainment in Mexico”,
   Mimeo
Haviland, William E., 1953 “The Rise of the African Tobacco Industry in Nyasaland and Its Production
   Problems” The South African Journal of Economics, Vol. 22 (2): 141–52
Heyneman, Stephen P., 1980 “The evaluation of human capital in Malawi”, World Bank Staff Working
   Papers No. 420.The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Hoddinott, John, John Maluccio, Jere R. Behrman, Reynaldo Martorell, Paul Melgar, Anges R.
   Quisumbing, Manuel Ramirez-Zea, Aryeh D. Stein, Kathryn M. Yount, 2011 “The consequences of
   early childhood growth failure over the life course”, IFPRI Discussion Paper No. 01073
Jeeves, Alan, 1987 “William Gemill and South African Expansion 1920-1950”, Paper prepared for
   University of the Witwatersrand History Workshop: The making of Class, 9-14 February, 1987
Kosack, Edward. 2015 “The Bracero Program and Effects on Human Capital Investments in Mexico,
   1942-1964”, Working Paper, Department of Economics University of Colorado Boulder
Kydd, Jonathan and Robert Christiansen, 1982 “Structural change in Malawi since independence:
   Consequences of a development strategy based on large-scale agriculture” World Development Vol. 10
   (5): 355-375
Lucas, Robert E. B., 1985 “Mines and migrants in South Africa”, American Economic Review, Vol. 75
   (5): 1094-1108
Lucas, Robert E. B. and Stark, Oded, 1985 “Motivations to Remit: Evidence from Botswana,” Journal of
   Political Economy, vol. 93(5), pages 901-18, October.
Lucas, Robert E. B., 1987 “Emigration to South Africa’s Mines” American Economic Review Vol. 77 (3):
   313-330
Lucas, Robert E. B., 2005 International Migration and Economic Development: Lessons from Low-
   Income Countries. EGCI: Edward Elgar
Malawi Ministry of Education, 1977 “Major trends in education in Malawi 1974-1976”, UNESCO
   International Conference on Education
Malawi National Statistical Office, 1972 Malawi Statistical Yearbook. Government Printer, Zomba
Malawi National Statistical Office, 1995 Malawi Statistical Yearbook. Government Printer, Zomba
Malawi National Statistical Office, 1979 Malawi 1977 Population Census Final Report Volumes I and II,
   Zomba


                                                 29
Malawi National Statistical Office, 1967 Malawi 1966 Population Census Final Report, Government
    Printer, Zomba
Mariotti, Martine 2015 “Father’s employment and sons’ stature: The long run effects of a positive
    regional employment shock in South Africa’s mining industry” Economic Development and Cultural
    Change, DOI: 10.1086/679755.
McCracken, John, 2012 A History of Malawi, 1959-1966, Boydell and Brewer
McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport, 2011 “Can migration reduce educational attainment? Evidence
    from Mexico,” Journal of Population Economics, Vol. 24 (4): 1331-1358
Mountford, Andrew, 1997 “Can a brain drain be good for growth in the source economy?”, Journal of
    Development Economics, Vol. 53: 287-303
Mponda, Felix, 2013 “Malawi offers South Korea 100,000 workers”, Business Day, June 11.
    http://www.bdlive.co.za/africa/africannews/2013/06/11/malawi-offers-south-korea-100000-workers
Nyasaland Governor, 1956 “Memorandum on Labor Migrancy in Malawi” 1956 Nyasaland Provincial
    Office Memo, December 7 1961
Nyasaland Ministry of Education, 1960 Annual Report. Government Printer, Zomba
Nyasaland Protectorate, 1931 Report on the Census of 1931. Government Printer, Zomba
Nyasaland Protectorate, 1946 Report on the Census of 1945. Government Printer, Zomba
Paton, Bill, 1995 Labour Export Policy in the Development of Southern Africa. Macmillan.
Pritchett, Lant, 2006 Let their people come: Breaking the gridlock on international labor mobility. Center
    for Global Development: Washington D.C.
Prothero, R. Mansell, 1974 “Foreign migrant labour for South Africa”, International Migration Review,
    Vol. 8 (3): 383-394
Pryor, Frederic. L. and Chinyamata Chipeta, 1990 “Economic Development through Estate Agriculture:
    The Case of Malawi”, Canadian Journal of African Studies, Vol. 24 (1): 50-74
Theoharides, Caroline, 2014 “Manila to Malaysia, Quezon to Qatar: International Migration and its
    Effects on Origin-Country Human Capital”, Working Paper December 29, 2014
Treaty Series No.10/1967, 1967 “Agreement between the Governments of the Republic of South Africa
    and Malawi relating to the Employment and Documentation of Malawi Nationals in South Africa”
    Place and date of signing: Pretoria and Blantyre, 1 August 1967, Date of entry in force: 1 August 1967
Weyl, Ulrich, 1981 “Labour migration in Malawi as a barrier to development”, PhD thesis, Universität
    Osnabrück
Woodruff, Christopher, 2007 “How does migration affect local development? What Mexico’s experience
   tells us”, in Susan Pozo (ed.) Immigrants and their International Money Flows, Upjohn Institute.
World Bank and UNICEF, 2009 Abolishing School Fees in Africa: Lessons from Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya
    Malawi and Mozambique IBRD, Washington D.C.
Wilson, Francis, 1972 Labour in the South African Gold Mines 1911-1969, Cambridge University Press
Yang, Dean, 2008 “International Migration, Remittances and Household Investment: Evidence from
    Philippine Migrants’ Exchange Rate Shocks,” Economic Journal, Vol. 118 (528): 591-630
Yang, Dean, 2011 “Migrant Remittances,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, American Economic
Association, Vol. 25 (3):129-52




                                                   30
  Figure 1 The spatial distribution of Wenela mine recruiting stations in 1937




Figure 1 shows district boundaries (thick black lines), sub-district/traditional
authority boundaries (thinner black lines) and the distribution of Wenela
recruiting stations established by 1937 (hatched areas) across Malawi. Malawi’s
four cities are the shaded areas.




                                         31
       Figure 2: Annual employment of Malawian miners on South African mines, 1950-1994

         140,000


         120,000
                                                                                                           Labor ban following
                                                                                                          1974 miner plane crash
         100,000


               80,000
                                                   Labor treaty
               60,000                                  1967
                                                    abolishing
                                                      quotas
               40,000              Period of
                                 labor quotas                                                             Removal of labor ban
                                                                                                             end of 1977
               20,000


                        0




Figure 2 shows number of workers contracted by Wenela to work on South African mines in each year. The three
dotted lines represent (from left to right) the abolition of labor quotas in August 1967, the moratorium on migration
after the April 1974 Malawian plane crash and the legal resumption of mine migration in 1978.

     Figure 3: Treatment assignment: Primary school eligibility in labor shock years 1967 -1977

                               Pre-treatment
                            cohorts: Age 14-33
                            in 1967, too old for
                              primary school
                                                   Early treated cohorts:
                                                    Ages 4-13 in 1967,
                                                    eligible for primary
                                                    school during labor
         1967 cohorts




                                                         expansion
                                                                                  Late treated cohorts:
                                                                                   age 4 and under in
                                                                                   1967 (born 1964-
                                                                                   1973), eligible for
                                                                                 primary school during
                                                                                    labor contraction
                                                                                                                Post-treatment
                                                                                                              cohorts: born 1974-
                                                                                                              1978, too young for
                                                                                                               primary school in
                                                                                                                     1977

                              Ages 45-64               Ages 35-44                    Ages 25-34                Age 20-24
                                                                       1998 Cohorts

Figure 3 shows which cohorts are eligible for primary school during the labor shock years, 1967 to 1977. The
horizonal axis shows age of cohorts in 1998, the vertical axis shows the range of ages for each cohort in 1967.



                                                                            32
             Figure 4: Estimated differences in education by cohort and Wenela status of district


                                                                0.35
             Difference in coefficients on cohort dummies for
                  WENELA and non-WENELA districts

                                                                0.25



                                                                0.15



                                                                0.05


                                                                        55-59       50-54       45-49       40-44      35-39     30-34        25-29      20-24
                                                                -0.05                                               Early and late treated                Post-
                                                                            Pre-treatment cohorts                                                      treatment
                                                                                                                           cohorts
                                                                                                                                                         cohort
                                                                -0.15
                                                                                                       Cohort age in 1998



      Figure 5: Estimated differences in primary schooling by cohort and Wenela status of district

                                                                   0.037
           Difference in coefficients on cohort
           dummies for WENELA and non-




                                                                   0.027
                   WENELA districts




                                                                   0.017


                                                                   0.007


                                                                   -0.003      55-59    50-54       45-49      40-44     35-39    30-34        25-29      20-24

                                                                   -0.013      Pre-treatment cohorts                 Early and late treated           Post- treatment
                                                                                                                            cohorts                       cohort

                                                                   -0.023
                                                                                                       Cohort age in 1998


Figures 4 and 5: show estimated interaction term coefficients (solid line) and 95% confidence intervals (dotted lines)
from a regression of education (figure 4) and primary schooling (figure 5) on nine age group dummies and their
interaction with the number of WENELA stations in the district. Controls include: female, log population density in
1931, share literate in 1945, district and region fixed effects, and trend terms interacted with region fixed effects,
baseline population density and baseline literacy rates. The x-axis shows five-year age cohorts in 1998.




                                                                                                             33
                Table 1: Share of children aged 10-14 working and share in school, 1966-1968
                                                        Wenela Recruiting           Non-Wenela                 p value of
                                   Full sample
                                                           Districts                 Districts                 difference
                                                                Panel A: All districts
Share in school                         0.34                  0.39                  0.24                           ***
Share working                           0.19                  0.21                  0.17                           **
N                                        46                    30                    16
                                                     Panel B: Districts with agricultural estates
Share in school                         0.27                  0.33                  0.22                            *
Share working                           0.18                  0.19                  0.18
N                                        16                     8                     8
                                                    Panel C: Districts without agricultural estates
Share in school                         0.37                  0.41                  0.25                           ***
Share working                           0.20                  0.21                  0.16                           **
N                                        30                    22                     8
Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively, and evaluated relative
to the small sample t distribution to account for the small number of clusters. Enrolment data are from the 1966 Census.
Work data are from the 1968 National Sample Survey of Agriculture. Excluded categories are home production and no
activities. An observation is a district-cohort-gender group for the 10-14 age cohort.
   Table 2: Historical and geographic predictors of Wenela recruiting station placement at district-level

                                                                            Number of recruiting stations in the district

                                                                              (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
Log population density, Census 1931                                         -0.979        -1.206*          -0.758         -0.176
                                                                           (0.595)        (0.585)         (0.639)        (1.035)
Estate district                                                                            -1.489          -0.891         -0.603
                                                                                          (1.126)         (1.230)        (1.535)
Altitude (meters)^*100                                                                                   0.288**           0.125
                                                                                                          (0.117)        (0.204)
Literacy rate, Census 1945                                                                                  2.678        10.010
                                                                                                         (17.140)       (17.080)
Central region                                                                                                             1.019
                                                                                                                         (2.128)
Southern region                                                                                                           -1.411
                                                                                                                         (3.961)
Observations                                                                  24             24             24              24
R-squared                                                                    0.07           0.13           0.24            0.34
Mean of outcome                                                              2.79           2.79           2.79            2.79
Robust standard errors in parentheses in all regressions. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated
by ***, **, and *, respectively, and evaluated relative to the small sample t distribution to account for the small number of
clusters. Outcome is the number of recruiting stations in the district in 1937. All variables are measured at district level.
Altitude is average altitude for each district and is a proxy for malaria risk.
                            Table 3: Wenela recruiting stations predict migration and money flows, 1966-1977
                                                    ∆ in number of migrants from the district             Deferred miner pay (Kwacha) per person,
                                                              between 1966 and 1977                           received between 1966 and 1977
                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)           (8)
Number of Wenela stations                          1,138**      1,356***      1,357***      1,532***         13.5       19.78*       19.23*       23.75**
                                                    (457)          (362)         (354)         (427)       (10.24)      (10.71)      (10.61)       (9.07)
Central region                                                    4,364         3,895         3,117                      17.34        22.76        -0.848
                                                                 (3,359)       (3,816)       (4,390)                    (47.56)      (54.92)      (56.16)
Southern region                                                   1,431         479.8         -821.3                     104.1        111.9        72.79
                                                                 (4,901)       (5,629)       (6,274)                    (66.73)      (78.81)      (75.18)
Mean Literacy rate in 1945                                        -7,114        -6,923        -6,577                     631.1          587        732.1
                                                                 (5,886)       (6,425)       (6,524)                     (465)         (498)        (543)
Log population density in 1931                                                    827         1,293                                   -5.733         8.52
                                                                               (1,977)       (2,116)                                 (18.25)      (15.43)
Estates                                                                         374.1         2,448                                   -28.98       21.85
                                                                               (3697)        (4,762)                                 (34.84)      (25.17)
Estate district*Number of Wenela stations                                                     -702.3                                               -17.41
                                                                                             (1,086)                                              (10.53)
N                                                     24            24            24             24          22           22            22           22
R2                                                   0.15          0.41          0.41           0.42        0.25         0.49          0.51         0.58
Mean of outcome variable                            3,445         3,445         3,445         3,445          40           40            40           40
Robust standard errors in parentheses in all regressions. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively, and evaluated relative to the small sample t distribution to account for the small number of districts. Unit of observation is the district.
Outcome are the change in the raw number (stock) of male migrants between 1966 and 1977, measured at district-level using Census data in 1966 and
1977 (columns 1 to 4) and total deferred pay per person (population measured in 1966) received by each district between 1966 and 1977 (columns 5 to
8). Number of Wenela stations is a count variable of all stations in the district in 1937 (mean is 2.79), estate is a dummy for whether the district contains
a tea, tobacco, sugar or cotton plantation. Deferred pay data exist for a subset of districts.
                                               Table 4: Summary statistics for Census, Geographic and Administrative Data

                                                                                                                  Wenela Recruiting
                                                                                       Full sample                                              Non-Wenela Districts          p value of
                                                                                                                     Districts
                                                                                                                                                                              difference
                                                                       Mean           s.d.         Mean        s.d.                              Mean             s.d.
                                       Panel A: Outcomes and control variables for District-5 Year Age Group-Gender cells
Variables measuring exposure to mining employment shocks
Number of Wenela stations                                              2.79          2.77           4.47       2.19                               0.00           0.00            0.00
Any Wenela station                                                     0.63          0.48           1.00       0.00                               0.00           0.00            0.00
Early Treatment Cohorts: Primary school eligible in 1967-1973          0.30          0.46           0.30       0.46                               0.30           0.46            0.50
Late Treatment Cohorts: Primary school eligible in 1974-1977           0.20          0.40           0.20       0.40                               0.20           0.40            0.50
Post-Treatment cohorts: Primary school eligible after 1977             0.10          0.30           0.10       0.30                               0.10           0.30            0.50
Pre-Treatment cohorts: Primary school eligible before 1967             0.40          0.49           0.40       0.49                               0.40           0.49            0.50

Education outcomes
Total years of education for adult sample                                           2.56           2.20            2.85           2.36            2.07           1.79            0.00
Share with any primary school for adult sample                                      0.41           0.29            0.45           0.30            0.35           0.25            0.00
Number of observations                                                480                          300                                            180
                                                     Panel B: Geographic and historical district variables
Number of Wenela stations                                            2.79          2.83            4.47                           2.26           0.00            0.00            0.00
Any Wenela station                                                   0.63          0.49            1.00                           0.00           0.00            0.00            0.00
Fraction of men ever been abroad by 1977~                            0.19          0.06            0.20                           0.05           0.18            0.06            0.14
∆ number of migrants, 1966-1977                                      3,445         8,282          5,060                           9,672           752            4,519           0.08
Migrant growth rate, 1966-1977                                        0.30          0.68           0.46                            0.78           0.03            0.37           0.04
Total deferred miner pay (Kwacha) per person, 1966-1977              40.12         77.03          56.74                           96.43          16.10           23.03           0.08
Altitude: high malaria area=1                                                       0.28            0.35           0.20           0.32            0.43            0.36           0.06
Population density in 1931                                                         24.67           22.13          15.71           9.59           39.60           29.09           0.01
District contains an estate                                                        0.21            0.41           0.27            0.46           0.11            0.33            0.17
English and vernacular literacy, share of youth in 1945                            0.08            0.04           0.09            0.04           0.06            0.02            0.00
Fraction of men doing wage work (farm, cash or other) 1966                          0.63            0.10           0.62           0.12            0.66            0.08           0.14
Fraction of men not earning any wage 1966                                           0.37            0.10           0.38           0.12            0.34            0.08           0.14
Number of districts                                                                  24                             15                              9
Panel A contains summary statistics using 1998 micro data and 1977 aggregate data, reported at the district-5 year age group-sex level. Panel B contains summary statistics from
geographic data, aggregate Census data in 1931, 1945, 1966, 1977 and administrative data on migrant and deferred pay flows. p values are reported for the test of the difference in
means across recruiting and non-recruiting station areas using robust standard errors and evaluated using the small sample t distribution to account for the small number of clusters.
Estate is a dummy variable as described in the text.
             Table 5: Long run effects of labor migration shocks on education: Difference-in-differences results
                                                      Total years of schooling attained     Share with any primary school
                                                            (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)
Early Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations (β 1)       0.137***            0.124**          0.014**            0.011**
                                                                      (0.045)               (0.046)                (0.005)               (0.004)
Late Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations (β 2)                    0.202***               0.179**               0.020**               0.016***
                                                                      (0.066)               (0.063)                (0.007)               (0.005)
Post-Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations (β 3)                     0.170**               0.141**               0.016***                0.010
                                                                      (0.061)               (0.066)                (0.005)               (0.006)
Trend interactions                                                       N                     Y                      N                     Y
N                                                                      480                   480                    480                   480
R2                                                                     0.83                  0.86                   0.82                  0.84
Mean of outcome variable                                               2.56                  2.56                   0.41                  0.41
p value of F test H0: β 1=β 2                                          0.01                   0.01                  0.01                  0.03
p value of F test H0: β 1=β 3                                          0.15                   0.57                  0.33                  0.73
p value of F test H0: β 2=β 3                                          0.02                   0.07                  0.01                  0.06

Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively, and evaluated relative to the small sample t distribution to account for the small number of clusters. Unit of observation is the district-
5 year age group-gender cell. The outcomes are average years of schooling attained by the district-cohort-gender group and the share of each district-
gender-cohort group with any primary schooling. Vector of controls included in every regression: female dummy, cohort dummies, region fixed
effects, the log of district-level population density in 1931 and the share of literate youths in 1945, and district fixed effects. In the second
specification for each outcome, a trend term is interacted with each of the region fixed effects, baseline population density and baseline literacy
rates variables. Number of Wenela stations in the district is a count variable. Sample includes adults ages 20 to 44 in 1977 and 1998 census.
         Table 6: Scaling human capital effects of migration shocks using migrant outflows and money inflows, IV results
                                                                        Total years of schooling
                                                                                                  Share with any primary school
                                                                                attained
                                                                          (1)              (2)          (3)              (4)
Total Migrants (1967-1977)*Early Treatment Cohorts (λ1)                 0.341**                      0.032***
                                                                                         (0.125)                                (0.011)
Total Migrants (1967-1977)*Late Treatment Cohorts (λ2)                                  0.482***                               0.043***
                                                                                         (0.162)                                (0.014)
Total Migrants (1967-1977)*Post-Treatment Cohorts (λ3)                                    0.347*                                 0.024
                                                                                         (0.168)                                (0.016)
Deferred Pay per capita (1967-1977)*Early Treatment Cohorts (λ1)                                            0.316***                               0.029**
                                                                                                             (0.103)                                (0.013)
Deferred Pay per capita (1967−1977)*Late Treatment Cohorts (λ2)                                             0.428***                               0.038***
                                                                                                             (0.134)                                (0.015)
Deferred Pay per capita (1967−1977)*Post-Treatment Cohorts (λ3)                                             0.252***                                 0.016
                                                                                                             (0.080)                                (0.011)
Additional controls, District FE                                                             Y                  Y                  Y                   Y
Trend interactions                                                                           Y                  Y                  Y                   Y
N                                                                                          480                440                480                  440
Mean of outcome variable                                                                   2.56               2.56               0.41                0.41
p value of Chi2 test H0: λ1=λ2                                                             0.00               0.00               0.02                0.02
p value of Chi2 test H0: λ1=λ3                                                             0.96               0.66               0.63                0.52
p value of Chi2 test H0: λ2=λ3                                                                0.20              0.27                0.17                0.29
Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively,
and evaluated relative to the small sample t distribution to account for the small number of clusters. Unit of observation is the district-5 year age group-
gender cell. The outcomes are average years of schooling attained by the district-cohort-gender group and the share of each district-gender-cohort group
with any primary schooling. Vector of controls includes age eligibilty dummies, female, age group dummies, a Census year indicator, two region fixed
effects, the log of district-level population density in 1931 and share of literate youth in 1945 and the interaction of density and literacy with trend.
Instruments include: Number of Wenela stations in the district interacted with eligibility in 1967-1973, in 1974-1977, and post-1977 dummies.
Coefficients evaluated at the mean number of migrants (3,445) and mean Kwacha per person (40). Sample includes adults ages 20 to 44 in 1977 and 1998
census. See Appendix Table 1 for first stage regressions.
          Table 7: Long run effects of labor migration shocks on education: Heterogeneous effects in estate and non-estate districts
                                                                      Total years of education             Share with any primary school
                                                                      Impacts in districts with                Impacts in districts with
                                                                    Estates             No Estates          Estates              No Estates
                                                                      (1)                    (2)               (3)                    (4)
Early Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations                       0.097**               0.149***            0.014*               0.014***
                                                                    (0.039)               (0.044)           (0.006)                (0.004)
Late Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations                        0.147**               0.215***            0.019*               0.021***
                                                                    (0.059)               (0.054)           (0.009)                (0.005)
Post-Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations                          0.076               0.200***            0.010                0.018***
                                                                    (0.065)               (0.038)           (0.008)                (0.003)
Additional controls, district FE and trend interactions                Y                      Y                 Y                      Y
N                                                                     160                   320               160                    320
R2                                                                   0.86                   0.86              0.85                   0.84
Mean of outcome variable                                             2.30                   2.69              0.39                   0.42
Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively, and evaluated
relative to the small sample t distribution to account for the small number of clusters. Unit of observation is the district-5 year age group-gender cell. Estate denotes
those districts which have substantial presence of tobacco and sugar estates, as described in the text. All regressions control for female, age group dummies, the log of
district-level population density in 1931, the share of literate youths in 1945, historical literacy and population density interacted with a national trend, a full set of
district and region fixed effects and region-specific trends. Number of Wenela stations is a count variable.
      Table 8 : Effects of labor migration shocks on change in shares of children working, 1968 to 1977
                                                                                              Non-estate
                                                        Full sample       Estate districts
                                                                                               districts
                                                                         (1)                     (2)                    (3)
Post Dummy (=1 in 1977)*Num. Wenela stations                           -0.010**               0.195***              -0.013***
                                                                       (0.004)                 (0.024)                (0.004)
Additional controls                                                       Y                       Y                      Y
District FE                                                               Y                       Y                      Y
Region trends                                                             Y                       Y                      Y
N                                                                        92                      32                     60
R2                                                                      0.71                    0.86                   0.76
Mean of outcome variable                                                0.18                    0.20                   0.17
Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by
***, **, and *, respectively, and evaluated relative to the small sample t distribution to account for the small number of clusters.
Unit of observation is the district-5 year age group-gender cell for the age group 10-14 years. Outcome is the share of children
working in 1968 or in 1977. Vector of controls includes a dummy for the year of observation being 1977, female, two region
fixed effects, the log of district-level population density in 1931, the share of literate youths in 1945 and historical literacy and
population density interacted with post dummies. Number of Wenela stations in the district is a count variable.
                                                      Appendix Table 1: First stage estimates for IV scaling

                                                            Total Migrants Total Migrants Total Migrants                  Deferred           Deferred           Deferred
                                                                (1967-         (1967-         (1967-                     Pay(1967-          Pay(1967-          Pay(1967-
                                                             1977)*Early    1977)*Late     1977)*Post-                  1977)*Early        1977)*Early         1977)*Late
                                                              Treatment      Treatment      Treatment                    Treatment          Treatment           Treatment
                                                               Cohorts        Cohorts        Cohorts                      Cohorts            Cohorts             Cohorts

                                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)                           (4)                 (5)                (6)
Early Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations                1.14740e+03**      47.663        38.130                        13.779               1.422              1.137
                                                               (454.094)      (82.981)      (66.385)                      (10.394)             (0.849)            (0.680)
Late Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations                      16.822   1.22198e+03***     67.289                         0.502              16.004              2.007
                                                                (29.287)     (380.489)     (117.149)                       (0.300)            (10.239)            (1.199)
Post-Treatment Cohorts*Num Wenela stations                       21.869       109.344   1.22535e+03***                      0.652               3.262             16.104
                                                                (38.074)     (190.368)     (377.883)                       (0.390)             (1.949)           (10.236)

Additional controls, district fixed effects                        Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y
Trend interaction terms                                            Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y
N                                                                 480                 480                480                 440                440                 440
R2                                                                0.47                0.45               0.40                0.56               0.55                0.51
F statistic on instruments (interaction term)                     7.73                7.73               7.73                2.77               2.77                2.77
Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively, and evaluated relative to the small sample t distribution to account
for the small number of clusters. Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. Unit of observation is the district-5 year age group-gender cell. Outcomes are
eligibility dummies interacted with the change in the number (stock) of migrants between 1966 and 1977 (columns 1 to 3) or with the total deferred pay flows per
capita in the district between 1966 and 1977 (columsn 4 to 6). All regressions control for female, age dummies, the log of district-level population density in 1931, the
share of literate youths in 1945 and a full set of district fixed effects. Trends are interacted with baseline population density, baseline literacy, and region fixed effects.
                                FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

Appendix 1: Data

This appendix describes the main data sources used in the paper and the construction of main outcome
and explanatory variables

1. Education and demographic variables from 1998 Census
      We use 100% microdata from the 1998 Census. These data are available from the Malawi
       National Statistics Office and from IPUMSI (https://international.ipums.org/international/).
      Variables include: total years of schooling attained for everyone in the data, current geographic
       location (region anddistrict of the individual), age and gender. We create additional education
       variables: whether someone has attained any primary schooling, whether someone has completed
       primary schooling, and whether an individual reports being bilingual or not


2. Education and demographic variables from the 1977 Census
      We digitize aggregate data tables constructed from the 100% microdata of the 1977 Census,
       reported in Malawi 1977 Population Census Final Report Volumes I and II, Malawi National
       Statistics Office, Zomba
      Data are available at national, region and district level, and sometimes at district, sex and five-
       year cohort level.
      Variables we use include: total years of schooling attained by each gender-five year age group at
       district level, the share of each district-gender-five year age group cell that has ever been to
       primary school, and the cell counts for each district-gender-five year age cell.
       We also use data on the number of men reporting a return from working abroad by district and
       five year age group, since the prior 1966 Census, and the number of boys and girls aged 10 to 19
       who are employed outside the home, employed in the home, and enrolled in school


3. Historic variables from older Census data
      Aggregate tables presented at the district level are available from published reports for the
       1931(Report on the Census of 1931, Nyasaland Protectorate), 1945 (Report on the Census of
       1945, Nyasaland Protectorate) and 1966 (Malawi 1966 Population Census Final Report, Malawi
       National Statistics Office, Zomba) Malawian Census. We digitized various tables from these
       reports and matched them to current definitions of district boundaries
      Variables include: the log of population density in 1931 and 1945, the share of youth who are
       literate (English and the vernacular) in 1945, the fraction of men employed in different sectors
       (farming/non-farming, working for wages/no wages, unemployed) in 1966, and the number of
       adult men who work abroad in 1966, reported at the district level


4. Geographic variables
      Altitude: we compute altitude for each point on the Malawian grid map using data from the
       national map seamless server (http://seamless.usgs.gov/index.php) and the Viewshed tool in
       ArcGIS. We aggregate these measures to district level.
      We define areas of high, medium or low malaria susceptibility based on standard measures of
       altitude: high malaria areas (altitude below 650m), medium malaria areas (altitudes between
       650m and 1100m) and low malaria areas (altitudes over 1100m).
      We create a district boundary crosswalk that links districts over time (across Census waves) and
       across name changes. We assign variables measured in earlier years to later Census district
       boundaries in this way:
           o   For districts that were eventually combined in later years, we add district level values
               together
           o   For districts split apart in later years, we apportion district totals to split districts using the
               fraction of physical area that each split district accounts for within the total district.
      We identify which districts contain a large tea or tobacco plantation using information in
       Christiansen (1984). The FAO’s crop suitability index measuring whether a district is highly
       suitable for tobacco or tea production significantly predicts this estate district indicator. Because
       of the coarseness of this measure, there is uncaptured variation within estate districts in the
       prevalence of estate lands out of total district agricultural lands.


5. Administrative data
      Figure 1 is constructed using the location of Wenela/TEBA recruiting stations in 1937. We
       collected and digitized this historical data using a variety of sources. The main source included
       “Correspondence from the Secretariat, Zomba, Nyasaland 1935 (Circular number 8 1935,
       S1/169/35). We verified these stations were still open in later years using information from later
       Provincial Administration Reports (Northern Province: 7th December 1961 Ref. No. O.3.37 and
       Commissioner for Labour Circular, 25th March 1957)
   Figure 2 is constructed using national labor migration totals from a variety of sources including:
    Chirwa (1991 for years 1950-1958); Lipton (1980: for years 1959-1994); Crush, Jeeves and
    Yudelman (1991: pp234-235) and various years of TEBA Annual Reports
                                                 FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

Appendix 2: Diagnosing selective attrition in the 1998 Census

Because life expectancy in Malawi was only 46 years in the late 1990s
(http://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Malawi/Life_expectancy/), we are concerned about mortality
selection at ages over 40 affecting the composition of our sample. Specifically, we worry that this
mortality selection may be differential across districts with and without recruiting stations. In this
appendix, we use the 1977 and 1998 Census to diagnose this selective attrition and motivate our use of
the 1977 Census data to construct estimates of educational attainment among the older cohorts in our
analysis.1

Assuming that education is completed by age 20 in 1977, we can compare mean educational attainment
for five year cohorts of those aged 20 to 44 in 1977 with the mean educational attainment of the five year
age cohorts for those aged 41 to 65 in 1998.2 At one extreme, if there is no mortality at all, mean
education rates should match up for the same cohorts across Census waves. If there is any attrition
(mortality) of those less educated between 1977 and 1998, then the mean education gap by cohort should
be positive. Appendix 2 Figure 1 below shows just this.

     Appendix 2 Figure 1: Mean education by cohort in 1998 using 1977 and 1998 Census data
                                     3.5    3
                             mean education
                                  2.52
                                     1.5




                                                40   45       50            55           60   65
                                                          five year age group in 1998

                                                                1998              1977




Mean years of education (on the y axis) for each age group is higher in 1998 than for the corresponding
age group in 1977, suggesting higher mortality rates among the less educated between 1977 and 1998.


1
  The question “What is the highest level of schooling you have attended?” is identical in the 1977 and 1998 Census’
and the same coding system for different levels of education is used in both waves.
2
  Note that we cannot do this reliably for younger cohorts in 1977 (i.e for those 36-40 in 1998), since many of those
under 20 are still in school.
Of greater concern for our identification strategy is differential mortality selection of the less educated in
Wenela districts. The table below presents coefficients from a regression of the gap in mean completed
years of education at district level (1998 levels minus 1977 levels) on dummies for each five year age
cohort and interactions of each cohort dummy with number of recruiting stations in the district (the
constant coefficient and coefficient on the number of recruiting stations are suppressed). All Wenela
interaction terms are positive, and the interaction terms are jointly significantly different than zero. This
means that the less-educated cohorts in Wenela regions are less likely to survive to 1998 than the less-
educated cohorts in non-Wenela regions.

           Appendix 2 Table 1: Diagnosing selective attrition between 1977 and 1998
Age 40-44*Number of Wenela Stations                                   0.0413
                                                                     (0.0255)
Age 45-49*Number of Wenela Stations                                   0.0288
                                                                     (0.0212)
Age 50-54*Number of Wenela Stations                                 0.0508***
                                                                     (0.0192)
Age 55-59*Number of Wenela Stations                                 0.0377**
                                                                     (0.0173)
Age 60-64*Number of Wenela Stations                                  0.0313*
                                                                     (0.0183)
Age 40-44                                                           0.348***
                                                                     (0.0938)
Age 45-49                                                            0.193**
                                                                     (0.0818)
Age 50-54                                                           0.405***
                                                                     (0.0878)
Age 55-59                                                           0.322***
                                                                     (0.0742)
Age 60-64                                                           0.423***
                                                                     (0.0821)
N                                                                      135
R2                                                                    0.654
N=189. Observation is the district-five year cohort. Outcome is the difference in mean level of education (1998 and
1977) measured for the district-five year cohort. Robust standard errors. F-statistic for interaction terms is 3.83 (p
value is 0.003)

Together, these results suggest that using only the 1998 Census for our analysis would result in
downwards-biased estimates of education gaps across Wenela and non-Wenela districts in the pre-
treatment cohorts. That is, we would end up controlling for larger positive education gaps between the
older cohorts in Wenela relative to non-Wenela districts, and would estimate smaller effects on
educational attainment among the treatment cohorts in our difference-in-differences strategy.

We can illustrate the impact of ignoring the differential selective mortality across the Wenela and non-
Wenela districts on our estimates. In Appendix 2 Figure 2, we present point estimates from the difference-
in-differences specification that generates our main result in Figure 4 of the paper. Instead of constructing
the synthetic cohort of older pre-treatment age groups (ages 45 and over) from the 1977 Census as we do
in Figure 4, we only use the 1998 Census to produce the graph below. The results in Appendix 2 Table 2
indicate that among the older age groups, less educated individuals have been differentially selected out in
Wenela areas. Because we lose these people by 1998, the figure indicates an increase in the education gap
between Wenela and non-Wenela cohorts even among the pre-treatment cohorts. This is the effect of
differential selective attrition in Wenela districts.

Appendix 2 Figure 2: Estimated differences in education by age group and Wenela status of district
                                                                                            using 1998 cohorts only


                                                                0.2
    Difference in coefficients on cohort dummies for WENELA




                                                              0.15
                    and non-WENELA districts




                                                                0.1




                                                              0.05




                                                                 0
                                                                      55 to 59   50 to 54    45 to 49   40 to 44   35 to 39    30 to 34     25 to 29    20 to 24

                                                                                                           Early and late treated cohorts                 Post-
                                                                             Pre-treatment cohorts                                                     treatment
                                                              -0.05
                                                                                                  Cohort age in 1998                                     cohort



We still see the largest impacts on education gaps between Wenela and non-Wenela areas concentrated in
the Early and Late treatment cohorts, as we do in our main results. However, the size of the effect is
smaller because of the bias coming from pre-treatment differences in the education gap. The point
estimates that correspond to the specification used to produce our main results in Table 5 but using only
the 1998 Census in Appendix 2 Table 2. The difference in differences terms are still significantly
different than zero for years of education, share with any primary schooling and two additional outcomes,
the share literate in English and the share bilingual (English and Chichewe), although smaller, as we
might expect from the discussion in this appendix.

    Appendix 2 Table 2: Long run effects of labor migration shocks on education: Difference-in-
                               differences results 1998 data only
                                 Total years of      Share with
                                                                   Share English
                                    schooling       any primary                     Share bilingual
                                                                       literate
                                     attained        schooling
                                  (1)       (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)       (6)    (7)       (8)
Early Treatment Cohorts*Num.             0.064**   0.060***   0.004*    0.004**   0.006**   0.005**    0.006**   0.005**
Wenela stations (1)                     (0.024)    (0.020)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.002)    (0.003)   (0.002)


Late Treatment Cohorts*Num.              0.066**   0.059***    0.003     0.004    0.008**   0.005***   0.008**   0.005***
Wenela stations (2)                     (0.028)    (0.018)   (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.002)    (0.004)   (0.002)


Post-Treatment Cohorts*Num.               0.034     0.026     -0.002     0.000     0.004     0.001      0.004     0.001
Wenela stations (3)                     (0.028)    (0.022)   (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.002)    (0.004)   (0.002)


Trend interactions                          N         Y         N         Y         N          Y         N          Y
N                                          432       432       432       432       432        432       432        432
R2                                        0.96       0.97      0.95      0.95      0.95       0.96      0.95       0.96
Mean of outcome variable                  3.66       3.66      0.60      0.60      0.36       0.36      0.36       0.36
p value of F test H0: 1=2               0.88       0.96      0.49      0.87      0.46       0.76      0.46       0.77
p value of F test H0: 1=               0.17       0.15      0.04      0.17      0.32       0.11      0.32       0.11
p value of F test H0: 3               0.02       0.04      0.01      0.04      0.02       0.02      0.02       0.02
Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is
indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively, and evaluated relative to the small sample t distribution to account for the
small number of clusters. Unit of observation is the district-five year age cohort-gender cell. Vector of controls
included in every regression: female dummy, cohort dummies, two region fixed effects, the log of district-level
population density in 1931 and the share of literate youths in 1945, as well as district fixed effects. In the second
specification for each outcome, trend terms are interacted with region fixed effects, baseline population density and
baseline literacy rates. Number of Wenela stations in the district is a count variable. Sample includes adults ages 20
to 64 in the 1998 census.
                                    FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

Appendix 3: Bounding results for composition effects from internal migration

Internal migration poses one possible threat to the validity of our main results. Because neither the 1977
nor 1998 Census captures district of birth, we potentially mismeasure childhood exposure to Wenela
recruiting stations among those people who move across districts after completing education, but before
we see them in the relevant Census year. Internal migration flows are unlikely randomly allocated across
districts. Without knowing more about differences in the magnitude and direction of migrant flows across
districts, this possible misclassification of exposure to Wenela stations generates unpredictable biases in
our estimates.

To see why, consider the following. Suppose all districts have the same average level of education before
internal migration. If more educated adults move from non-Wenela to Wenela districts while less
educated adults move in the opposite direction, this generates artificially positive differences in adult
educational attainment across districts that we would ascribe to exposure to Wenela stations. As long as
this sorting is constant over time, then the Wenela dummy in our regressions (as well as district fixed
effects) controls for these observed differences in educational attainment driven by internal migration. If,
however, internal migration flows differ by district as well as cohort then our results could be the result of
complicated changes in the composition of population at the district level.

In the absence of individual level data on birth districts, we bound our effect sizes for possible
composition changes induced by internal migration. We combine information on net migration rates from
the 1977 Census with assumptions about possible levels of education of net migrants. First, we use 1977
Census data to construct the number of net migrants per person currently living in the district for each
district in each five-year cohort and gender cell. We call this the net migration rate, or NetMigRateasd. In
our data, this number is always between -0.35 and 0.29.1 We need to assume that this net migration rate is
the same in 1977 and 1998, since the 1998 Census contains no information on district of birth. Second,
we assume that all migrants – whether they show up as in- or outmigrants in a particular district – have




1
  Census 1977 counts the number of people in each district, cohort, and gender cell and enumerates how many of
these individuals were born in each district. The net migration rate is computed as the difference between total in-
migrants and total out-migrants divided by total current population in the district; it is the number of net migrants
(in-migrants – out-migrants) per person living in the district. A 0.2 net migration rate means that for every person
living in the district, there are 0.2 net in-migrants.
the same level of education and therefore we need only account for the potential education of net
migrants, the difference between in- and outmigrants.2

We adjust our education variables (           measured at district, cohort, and gender level:

                                                                ∗
                                                                                           (A.1)

                                                                ∗    ∗
                                    =
                                                                ∗


                                                            ∗
                                    =


where BOUND = {upper, lower},                   represents the adjusted mean education outcome at district,
cohort, and gender level, Nasd is total population in a district-cohort-gender cell,           is either the
maximum or minimum value of the relevant education variable across all districts at cohort and gender
level, and NetMigrantsasd is the total number of net migrants in a district-cohort-gender cell.
NetMigrantsasd is estimated by multiplying the total population in that district-cohort-gender cell with the
net migration rate (NetMigRateasd) for that cell. Each component of (A.1) comes from the relevant Census
wave, except for NetMigRateasd which is computed using 1977 Census data and applied to both Census
waves. We estimate the main regression specifications for our sample after creating these adjusted
education variables, one set for each of the extreme values of            , or

                                                                      ∗
                                                                                 and


                                                                            ∗
                                                                                       .
                                                     1

There are two notable features of equation (A.1). First, the adjustments we make for internal migration
imply that          and          provide upper and lower bounds on mean education and average share of
adults with any primary school across the entire sample. Second, despite these names, these adjustments
do not imply that the difference-in-differences regressions using these new variables will produce
estimates that contain our main education results. This is because in a closed system (i.e. the whole of
Malawi) some districts are receiving districts (NetMigRateasd>0) while others are sending districts


2
 For example: if there are 110 in-migrants and 100 out-migrants to a particular district, and in-migrants and out-
migrants have the same levels of education, the only change in composition that occurs as a result of this net
migration is due to the additional 10 people who migrated into the district.
(NetMigRateasd<0). In order for           >           or         <     , the following equations should hold (note
that in our sample, 1                         > 0 in all cases):

                                                  ∗                       0           (A.2)

                                                  ∗                       0           (A.3)

Since                 and                in all districts, these equations are only satisfied for receiving
districts that have                      0. To see this, assume that we impute the minimum level of
education for net migrants, Then,             >            is satisfied only in receiving districts because our
adjustments take out the low levels of education of net in-migrants to create a higher adjusted mean
education variable. For sending districts, where                               0, the inequality in (A.2) is reversed
and                   . Similarly, when we impute the maximum level of education for net migrants,
equation (A.3) will only be satisfied in receiving districts; subtracting high levels of net in-migrant
education generates                   . In sending districts, (A.3) is reversed, so                     .

Because we have both sending and receiving districts in our sample, and because rates of internal
migration in 1977 are different across Wenela and non-Wenela districts (rates of in-migration are higher
in Wenela districts, results not shown), our adjustments have different effects on the bounds values in
specific Wenela and non-Wenela districts. More complicated patterns of net migration that vary across
exposed and non-exposed cohorts and across Wenela and non-Wenela areas imply that adjustments for
internal migration may generate in difference-in-differences estimates that do not bound our main result.3
Nevertheless, it is still a useful exercise to check whether internal migration modelled in this way appears
to confound our results.

Appendix Table 2 displays results from difference-in-differences regressions estimated using the adjusted
education variables, first including all controls and district fixed effects, and then adding in trend
interactions with region fixed effects, baseline literacy and baseline population density. We compare the
coefficients in this table with the main estimates in Table 5.

First, assuming net migrants have the maximum level of schooling in the district-cohort-gender cell for a
given Census year, the presence of anyone new in a receiving district raises mean education and their
absence from a birth district artificially deflates that district’s average education. Adjusting for these

3
 Crudely, if net migration rates are more likely positive in Wenela districts among exposed cohorts, we would be
doing more “receiving district” adjustments in our core treatment groups and more “sending district” adjustments in
our control groups.
educated net migrants, we still see large, positive impacts of exposure to treatment among exposed
cohorts: those exposed during the labor expansion have 0.14 more years of education, while those
exposed during the labor contraction have 0.2 more years of education. The education gap between
Wenela and non-Wenela districts for the post-treatment group continues to be positive, at around 0.16
more years of education. Second, if we instead assume that net migrants are uneducated, removing them
from our outcome measure in receiving districts and adding them back to sending districts reveals similar,
large positive impacts of exposure to mine employment shocks. The difference-in-differences estimates in
columns (3) and (4) imply that exposed cohorts in Wenela areas gained between 0.16 and 0.25 more years
of education. Post-treatment groups continue to have about 0.22 more years of education in Wenela
relative to non-Wenela areas, controlling for differences between these areas using the oldest pre-
treatment cohorts. These bounds compare favorably to our main results in Table 5, 0.12 and 0.179 more
years of education (Table 5, column 3).

Results are similar when we use the share with any primary school as outcome. In Table 5, directly
exposed cohorts from districts with more Wenela stations are 1.1 to 2.6 percentage points more likely to
have ever attended primary school. After adjusting for internal migration in Appendix Table 2 columns
(5)-(8), these exposed cohorts from districts with Wenela stations are between 1.2 and 2.4 percentage
points more likely to have ever been to primary school. All of our estimates are statistically different from
zero at the 1, 5 or 10% level. Looking at the final three rows of the table, we see that we can strongly
reject that the impacts of the migration shock on education are the same for the labor expansion and labor
contraction cohorts, and we can reject that the impacts on primary school access for the labor contraction
cohorts and the youngest post-treatment cohorts are the same. However, as in the case of our main results
in Table 5, we cannot reject that the impacts for the post-treatment cohorts and the labor expansion
cohorts are the same. We see the same inverted U-shaped pattern of coefficients in our bounded results as
in the main results. The results of this bounding exercise suggest that selective internal migration and any
resulting measurement error in Wenelad cannot account for our main effects.
                           Appendix 3 Table 1: Long run effects of labor migration shocks on education: Bounds for internal migration
                                                                     Total years of education                       Share with any primary school
                                                                                                                                   Highest share with              Lowest share with
Assumptions about migrant education:                                  Max. schooling                  Min. schooling
                                                                                                                                    primary school                  primary school
                                                                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)
Early Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations (β 1)                0.142***        0.136***         0.163**        0.164**         0.014***       0.012***        0.015***        0.014***
                                                                   (0.048)         (0.044)         (0.059)         (0.063)         (0.005)        (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.005)
Late Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations (β 2)                 0.202***        0.191***        0.251***        0.252**         0.020***       0.016***        0.024***         0.021**
                                                                   (0.067)         (0.060)         (0.084)         (0.090)         (0.007)        (0.005)         (0.007)         (0.007)
Post-Treatment Cohorts*Num. Wenela stations (β 3)                  0.168**         0.153**        0.220***        0.222**         0.015**          0.011*        0.019***         0.015*
                                                                   (0.062)         (0.062)         (0.076)         (0.088)         (0.005)        (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.007)
District FE                                                           Y               Y               Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y
Region trends                                                         N               Y               N               Y               N              Y               N               Y
N                                                                    480             480             480             480             480            480             480             480
R2                                                                   0.83            0.86            0.83            0.85           0.824           0.84            0.82            0.83
Mean of outcome variable                                             2.53            2.53            2.59            2.59            0.41           0.41            0.41            0.41
p value of F test H0: β 1=β 2                                        0.01            0.00           0.00            0.01            0.01            0.02            0.00            0.02
p value of F test H0: β 1=β 3                                        0.22            0.56           0.02            0.09            0.56            0.69            0.10            0.76
p value of F test H0: β 2=β 3                                        0.01            0.09           0.04            0.12            0.01            0.07            0.01            0.04
Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively, and evaluated relative to the small sample t distribution to account for the small
number of clusters. Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. Unit of observation is the district-5 year age group-gender cell. Vector of controls includes female, age
group dummies, two region fixed effects, the log of district-level population density in 1931 and the share literate in 1931, and historical density, historical literacy and region fixed
effects interacted with a trend term. Number of Wenela stations in the district is a count variable. Outcomes are our estimates of the bounds on education and share in primary
school, after accounting for maximum and minimum possible values of each variable for the number of net migrants in each age-gender cell. Details of variable construction are
explained in the text. Sample includes adults ages 20 to 44 in 1977 and 1998 census.
                                 FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

Appendix 4: Constructing exact p values for Table 5 results using randomization inference

Our empirical strategy exploits pre-existing spatial variation in migration costs across 24 districts within
Malawi. The relatively small number of districts leads to a concern that standard inference procedures
will over-reject the null hypothesis of zero impact of district-level exposure to the labor migration shock.
We deal with this concern by presenting robust standard errors clustered at the district-level in Table 5
and obtain p values to indicate statistical significance using the small sample t distribution adjusted for
the number of covariates that are constant within the cluster.

An alternative approach is to construct exact p values using randomization inference (Fisher, 1935;
Rosenbaum 2002; see Cohen and Dupas 2010 for an example of how this is done in the context of a
randomized controlled trial with 16 clusters and a single treatment). The idea behind this approach is as
follows:

   We randomly assign the actual distribution of Wenela stations to districts and estimate the difference-
    in-difference models of Table 5 for this “false” assignment. The false allocation mimics the true
    distribution of stations
   Since there are over 1.3 million ways to allocate Wenela stations (the range of this variable is 0 to 10)
    to the 24 districts, we generate 1,000 different random assignments of stations to districts and
    estimate the difference-in-differences regression for each allocation.
   We compute the empirical distribution of t statistics for each of the three main parameters (1, 2 and
    3) generated by these 1,000 false assignments
   We compare the actual t statistics from Table 5 to the empirical distribution of test statistics for each
    parameter and compute the probability of observing a t statistic in the tails of this distribution. The
    resulting p values, denoted randomization inference p values are presented in the table below.

In all cases, we can reject the null of zero impact at the 10% level. In most cases, for the estimates of 1
and 2, we can also reject the null of zero impact at the 5% level.

References
Cohen, Jessica and Pascaline Dupas, 2010 “Free distribution or cost-sharing? Evidence from a
   randomized malaria prevention experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 125 (1): 1-45
Fisher, Ronald A. 1935 The Design of Experiments London: Oliver and Boyd.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. 2002 Observational Studies New York: Springer-Verlag.
Appendix 4 Table 1: Randomization inference pvalues for difference-in-differences estimates of Table 5

                                                                 Outcome is: Share with any primary
                           Outcome is: Years of schooling
p value for:                                                                     school
H0: 1=0                       0.001                 0.001               0.001               0.016
H0: 2=0                       0.009                 0.012               0.013               0.011
H0: 3=0                       0.013                 0.031               0.009               0.084
Other controls?                  Y                     Y                   Y                   Y
District FE?                     Y                     Y                   Y                   Y
Trend interactions               N                     Y                   N                   Y
                                  FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

Appendix 5: Correlations between human capital formation and household well-being in Malawi

Given concerns about the quality of education provided in poor countries, it is worthwhile asking whether
there is any evidence that more years of schooling and more skills learned in school are valuable in
Malawi. We use data from the 2004 Malawi Integrated Household Survey to estimate the relationship
between total assets owned by the household (as a summary measure of household well-being) and
human capital attainment of the head of the household. There are too few wage earners in the data to
examine the relationship between individual education and wages.

We restrict the sample to all rural households in the survey where the head is between the ages of 26 and
60 in 2004, leaving us with 85% of the initial survey. We calculate total assets owned by the household
(the range is 0 to 31; the mean is 6.9) and regress this index on four different measures of human capital
of the household head: total years of schooling attained, whether the head has been to primary school, and
self-reported literacy in English and Chichewa (the person reports that they can read a one page letter in
the relevant language). Using the education of the head of household (rather than the maximum level of
education in the household) is a meaningful way to characterize how much human capital the household
has access to, since there are few three-generation households in the sample. Literacy reflects skills
acquired in the lower levels of primary school: 88% of household heads with four years of completed
education report being literate in Chichewa, and literacy rates increase from 47% to 72% between two
and three years of total schooling.

Appendix 4 Table 1 presents the results of regressing our asset index on the four human capital measures
for three specifications: one without controls, a second adding controls for age and gender of the
household head, household size, historical district characteristics (literacy, population density) and region
fixed effects, and a third that includes district fixed effects. Results indicate a robust, large and positive
relationship between each human capital measure and the household asset index. In the first three
columns of the table, we see that an additional year of schooling is correlated with about one third more
total assets (columns 1-3), which is a 5-6% return per year of schooling. For a household head with any
primary school, assets are 7% higher (columns 4 and 5). Returns to literacy are particularly large: having
a literate household head raises total assets in the household by over two; a 30% gain. While usual
concerns about selection and measurement error caution us against interpreting these point estimates as
exactly causal, the strong positive relationship between human capital attained in childhood and measures
of household well-being in adulthood provide some evidence that education, and skills learned at school,
are indeed valuable in Malawi.1




1
 Our results are consistent with findings in Chirwa and Matita (2009), who use Mincerian regressions to show that
among wage earners working in urban areas of Malawi, the return to completed primary education is 5 percent.
                            Appendix 5 Table 1: Correlation between household asset index and human capital of household head
                                                                 Outcome: Total assets owned by household [mean=6.9]
                                    (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)     (9)      (10)                                    (11)        (12)
Human capital of household head
Years of education           0.380*** 0.362*** 0.361***
                              (0.023) (0.023) (0.019)
Any primary school                                                         0.253 0.471*** 0.473***
                                                                          (0.165) (0.148) (0.146)
Literate in English                                                                                           2.531*** 2.217*** 2.185***
                                                                                                               (0.129) (0.130) (0.130)
Literate in Chichewa                                                                                                                               2.435*** 2.061*** 2.005***
                                                                                                                                                    (0.148) (0.166) (0.147)

N                                     6,771       6,771        6,771       6,771       6,771       6,771        6,794       6,794       6,794       6,794       6,794        6,794
Effect size: % of mean assets           6%          5%           5%          4%          7%          7%          37%         32%         32%         35%         30%          29%

Additional controls?                     N           Y           Y           N            Y           Y           N           Y            Y           N           Y           Y
District FE?                             N           N           Y           N            N           Y           N           N            Y           N           N           Y
Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. Unit of observation
is the household; household head's level of education is the main regressor in each specification. Sample includes all rural households where the household head is between
the ages of 26 and 60 in 2004. Additional controls include age of household head, whether the head is female, household size, the log of district-level population density in
1931, the share of literate youths in the district in 1945, and region fixed effects. All regressions are weighted using household weights. Data are from the 2004/2005 Malawi
Integrated Household Survey.
