NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN FIXED-TERM CONTRACTS PUT LOW SKILLED YOUTH ON A BETTER
CAREER PATH? EVIDENCE FROM SPAIN
J. Ignacio García-Pérez
Judit Vall Castelló
Ioana Marinescu
Working Paper 22048
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22048

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016

Our thanks to A. Hijzen, S. Bentolila, and A. Novo for all their comments, and to the audience at Harris
School of Public Policy (Chicago), the OECD Employment Directorate, the SAEe 2013 (Santander),
the 8th IZA/World Bank Conference on Employment and Development, (Bonn), THEMA(University
of Cergy-Pointoise, Paris), the ESPE-2014 (Braga), the Workshop on “Labour Markets during crises”
(NUY Maynooth), the 3rd SEEK Conference at ZEW, Mannheim, the SOLE/EALE world meetings
in Montreal 2015. J. Ignacio Garcia Perez acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry
of Economics and from the Regional Government of Andalusia (research grants no. SEJ-6882/ECON
and ECO2010-21706). Judit Vall Castello acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry
of Economics and Competition (research grant ECO201231081). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by J. Ignacio García-Pérez, Judit Vall Castelló, and Ioana Marinescu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Fixed-Term Contracts Put Low Skilled Youth on a Better Career Path? Evidence from
Spain
J. Ignacio García-Pérez, Judit Vall Castelló, and Ioana Marinescu
NBER Working Paper No. 22048
February 2016
JEL No. J3,J41,J48,J64
ABSTRACT
By reducing the commitment made by employers, fixed-term contracts can help low-skilled youth
find a first job. However, the long-term impact of fixed-term contracts on these workers’ careers may
be negative. Using Spanish social security data, we analyze the impact of a large liberalization in the
regulation of fixed-term contracts in 1984. Using a cohort regression discontinuity design, we find
that the reform raised the likelihood of male high-school dropouts working before age 19 by 9%. However,
in the longer run, the reform reduced number of days worked (by 4.5%) and earnings (by 9%).

J. Ignacio García-Pérez
Universidad Pablo de Olavide
jigarper@upo.es
Judit Vall Castelló
Centre for Research in Health and Economics
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
08005 BARCELONA (SPAIN)
judit.vall@upf.edu

Ioana Marinescu
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ioanamarinescu@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

European countries typically have a high level of employment protection legislation (EPL),
making it expensive to dismiss workers on permanent contracts. While EPL does not
reduce overall employment, it has an adverse effect on the employment of workers with
low and hard to observe productivity, such as youth (OECD, 2006). To address this
problem, a number of European countries have made it easier for firms to use fixed-term
contracts with lower firing costs. It was hoped that fixed-term contracts would help
improve the labor market outcomes of low skilled workers in high EPL countries.
But do fixed-term contracts really help? In theory, fixed-term contracts, by decreasing
firing costs, can help workers with uncertain credentials obtain employment. Moreover,
fixed-term contracts may help workers accumulate human capital as well as gain contacts
that can allow them to obtain better jobs in the future. On the other hand, there is a danger
that workers go from fixed-term contract to fixed-term contract, leading to lower
employment stability and no progression towards better jobs (Blanchard and Landier,
2002). In theory, the impact of fixed-term contracts on the labor market outcomes of
affected workers is therefore ambiguous.
The empirical evidence on the impact of fixed-term contracts and temporary work on the
labor market outcomes of affected workers is also mixed. A number of papers examine the
stepping stone hypothesis according to which temporary work helps workers land
permanent jobs. The evidence at the European level is mixed, with some papers finding
evidence of the stepping-stone hypothesis (D’Addio and Rosholm (2005); Booth,
Francesconi and Frank (2002), among others) while some other papers find that temporary
contracts do not improve access to permanent contracts (Zijl, Van Den Berg and Heyma,
2004). The evidence on temporary help jobs is also mixed with the best identified study
finding a somewhat negative impact of temporary work on earnings and employment in the
US (Autor and Houseman, 2010), while studies using European data find a positive effect
of temporary help jobs on securing permanent employment (e.g. Ichino, Mealli, and
Nannicini, 2008).
Even if fixed-term contracts can help workers secure permanent jobs, the long-term effects
of easily available fixed-term contracts remain uncertain. Indeed, when workers lose a
permanent job, they may be back on a fixed-term contract and their return to stable
employment may be delayed. The current literature only addresses the impact of temporary
2

work within a few months to a few years of the first temporary job, and the long-run impact
remains unknown.
Another limitation of the existing literature is that it compares people who did and did not
use temporary contracts (or temporary help agencies) within a given regulatory framework.
This research cannot therefore directly inform us about what happens when the regulation
of temporary work becomes less stringent. With a laxer regulation of fixed term contracts,
some unemployed workers may get a fixed term contract fairly quickly and then transition
to a permanent contract. However, it is possible, that, were fixed term contracts not easily
available, the same workers would have transitioned to a permanent contract even more
rapidly. Therefore, even if we believe the stepping stone hypothesis that, for an
unemployed worker, taking a fixed term contract is better than staying unemployed, this
does not imply that making fixed term contracts more easily available will increase the
proportion of low skilled workers in permanent contracts and benefit their careers. Overall,
both the long-term impact of temporary work on careers, and the overall impact of fixedterm contract regulation remain open questions.
In this paper, we use Spanish social security data to assess the long-term impact of fixedterm contract regulation on employment and earnings. Spain is an ideal ground for our
research because fixed-term contract use was liberalized early and Spain subsequently
became the OECD country with the highest share of fixed-term contracts (Dolado et al.,
2002). To assess the impact of fixed-term contracts, we track cohorts of workers who enter
the labor market before and after a 1984 reform that liberalized the use of fixed-term
contracts. We focus specifically on male high school dropouts because they are most likely
to be affected by the liberalization of this type of contracts. We assign their age of labor
market entry to be 16 as this is the minimum legal age to work in Spain and we know that
those individuals are high school dropouts.
Thus, using a cohort discontinuity design (see e.g. Borghans et al., 2014), we show that,
compared to workers who entered the labor market (turned 16) in the trimester just before
the reform, workers who enter the labor market (turned 16) in the trimester after the reform
experience a larger probability of working before age 19. However, workers who enter the
labor market after the reform also experience both lower days of work and lower earnings
over their subsequent career. We find that these losses are largest in the first ten years of
these workers’ careers. Based on the first ten years of potential labor market experience,
and after controlling for year and experience fixed effects, we estimate the loss in terms of
3

days of work to amount to 9.8 days per year (4.5% of average days worked). The earnings
loss is as high as 9% per year. Even for workers with more than ten years of potential
experience, the reform still has a significant, if smaller, negative effect on days worked and
earnings. Over 27 years of these high school dropouts’ careers, yearly earnings losses due
to the liberalization of fixed term contracts amount to 7.5%, a large and persistent effect.
We perform the same analysis for male high school graduates and find no effect of the
reform on days worked or earnings in the first ten years in the labor market. Using the high
school graduates as a control group, we can re-estimate the impact of the reform on high
school dropouts. In this difference-in-differences specification, we find a statistically
significant negative effect of the reform on days worked and earnings that is of similar
magnitude to the results based on the cohort discontinuity alone. These difference-indifferences results alleviate the concern that the estimated impact of the liberalization of
fixed-term contracts on high school dropouts is biased by other concurrent changes in the
labor market.
We also investigate the channels through which the reform negatively affects the careers of
male high school dropouts. One of the reasons why greater fixed-term contract availability
at the beginning of a worker’s career has a negative impact on long-run career outcomes is
that workers are more likely to work under non-permanent contracts well after labor market
entrance. This situation further exposes workers to the well known wage penalties
associated to both unemployment and temporary work.
This paper makes two key contributions to the literature. First, while previous literature on
the labor market impact of fixed term contracts has relied on regression adjustments and
other non-experimental techniques for identification, we use a cohort discontinuity design
and a difference-in-differences strategy that exploit a large change in Spanish regulation.
Second, our paper innovates by examining the long-term impact of fixed-term contracts on
young people’s career: Social Security data allows us to have more than 20 years of follow
up whereas previous literature examined outcomes over at most a few years. While most of
the previous literature on European labor markets finds a positive short run effect of fixedterm contracts and temporary work, we find a negative impact of fixed term contracts on
labor market outcomes in the long run. Our results are most similar to the quasiexperimental study of temporary help jobs in the US (Autor and Houseman, 2010). We
conclude that the combination of examining long-run outcomes and using a quasiexperimental design allows us to uncover substantial and previously undocumented
4

negative effects of lax fixed-term contract regulation on the long-term labor market
outcomes of low-skilled youth.
There have been a number of previous papers examining the use of fixed-term contracts in
Spain, but focusing on somewhat different issues from our paper.1 First, the previous
literature has examined the impact of fixed-term contract duration on the probability of
finding a permanent job. Most of those papers (see for example Güell and Petrongolo
(2007) or García-Pérez and Muñoz-Bullón (2011)) agree that the effect of temporary
contract duration on the probability of finding a permanent job is slightly increasing with
tenure at the temporary contract but mainly concentrated at specific durations of the
temporary contract (6, 12, 24 – the typical duration of these contracts-, and specially at the
36th. month, the maximum duration of such contracts in Spain). Second, the paper by
Rebollo (2011) stresses the idea that not only the number of temporary contracts and job
interruptions are important in determining the chances of a worker to find a permanent
contract but also the number of firms for which this person has worked is an important
determinant. Therefore, accumulating temporary contracts with the same firm reduces the
probability of getting a permanent contract while moving from one firm to another with a
temporary contract increases the chances of getting a permanent contract. Third, the
literature has examined the impact of fixed-term contracts on firms’ outcomes. Using the
simulations of a dynamic labor demand model, Aguirregabiria and Alonso-Borrego (2014)
evaluate the effects of the same labor market reform we are analyzing: the liberalization of
fixed term contracts in 1984. They find that both total employment2 and job turnover
increased due to the reform in Spanish manufacturing firms.
Our paper is also related to a literature that examines the long-term labor market impact of
entering the labor market under high unemployment. Kahn (2010), Moulton (2011) and
Oreopoulos et al. (2012) all find negative long-run wage effects of entering the labor
market under adverse economic conditions. Our work complements this literature by
examining the long-term impact of policy rather than macroeconomic conditions. Although
our regression discontinuity model identifies the impact of the policy by comparing two
1

Some recent papers as Bentolila, Cahuc, Dolado and Le Barbanchon (2012) or Costain, Jimeno and Thomas
(2010) analyze the effect of temporary contracts in Spain within the current context of economic crisis. The
former explores the extent to which the significantly larger increase in unemployment in Spain, versus
France, during the ongoing recession can be accounted for by the difference in EPL between the two
countries. The latter studies the extent to which the coexistence of permanent and temporary jobs accounts for
the volatility of employment in Spain. An also recent paper by Fernández-Kranz et al. (2015) finds that
having a permanent contract partially protects Spanish women against the part-time/full-time wage gap.
2
Examples of other papers analyzing the impact of employment protection legislation on firm outcomes are
Autor, Kerr and Kugler (2007) for the US, and Cingano et al. (2015) for Italy.

5

cohorts that enter the labor market only one trimester apart, in the robustness test section
we provide additional evidence that our results are not driven by different labor market
conditions at entry in these two consecutive trimesters.
The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we discuss the history of temporary contracts
in Spain. Section 3 describes the data and the empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the
results and some discussion and robustness checks are performed in section 5. Section 6
concludes.
2

History and current rules of temporary contracts in Spain

Historical background
During the time of Franco’s regime, the Spanish labor market was heavily regulated with a
single trade union to which both employers and employees had to belong and with strong
labor regulations to protect employment. This meant that, in reality, all jobs were full-time
jobs of a permanent nature. After Franco’s death in 1975 changes were introduced to relax
some of the previous regulations. The most important one was the legalization of free trade
unions and the abolishment of the single trade union in 1977.
It was not until 1980 that the strongest modernization of the labor relations system was
introduced in Spain with the approval of the Workers’ Statute. This law assumed every
contract to be an open-ended contract as a general case, whereas temporary contracts were
intended to be used only for jobs whose nature was temporary (seasonal jobs, temporary
substitution of permanent workers, etc). Furthermore, the Worker’s Statute kept most of the
restrictions on dismissals. Dismissed permanent workers would receive severance
payments that depend on whether the dismissal is fair or unfair. For fair dismissals,
severance payments equal to 20 days of salary per year of job tenure with a maximum of
one year wages, while for unfair dismissals severance payments amount to 45 days with a
maximum of 42 months of wages. The reasons for the dismissal to be considered as fair are
twofold: either the firm argues that the employee is incapable of performing his/her tasks or
it argues that there are economic or technological reasons that require the dismissal of the
worker. If a worker is dismissed under a fair dismissal by the firm but he/she does not
agree with the fairness of the process, he/she can sue the firm and a legal process begins in
which the firm has to pay the legal costs (in any case) as well as the wages of the worker if
the dismissal is finally judged to be unfair by the court. In reality, labor courts effectively
ruled most dismissals as unfair and so the costs of the legal process were usually higher for
6

the employer than the severance payment for unfair dismissals. Although temporary
contracts had a much lower severance payment (8 days per year of seniority), the
restrictions on the use of this type of contracts meant that their use was very limited during
the first half of the 1980s (Aguirregabiria and Alonso-Borrego, 2014; García-Pérez and
Muñoz-Bullón, 2011).
During the first half of the 1980s, the Spanish unemployment rate experienced a rapid
growth and it went over 20%. This event prompted the Spanish government to introduce a
new reform in 1984.3 This was the first reform designed to liberalize the use of temporary
contracts and to reduce dismissal costs for this type of contracts. The most important
element of the reform is the fact that it eliminated the requirement that the activity
associated with a temporary contract had to be of a temporary nature. Therefore, firms
whose activities are not of a temporary nature could sign temporary contracts with any type
of worker after the reform of 1984. These contracts can be signed for a period between a
minimum of six months and a maximum of three years. After the three years, the contract
cannot be renewed, and the worker must either be fired (in this case, the employer cannot
hire any other worker for that job and has to wait for at least one year to hire the same
worker) or must be offered a permanent contract by his/her current employer. Furthermore,
another advantage of this type of contracts is that firing costs at termination are very low (8
days per year of tenure but they can even be zero in some cases) and this termination
cannot be appealed in front of the courts. The reform in 1984 did not alter any of the
conditions for permanent contracts explained above (Aguirregabiria and Alonso-Borrego,
2014), which made temporary contracts even more appealing for firms.
As a result of this legislative change, the proportion of male employees aged 15-24 under
temporary contracts increased from less than 40% to over 70% in less than five years after
the approval of the reform, as can be seen in Figure 1.4 Between 1985 and 1994, over 95%
of all new hires were employed through temporary contracts and the conversion rate from
temporary into permanent contracts was only around 10% (Güell and Petrongolo 2007).
Thus, the main concern with the liberalization of temporary contracts after 1984 was that it
generated a huge segmentation in the Spanish labor market between unstable low-paying
jobs and stable high-paying jobs, without helping to reduce unemployment.
3

The law was passed in August 2nd 1984 and the full implementation of the law was established in a “Real
Decreto” in October 1984.
4
The rate of temporary employment in the Spanish labor market as a whole moved from less than 10% to
over 30% in the same period. Data in Figure 1 is taken from the Spanish Labor Force Survey, which only
reports information on the type of contract (temporary/permanent) from 1987. In the following section, we
present evidence to show that the use of temporary contracts was very small before the 1984 reform.

7

Shifting direction in light of these concerns, in 1994 new regulations limited the use of
temporary employment contracts to seasonal jobs. In addition, the 1994 reform slightly
relaxed dismissal conditions for permanent contracts. In particular, the definition of fair
dismissals was widened by including additional “economic reasons” for them. In practice,
however, employers continued to hire workers under temporary contracts for all types of
jobs and not just for seasonal jobs. This perceived ineffectiveness of the 1994 reform led to
a new reform in 1997, which was eventually extended in 2001. As with the 1994 reform,
the goal of the 1997 and 2001 reforms was to reduce the use of temporary contracts. The
1997 reform created a new type of permanent contract, with lower severance costs in case
of unfair dismissal (33 days per year of seniority) and with fiscal incentives in the first two
years of the contract (i.e., reductions of employers’ payroll taxes).5 However, rather than
trying to limit the use of temporary contracts by further possibly ineffective regulation,
these new reforms widened the employers’ incentives to hire workers from certain
population groups under permanent contracts.6 The 2001 reform essentially extended the
1997 reform by applying lower subsidies to more worker groups than the previous reform
(García-Pérez and Muñoz-Bullón, 2011). The consequences of these subsidies, however,
have not been a reduction in the use of temporary contracts or an increase in workers’
employment stability but, on the contrary, only negligible effects on both dimensions
because of the important side-effects (basically substitution effects) such subsidies have
entailed (see García-Pérez and Rebollo, 2009).

Evolution of temporary contracts in Spain
Although the Spanish Labor Force Survey only reports information on the type of contract
from 1987, some data from a report published in 1988 (Mateos and Sebastián, 1988) show
that temporary contracts represented a very low percentage of the total number of nonagricultural private sector employees in 1983 (below 3% until 1986). We can see in Figure
2 that the number of temporary contracts increased from the last trimester of 1984 when the
new legislation on temporary contracts was passed.

5

This was the first time (in 1997) since the Workers’ Statute in 1980 that severance costs were changed for
permanent workers in Spain.
6
In particular, the 1997 reform reduced dismissal costs for unfair dismissals by about 25% and payroll taxes
between 40% and 90% for newly signed permanent contracts and for conversions of temporary into
permanent contracts after the second trimester of 1997 for workers under 30 years-old, over 45 years-old, the
long-term unemployed, women under-represented in their occupations, and disabled workers (see, in this
respect, Kugler et al. 2005)

8

On the other hand, the Spanish Labor Force Survey shows that the proportion of temporary
contracts as a percentage of total employment was around 10% at the beginning of 1987
and was already around 35% in the mid-1990s. Therefore, very soon after the introduction
of the 1984 reform, Spain was the country in Europe with the highest proportion of
temporary contracts and this rate has been approximately three times larger than the
average in OECD countries and approximately 2.5 times higher than the average in Europe
until the second half of the 2000s (see Figure 1).
It has been widely recognized that the group of workers that has been most affected by the
widespread use of temporary contracts in the Spanish economy is the youngest group of
workers that enters the labor market. If we look at data from the OECD in Figure 1, we can
see that the share of temporary contracts for the group of workers aged 15-24 was already
37.5% in 1984 (as opposed to 15.6% for the whole population of workers). If we restrict
this age group even further, the Spanish Labor Force Survey shows that temporary
contracts represented almost 50% of total employment for the age group 16-19 already by
1987 (as opposed to 15.6% for the whole population).
Again, data on temporary contracts before the introduction of the 1984 reform for the group
of young workers is difficult to find but the same report mentioned above (Mateos and
Sebastián, 1988) contains data on the number of apprenticeship contracts (which represent
one part of the group of temporary contracts) from 1981 to 1986 as well as data on the
percentage of these contracts with respect to the group of employees in the non-agricultural
private sectors aged 16-19. We can see in Figure 3 that the percentage of these contracts for
the group of individuals aged 16-19 increased from around 2% before 1984 to 15-16% in
1985 and 21% in 1986. Again, this represents only one type of temporary contracts
(apprenticeship contracts) and for one group of workers (non-agricultural private sector
workers) but it is quite impressive how the use of these contracts has increased since 1984.
Therefore, as our aim in this paper is to disentangle the long-term effects of the 1984
reform we will use a regression discontinuity strategy comparing high-school dropout men
who reach the labor market entry age of 16 before and after the reform. As we have seen
that this group of individuals is the most likely to be affected by the 1984 reform, we will
compare individuals that entered the labor market when temporary contracts were not
widely available with individuals that had their first labor market experience when the main
restrictions for the use of temporary contracts were abolished. Therefore, even if we do not
have individual information on the type of contract held in the first job, we know from
9

previous evidence that just 2% of young workers had a temporary contract before the
reform while 21% of them had a temporary contract by 1986 and almost 50% by 1987. Our
aim is to understand whether entering the labor market under two very different labor
market situations (with or without widely available temporary contracts) had any effect on
long-term labor market outcomes.

3

Data and empirical strategy

Data
This study will use the Continuous Sample of Working Lives (“Muestra Continua de Vidas
Laborales”, MCVL) which is a microeconomic dataset based on administrative records
provided by the Spanish Social Security Administration. Each wave contains a random
sample of 4% of all the individuals who had contributed to the social security system
(either by working or being on an unemployment scheme) or had received a contributory
benefit (such as permanent disability, old-age, etc.) during at least one day in the year the
sample is selected. Hence, the sample is not including those individuals without any contact
to Social Security in such a year. This may create some risks of sample selection, especially
among women, immigrants or young workers. Hence, in order to minimize the potential
selection effects, we combine the database for seven waves, from 2006 to 2012. That is, we
have everybody that had a relationship of at least one day during this seven year period
with the Social Security administration. For them, we have their complete labor market
history observed in the data. In our sample, we select the cohorts born between 1965 and
1972 so that individuals are aged 34-47 during 2006-2012. Therefore, it is very rare for
native men at these ages not to have any relationship of at least one day with the Social
Security administration during a seven year period. This may be a potential problem,
however, for women or immigrants in the sample as they have a more interrupted and
discontinuous labor market trajectory. Therefore, we restrict the analysis to the native male
sample.
There is information available on the entire employment and pension history of the
workers, including the exact duration of employment, unemployment and disability or
retirement pension spells,7 and for each spell, several variables that describe the

7

As explained in, for example, Garcia-Perez and Rebollo (2009), there exists a potential issue of
measurement error in the number of employment and unemployment spells and their duration given that firms
can offer contracts for very short periods but subsequently recall workers. When this occurs, we treat the
employment spell as a continuous period, despite the short interruption that appears in between. More

10

characteristics of the job or the unemployment/pension benefits. There is also some
information on personal characteristics such as age, gender, nationality and level of
education.
Our main sample includes all high-school dropout native males who were born between the
first trimester of 1965 and the fourth trimester of 1972. We determine their trimester of
labor market entry to be the trimester they turn 16 as the minimum working age in Spain is
set at 16 years old and these individuals are high school dropouts. Thus, we can compare
cohorts who experienced the same labor market conditions, except that some entered the
labor market in a tightly regulated fixed term contracts regime while others entered the
labor market in a laxer fixed term contract regime.8,9 It is important to realize that we are
not comparing a whole career spent under restrictive or lax fixed term contract regulation,
but two careers, both exposed to lax fixed term contract regulation for most years, but that
differ in the fixed term contract regulation in the first trimester of the career. As the reform
was fully implemented by October 1984, individuals born in the third trimester of 1968 are
used to determine what happens with a tight regulation of fixed-term contracts at entry
whereas individuals born in the fourth trimester of 1968 (who turn 16 in Oct-Dec 1984) are
used to assess what happens with a lax regulation of fixed-term contracts as they reach the
age of labor market entry after the implementation of the reform.
We have 24.934 native males in the sample of high school dropouts, 14.732 workers born
between 1962 and 1968 and 8.327 born between 1969 and 1975.10 Descriptive statistics of
the variables included for our sample can be found in Table 1 and Table 2.
On top of our main sample of high school dropouts, we also use a sample of 68.611 native
male high school graduates. This sample is used to examine the impact of the reform on a
group of workers who are more educated and should therefore experience fewer difficulties

specifically, we unify successive registers when they correspond to the same worker in the same firm with the
same type of contract, and when the interruption lasts for less than 15 days.
8
The minimum legal age for working in Spain was 14 before 1980 and 16 since that year. However, in 1977
there was already a regulation that increased the age to 16 years old. As can be seen in Figure 11 in the
appendix, essentially no one in our oldest cohort born in 1965 was working before age 16, so the working
patterns anticipated the change in the minimum legal age of working. We drop the few individuals who start
working before age 16.
9
As individuals can enter the labor market after the age of 16, we impose an extra sample restriction to
include only those workers that begin working before age 21 in order to gain in sample homogeneity.
Therefore, we interpret these results as an “intent-to-treat” estimation.
10
The wage data is subject to bottom and top coding but the incidence of this in our estimation sample is
quite low: there is no bottom code due to the possibility of working part-time and the percentage of workers
in our sample with a wage in the top code is just 3.6%.

11

in the labor market. For this sample, we retain cohorts born in 1962-1969,11 and we keep
only individuals who start working before age 22. In this sample, the first trimester cohort
that could be affected by the reform is the cohort born in the first trimester of 1966. Indeed,
in Spain, the cutoff for entering school is in January. So, those who are born in the first
trimester of 1966 can graduate from high school in the summer of 1984 at the earliest and
be affected by the liberalization of fixed-term contracts in the fall of 1984. In contrast,
those who were born in the last trimester of 1965 can graduate from high school in 1983
the earliest, and would not be affected by the reform during their first year in the labor
market if they graduated on time.
We will look at the effect of the reform on several labor market outcomes measured over
the individual’s labor market career. These outcomes include the number of non-permanent
employment spells, the number of days worked, and the logarithm of the earnings.

Empirical strategy
We analyze the effect of the reform on a set of labor-market outcomes measured yearly.
The key explanatory variable is the trimester of birth cohort, since this determines whether
individuals enter the labor market before or after the liberalization of fixed-term contracts.
We define the trimester of birth cutoff as the fourth trimester of 1968: that is, we consider
as treated the cohort who turns 16 in October-December 1984, and older cohorts as
untreated by the new policy at labor market entry (both cohorts are potentially affected in
later years). Indeed, the law liberalizing fixed term contracts was passed in August 1984
but was only fully implement in October 1984. In robustness tests (Table 9 and Table 10),
we will check the sensitivity of our results to dummying out the transition cohorts, i.e.
those who turn 16 in the third or fourth trimester of 1984.
We expect the impact of the liberalization of fixed-term contracts to be stronger in the first
ten years in the labor market. Therefore, we first restrict the data to the first ten years of
potential labor market experience for each cohort (we will also show results with all years).
We then collapse the individual data at the level of trimester of birth cohort (c) and
calendar year (t), like in Oreopoulos et al. (2012). We collapse the data by year and not just
by cohort in order to be able to add the following controls: year fixed effects to account for
macro factors, and potential experience fixed effects. The data is collapsed at the calendar

11

We have some missing values for wages for cohorts born 1962-1963 because wages were not properly
measured (or were missing) in this dataset before 1990.

12

year level and not at the trimester level because the outcomes in the data such as earnings
or days worked are only observed at the calendar year level.
We run the following baseline specification for the cohort discontinuity design (weighing
by cell size):

(1)
Where the cutoff point C is the cohort born in the fourth trimester of 1968. The model
includes a linear cohort trend consisting of a birth year cutoff (C) subtracted from the
which estimates the trend12 in the outcome

cohort’s birth trimester

variable analyzed, for all birth cohorts. This trend is then interacted with the reform
indicator

(this is equal to one for all cohorts born at the cutoff C or later) to allow

for a change of trend in the post-reform cohorts.

is a calendar year fixed effect and

a years of potential labor market experience fixed effect, and

is

is the error term. We

cluster the standard errors by cohort.
The variable that captures the effect of the policy is

, an indicator variable that

equals 1 if the individual is born at or after the trimester cutoff, so that  3 is the shift in
the intercept of the post-cutoff trend which represents the effect of the treatment. How can
the coefficient of interest  3 be interpreted? For example, when log earnings is the
outcome

,  3 tells us the percentage effect impact of the liberalization of fixed-term

contracts on annual earnings (on average over the career), and after accounting for macro
variables (time effects ,

) and labor market experience (

). Accounting for years of

labor market experience is particularly important when earnings are on the left-hand side,
since experience has a strong impact on earnings in the first years of a workers’ career.
In order for the effect to be correctly identified, regression discontinuity models require
that the running variable (in our case the trimester of birth) cannot be manipulated so that
the probability of being on each side of the discontinuity is exogenous. This is obviously
satisfied in our sample for the date (trimester) of birth. However, as we also select
individuals that are high-school dropouts in order to assume that they enter the labor
market at age 16, it could be the case that the reform affected the probability of individuals

12

We have also estimated the model with higher-order polynomials for the cohort trend (Table 9 and Table
10).

13

studying more or less. In this case, we would observe a jump in the number of individuals
in our sample for the cohort entering the labor market after the implementation of the
reform. We can see in Figure 4 that this is not the case, as the percentage of men of each
cohort who are high-school dropouts, and therefore are in our sample, declines over time.
This is a steady decline due to the progressive increase in the amount of education for each
subsequent cohort and we can observe that there is no discontinuity for individuals born in
the fourth trimester of 1968.
In Table 3, we also formally test13 for an impact of the reform on the probability of
dropping out of high school. We restrict the sample to males who are either high school
dropouts or high school graduates. We find no significant impact of the reform on dropping
out of high school, whether we use a linear (col. 1-2) or quadratic (col. 3-4) trend for birth
cohorts. We thus conclude that the reform did not affect high school graduation.
The key identification assumption for the cohort discontinuity design is that the only
discontinuous change at the cutoff is the liberalization of fixed-term contracts. In practice,
the concern is that there may be important changes in the Spanish labor market in the
fourth trimester of 1984 as compared to the third trimester of 1984 (when our treated and
control cohorts respectively enter the labor market) and that these changes could bias our
estimate of the impact of the reform. To address this concern, we use a control group: male
high-school graduates. We expect the liberalization of fixed-term contracts to have less of
an effect on high-school graduates because they tend to be more employable than highschool dropouts (Blazquez Cuesta (2008) and Dolado et al. (2013), among others,
document this fact for the Spanish case). We first estimate the impact of the reform on male
high-school graduates using the same cohort discontinuity design as for the high-school
dropouts (equation 1), and restricting the data to the first 10 years in the labor market. We
then use a difference-in-differences specification where the data is collapsed by trimester of
birth, year, and education ( ):

(2)
This specification is similar to the previous specification (1). The cutoff

is now specific

to an education group: the cohort born in the last trimester of 1968 for high school
dropouts, and the cohort born in the first trimester of 1966 for high school graduates (for
13

We cannot use the popular McCrary (2008) test because our forcing variable, trimester of birth, is not
sufficiently close to being continuous.

14

high school graduates to enter the labor market in the fall of 1984, they must have
graduated in the summer of 1984). The post-reform cohort indicator
specific to an education group. The dummy

is also

is equal to 1 for high school dropouts

and 0 otherwise. The difference-in-differences estimate is the coefficient

on the

interaction between the high school dropout dummy and the post-reform cohort dummy.

4

Results

We are interested in evaluating the long-term impact of entering the labor market under a
regime where fixed term contracts are easy for firms to use. Specifically, we would like to
answer the following question: does greater availability of fixed term contracts lead to
more days of employment and higher accumulated earnings in the long run?

Number of non‐permanent contracts and labor market insertion
We first investigate whether the reform led to a greater number of fixed-term contracts or
non-permanent contracts14 using the cohort discontinuity design described by equation (1).
Because the data on the type of employment contract is low quality before 1990, we use
years 1990-2012 to assess the impact of the reform on the number of fixed-term and nonpermanent contracts. In Table 4, Panel A, we find that the impact of the reform on the
number of fixed-term contracts is positive but falls short of statistical significance (P-value
of 0.14 in col. 2) for high school drop-outs. The impact of the reform on high-school
graduates is close to 0 and not statistically significant (Panel A, col. 4). When we use the
difference-in-differences specification (Panel A, col. 5, coefficient on After*Treat), we find
that high school dropout men who entered the labor market in the fourth trimester of 1984
had a larger number of fixed-term contracts per year between 1990 and 2012 than men who
entered the labor market in the third trimester of 1984. This effect is statistically
significant: entering the labor market under a lax fixed term contract regulation increases
the annual number of fixed-term contracts by 0.043 per year, which means 14.6% more
fixed-term contracts per year.
When we analyze the impact of the reform not only on fixed-term contracts but on all nonpermanent contracts, we find stronger results. Thus, we find a positive and significant
14

In order to capture a deeper understanding about instability in labor market careers, we include in this
measure not only all fixed-term contracts but also all self-employment and special regimes' employment
spells. The latter deals with employment in agriculture, fisheries, training programmes, etc. The average
number of non-permanent contracts in our sample is 0.313 per year between 1990 and 2012, that is, about 7
employment spells in total between 1990 and 2012.

15

impact of the reform on the number of non-permanent contracts held by male high-school
dropouts (Table 4, Panel B, col. 2). Again, there is no effect of the reform on the number of
non-permanent contracts held by high school graduates (Panel B, col. 4). The difference-indifferences specification (Panel B, col. 5) shows that the reform led to male high-school
dropouts holding 0.052 (17.7%) more non-permanent contracts per year between 1990 and
2012.
The fact that the impact of the reform is larger and more significant on all forms of nonpermanent work suggests that fixed-term contracts beget not only more fixed-term
contracts but more precarious work (see footnote 15 above for the definition of nonpermanent work). Overall, these results show that men who entered the labor market under
lax fixed term contracts regulation were more likely to hold non-stable employment
contracts even years after their entry into the labor market.
Before examining long-run employment effects, we show the impact of the introduction of
fixed term contracts on the initial labor market insertion of youth. Specifically, we
investigate the impact of the reform on the probability of working before age 18 or before
age 19. Graphically, the results are suggestive of a positive impact of the reform on the
probability of finding a first job before age 18 (Figure 5) or 19 (Figure 6), especially if we
exclude the transition cohorts born in the third and fourth trimester of 1968. We then use a
regression on individual level data, with one observation per individual and using the
cohort discontinuity design described by equation (1). Regression results (Table 5)15 show
the policy change had a positive and significant impact on the probability of working
before age 18 (when we dummy out the transition cohorts in col. 2) or 19 (col. 3 and 4).
Those low educated native male workers who began working just after the 1984 reform are
9% (col. 4) more likely to work before age 19. Thus, the reform may have facilitated the
integration in the labor market for young people.

Employment and earnings
We now look at employment outcomes over the long-run. Since we expect the results to be
concentrated in the first 10 years in the labor market, we first show graphs for outcomes in
the first ten years of potential experience (Figure 7 and Figure 8). Employment and
earnings trends were positive prior to the reform, with each cohort doing better than the
previous cohort. In the trimester of the reform however, we see a large downward jump.
15

Regressions also control for trimester of birth because there are important differences in the outcome
depending on the trimester of birth (seasonality).

16

Furthermore, the trend in both employment and wages becomes negative after the reform,
with each cohort doing worse than the previous one. This negative post-reform trend may
be due to the reform itself, given that the use of fixed-term contracts continued to grow
after the reform (see Figure 2 and Figure 1). Thus, male high-school dropouts who entered
the labor market under a lax fixed-term contract regime had lower employment and
earnings during the first ten years of their careers.
Regressions in Table 6 confirm the negative impact of the reform on employment. Without
controls, the reform is found to have decreased annual days of employment by 12 days.
After controlling for macro factors (year effects) and potential labor market experience, the
reform still has a negative and highly significant effect on yearly days worked: it reduces
yearly days worked by 9.8 days (4.5% of average yearly days worked in the first 10 years
of potential experience by the pre-reform cohort born in the third trimester of 1968). For
high school graduates, the impact of the reform on days worked is small and statistically
insignificant (col. 3 and 4). In the difference-in-differences specification (2), where high
school graduates serve as a control for high school dropouts, we find that the reform
decreased the annual days worked by high-school dropouts by 17 days (col. 5). The fact
that the difference-in-differences estimate is of the same order of magnitude as the
estimates based on the cohort discontinuity alone is supportive of the assumption that our
estimate of the impact of the reform is not driven by other changes in the labor market
around the time of the reform.
Finally, we investigate the very long-run effects of the reform. In Table 6, column 6, we
use all the years in our data and find that the reform decreased the yearly number of days
worked by 6.5 days (2.4% of average yearly days worked up to 2012 by the pre-reform
cohort born in the third trimester of 1968). This effect corresponds to a total of 175.5 days
of employment lost over 27 years by male high-school who entered the labor market under
a lax fixed-term contract regulation. This negative employment effect is likely due to the
fact that, as shown above, under a lax fixed term contract regulation, more non-permanent
contracts are used, which likely leads to workers losing employment more often.
Apart from employment we also look at yearly earnings during the first ten years of
potential labor market experience. Regressions in Table 7 show that men who entered the
labor market under a laxer regulation of fixed term contracts accumulated lower earnings.16

16

Among individuals with a fixed-term contracts some differences in wage growth patterns can also exist as
there are diferent types of fixed-term contracts with diferent durations. In this line, the paper by Amuedo-

17

The yearly earning loss is estimated to be 9% when we include year and experience fixed
effects (second column of Table 7). Can this earnings loss be explained by the lower days
of employment accumulated by the cohort entering the labor market during a lax fixed-term
contract regulation (cohort born in the fourth trimester of 1968)? If we estimate the effect
of the reform in percentage points, we get that the reform made affected workers to spend
4.5% fewer days in employment. Given the estimated wage gap, we can see that about half
of the large earnings loss experienced by the cohort entering the labor market after the
reform could be explained by the fewer days of work accumulated by this cohort. The rest
might be connected to the well-known wage gap between permanent and temporary
workers observed in Spain since the beginning of the nineties (See Jimeno and Toharia,
1993). Furthermore, as documented in García Pérez and Rebollo (2005), Spanish workers
suffer important wage losses (of about 11%) due to involuntary job interruptions.
Next, we explore the impact of the reform on high-school graduates and find that the
liberalization of fixed term contracts had no significant effect on log earnings (Table 7, col.
4) after controlling for year and experience fixed effects. The difference-in-differences
estimate implies that the reform decreased the earnings of high school dropouts by 6.5%
(col. 5), an estimate that is similar to our baseline estimate in col. 2. Finally, the very long
term impact of the liberalization of fixed-term contracts on earnings is found to be negative
and significant with a 7.5% yearly earning loss (col. 6) over 27 years.
We have investigated the impact of the liberalization of fixed term contracts on
employment and earnings by comparing the birth cohort that enters in the trimester before
the reform with the birth cohort that enters in the trimester right after. However, as noted
before based on the graphical analysis, each post-reform cohort was doing worse than the
previous one in terms of days of work and earnings. Regressions confirm that the effect of
the reform on the trend is significant and negative for both days of employment and
earnings (see the coefficient on After*Trend in col. 2 in Table 6 and Table 7). The post
reform-trend is negative (adding the coefficient on Trend and After*Trend). This evidence
is thus consistent with the impact of the reform being more negative for younger cohorts
entering the labor market after the reform, as the use of fixed-term contracts was ramping
up.

Dorantes and Serrano-Padial (2007) shows that job-stayers with fixed-term contracts are more able to narrow
their wage gap with respect to workers with permanent contracts (than job-movers with fixed-term contracts).

18

Finally, we explore the timing of the impact of the liberalization of fixed-term contracts, to
test our assumption that the impact of the reform is concentrated in the early years in the
labor market. In Table 8, we estimate the impact of the reform separately for different
levels of potential labor market experience: 0 to 9 years, 10 to 19 years, and more than 20
years. We find that the impact on both days worked and earnings is largest in the first ten
years of labor market experience. The impact of the reform on yearly days worked is about
50% as large but still negative and significant for years of experience 10-19 and over 20
(col. 1). For earnings, the impact of the reform is more persistent: the negative impact of
the reform is about 70% as large for years of experience 10-19 and over 20 (col.2). The
liberalization of fixed term contracts had a negative impact on days worked and earnings in
the first ten years of potential experience, and this negative effect was persistent if smaller
at higher levels of labor market experience up to 27 years.
5

Discussion and robustness checks

Discussion
Our results differ from some of the findings in prior literature. In particular, our results
differ from the ones in Aguirregabiria and Alonso-Borrego (2014) in the sense that they
find an increase in job turn-over, as we do, but also an increase in total employment. This
may be due to the fact that they analyze the firm's maximization problem for a sample quite
different from the one we have.17 They find that these firms react to the reform by
substituting permanent workers by temporary ones, all this process resulting in a 3.5%
increase in total employment but a null effect on productivity. They also find an increase in
turnover what makes easier to exit from unemployment, especially for high-qualified
workers who may be working more in equilibrium as the former paper finds. But, at the
same time, this process makes it much easier for low-skilled workers to be unemployed,
which results in a less stable career for this type of workers (the ones we analyze in this
paper). Thus, in a similar flavor to the results from Aguirregabiria and Alonso-Borrego
(2014), we do find an increase in employment at earlier ages, that we interpret as the
reform facilitating the initial labor market insertion of young workers. However, we also
find that the reform fostered a more unstable labor market career for low-skilled workers
due to the increase in the number of non-permanent employment spells. Therefore, we go a
17

They analyze the results of introducing temporary contracts with a sample of 2,356 Spanish manufacturing
firms during the period 1982-1993. Hence, they focus on a group of firms larger than the average for the
Spanish economy and where the typical worker is a medium-high qualified one with a permanent contract,
both before and after the 1984 reform. As Table 1 shows, we have just 17.4% of workers in our sample
working in manufacturing firms.

19

step further from the current literature in providing evidence of the negative long-term
effects of the introduction of temporary contracts.

Robustness tests
In our baseline results, we include 4 cohort-years (16 trimesters) before and 4 cohort-years
after the reform. As a robustness test we reduce the bandwidth to 2 cohort years (8
trimesters) or 3 cohort years (12 trimesters). In both cases, the impact of the reform on days
worked (col 1-2, Table 9) and earnings (col. 1-2 Table 10) is significant and quantitatively
almost the same as in our baseline results. The negative impact of the liberalization of
fixed-term contracts on employment and earnings is thus robust to the choice of bandwidth.
Linear trends are used in our baseline results. As a robustness test, we use second and third
degree polynomials for the cohort trends. The negative impact of the reform on days
worked is robust to the inclusion of these polynomial trends (col. 3-4, Table 9). For
earnings, the impact of the reform is negative and significant with a quadratic trend (col. 3,
Table 10), but loses significance with a cubic trend, though the point estimate is still
negative (col. 4, Table 10) and not statistically significantly different from our baseline
estimate. Overall, our results are thus generally robust to controlling for higher order
polynomials.
In specification (1), we include all cohorts from the first trimester of 1965 to the fourth
trimester of 1972. The reform was approved in August of 1984 but the law was not fully
implemented until October 1984, so those born in the third trimester of 1968 may have
been partially affected. At the same time, those born in the fourth trimester of 1968 may
not have been fully affected if it took time for firms to adopt fixed-term contracts. Thus, we
run the same model including dummies for these two transition cohorts (third and fourth
trimester of 1968). The results of this model are reported in col. 5 Table 9 for days worked
and in col. 5 Table 10 for earnings. The negative impact of the reform on days worked and
earnings is thus robust to excluding transition cohorts from the estimation of the reform’s
impact.
Our baseline specification controls for years of potential experience, as is customary in
wage regressions. However, one may be concerned that, to the extent that the post-reform
cohort is one trimester younger than the pre-reform cohort, failing to control for this
difference in potential experience may be biasing the results. Regression in Table 9 col. 6
and Table 10 col. 6 control for quarterly potential experience dummies. The negative
20

impact of the reform on days worked and earnings is still highly significant, and is thus not
driven by a failure to control for potential experience at the quarterly level.
One concern with our baseline estimates is that they could be biased by changes in the
labor market that occurred in the same trimester as the reform. This concern is already
made less acute by the fact that the difference-in-differences estimates show the same result
as our baseline estimate. Furthermore, as we include the pre and post reform trends in our
empirical model, we are only focusing on differences in long-term labor market outcomes
between two trimester cohorts that enter the labor market only three months apart. Thus,
we can expect the labor market conditions to be quite similar in a time span of only three
months. Still, here, we explore the sensitivity of our results to trends in economic
conditions. Indeed, prior to the reform, youth unemployment rate in Spain was very high
and increasing (Figure 1). So one may worry that the worsening economic conditions are
biasing the results. To address this concern we follow two alternative strategies. First, we
split the sample into regions with average high (7 percentage points) and low (3.1
percentage points) growth in unemployment during the period 1982-1986. While the
impact of the reform on days worked is negative in both low and high (Table 11)
unemployment regions, the impact tends to be larger and more significant in low
unemployment regions. This suggests that the negative impact of the reform on days
worked was not driven by regions where unemployment was growing particularly rapidly.
The second strategy we follow to account for the impact of labor market conditions is to
include the unemployment rate of the trimester of labor market entry for each trimester
cohort. Our main specification already controls for year fixed effects to account for
macroeconomic conditions after entering the labor market. Thus, including the control for
trimester unemployment rate accounts for differences in initial trimester economic
conditions given the macroeconomic conditions in the current year (which are controlled
for by the year fixed effects). We can see in Table 12 that the results including this
additional variable remain negative and significant and the point estimates are somewhat
larger (more negative) than our baseline results reported in Tables 6 and 7. Additionally,
the unemployment rate coefficient is not significantly different from zero, consistent with
the idea that labor conditions in the trimester before and after the introduction of the reform
are not sufficiently different to turn the coefficient significant.
It has to be noted that this result is not comparable to the results found in the literature that
study the long term effects of bad economic conditions at labor market entry. We are using
a trimester cohort regression discontinuity approach in order to isolate the impact of the
21

1984 reform by comparing only two trimester cohorts and controlling for differences in pre
and post reform cohorts with the trends. On the other hand, the literature on long-term
effects of economic conditions exploits the differences in unemployment rates at the time
of labor market entry across all cohorts and regions. In fact, Garcia Perez and Vall Castelló
(2015) use the same administrative data for Spain but follow the strategy in Oreopoulus et
al. (2012) and report significant negative long-term employment and wage effects for highschool dropouts entering the labor market in bad economic conditions in Spain.
Finally, we perform placebo tests in which we simulate the policy to take place in a number
of pre and post reform years (from 1966 to 1971). We use the specification from equation
(1). The negative impact of the reform on days worked (appendix Figure 12) and earnings
(appendix Figure 13) is largest for the true date. At the same time, the impact of the
placebo reform is almost as negative though generally insignificant for dates after the
reform. This can be explained by the fact that there is both a jump and a change in the
cohort trend at the time of the reform, and linear trends are too coarse to capture such
complex changes. To allow for a more local estimate of the cohort trend, we have
performed these placebo tests with a narrower bandwidth of 2 cohort years instead of 4
cohort years. In this case, the impact of the reform on days worked is only negative and
significant for the true date of the reform (Figure 9), and the placebo estimates for dates
prior to or after the reform are close to zero. A similar picture emerges when the logarithm
of yearly earnings is the outcome (Figure 10). These placebo tests reinforce our conclusion
that the liberalization of fixed-term contracts use had a negative effect on the long-run
employment and earnings outcomes for male high school dropouts.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we have investigated the impact of entering the labor market under a lax
regulation of fixed-term contracts on subsequent labor market outcomes. Using Spanish
social security data, we found that the trimester-of-birth cohort of native male high school
dropouts who entered the labor market under a lax regulation of fixed-term contracts
experienced worse labor market outcomes than the cohort that just preceded them.
Specifically, entering the labor market under a lax regulation of fixed-term contracts leads
to 4.5% fewer days worked and a 9% reduction in earnings in the first ten years in the labor
market. This is the case despite the fact that the reform likely increased the probability of
working before age 19. The source of those negative effects on long-term outcomes is
22

likely to be the larger probability of working under non-permanent contracts well after
labor market entry, which also makes it more likely to be subject to the well known wage
penalties due to unemployment and temporary work (see, for example, Jimeno and Toharia
(1993), García Pérez and Rebollo (2005) or Fernández-Kranz et al. (2015)).
Hence, our findings suggest that, on balance, making fixed-term contracts more readily
available reduced the welfare of low skilled workers. Even though these contracts seem to
allow low skilled workers to secure a first job more rapidly, the long-run consequences are
negative. Fixed-term contracts ultimately reduce the long-run employment and earnings
prospects of low skilled workers. Far from being a stepping stone, fixed-term contracts are
a stumbling block for the career of low skilled workers.

23

REFERENCES
Aguirregabiria, V. and C. Alonso-Borrego (2014): Labor Contracts and Flexibility:
Evidence from a Labor Market Reform in Spain. Economic Inquiry, Vol. 52, No. 2, April
2014, 930-957.
Amuedo-Dorantes, C. and R. Serrano-Padial (2007): Wage Growth Implications of FixedTerm Employment: An Analysis by Contract Duration and Job Mobility. Labour
Economics, 14, 829-847.
Autor, D. and S. Houseman (2010): Do Temporary Help Jobs Improve Labor Market
Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from 'Work First'. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3), July 2010, 96-128.
Autor D., Kerr W., Kugler A. (2007), “Do Employment Protections Reduce Productivity?
Evidence from U.S. States”, Economic Journal, vol. 117, issue 521.
Bentolila, S., Dolado, J., Cahuc P. and T. Le Barbanchon (2012): Two-Tier labour Markets
in the Great Recession: France vs. Spain. Economic Journal, 122, F155–F187.
Blanchard, O. and A. Landier (2002): The Perverse Effects of Partial Labor Market
Reform: Fixed-term Contracts in France. Economic Journal, 112, 214-244.
Blázquez Cuesta M. (2008): Low-wage Employment and Mobility in Spain, LABOUR, 22,
115-146.
Booth, S., Francesconi, M. and J. Frank (2002): Temporary Jobs: Stepping Stones or Dead
Ends?. Economic Journal, 112, 183-213.
Borghans, Lex, Anne C. Gielen, and Erzo F. P. Luttmer. 2014. “Social Support Substitution
and the Earnings Rebound: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity in Disability
Insurance Reform.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (4): 34–70.
doi:10.1257/pol.6.4.34.
Cingano F., Leonardi M., Messina J. and Pica G. (2015), “Employment Protection
Legislation, Capital Investment and Access to Credit: Evidence from Italy”, Economic
Journal, DOI: 10.1111/ecoj.12212.
D’Addio, A.C. and M. Rosholm (2005): Exits from Temporary Jobs in Europe: A
Competing-Risk Analysis. Labour Economics, 12, 449-468.
Costain, J., Jimeno, J and C. Thomas (2010): Employment fluctuations in a dual labour
market, Bank of Spain Working Paper No. 1013.
Dolado, J.J., Garcia-Serrano, C. and J.F. Jimeno (2002): Drawing Lessons from the Boom
of Temporary Jobs in Spain. Economic Journal, 112, 270-295.
Dolado, J.J., Jansen M., Felgueroso F., Fuentes A. and A.Wölfl (2013): Youth Labour
Market Performance in Spain and its Determinants. A Micro-Level Perspective, OECD
Econ. DepartmentWorking Paper No. 1039.
Fernández-Kranz, D., Paul, M., and N. Rodriguez-Planas (2015): Part-Time Status, FixedTerm Contracts, and the Returns to Experience. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics,77-4, 512–541.
24

García Pérez J.I. and Y. Rebollo (2005): Wage changes through job mobility: does
unemployment mean a penalty in Europe?- Labour Economics, Vol 12, Issue 4, pp. 531556.
García Pérez J.I. and Y. Rebollo (2009): The use of permanent contracts across Spanish
regions: do regional wage subsides work? . Investigaciones Económicas, XXXIII(1), 97130.
Garcia-Perez, J.I. and F. Muñoz-Bullón, (2011): Transitions into Permanent Employment
in Spain: An Empirical Analysis for Young Workers. British Journal of Industrial
Relations, 49, 103-143.
Garcia-Perez, J.I. and J. Vall Castelló (2015): Youth Unemployment in Spain: More Issues
than just High Unemployment. In No country for young people? Youth labour market
problems in Europe, edited by Juan J. Dolado, CEPR Press, A VoxEU.org book, pp.117128.
Güell, M. and Petrongolo, B. (2007): How Binding are Legal Limits? Transitions from
Temporary to Permanent Work in Spain. Labour Economics, 14, 153-183.
Ichino, A., Mealli, F. and Nannicini, T. (2008): From temporary help jobs to permanent
employment: what can we learn from matching estimators and their sensitivity?. Journal of
Applied. Econometrics., 23: 305–327. doi: 10.1002/jae.998.
Jimeno, J. F. and Toharia L. (1993): The effects of Fixed-term Employment on Wages:
Theory and Evidence from Spain, Investigaciones Económicas, 27, 475-494.
Kahn, L. (2010): The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College
in a Bad Economy. Labour Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2, April, 2010.
Kugler, A., Jimeno, J.F., and V. Hernanz (2005): Employment Consequences of Restrictive
Employment Policies: Evidence from Spanish Labor Market Reforms. Mimeo.
Mateos, B., and C. Sebastián (1988): Los Programas de Fomento y la Evolución del
Empleo. In Estudios sobre participación activa, empleo y paro en España, Estudios de
FEDEA number 7, pp. 411-444.
Documento elaborado para la Comisión de Expertos para el estudio del desempleo en
España. Mimeo.
McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression
Discontinuity Design: A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics, The regression
discontinuity
design:
Theory
and
applications,
142
(2):
698–714.
doi:10.1016/j.jeconom.2007.05.005.
Moulton, G. J. (2011): Great Depression of Wages: An Investigation of the Impact of
Entering the Labor Market during the Great Depression using a Regression Discontinuity
Approach, working paper.
Nagore, A., and A. Van Soest (2014): Unemployment Transitions to Stable and Unstable
Jobs Before and During the Crisis. IZA Discussion Paper No. 8121.
OECD (1987): Employment Outlook.
OECD (1993): Employment Outlook.
25

OECD (2006), Employment Outlook, chapter 7
Oreopoulos, P.,Von Wachter, T., and A. Heisz (2012). The Short and Long Term Career
Effects of Graduating in a Recession. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
Vol. 4(1), 1-29.
Rebollo, Y. (2011): Landing a Permanent Contract in Spain: Do Job Interruptions and
Employer Diversification Matter?. The Manchester School, 79 (6), 1197-1236.
Zijl, M., Van Den Berg, G. and A. Heyma (2004): Stepping Stones for the Unemployed:
The Effect of Temporary Jobs on the Duration until Regular Work. IZA Discussion Paper
1241.

26

Figure 1. Unemployment rate in Spain for workers with less than 25 years old; share of temporary contracts for
men aged 15-24 in Spain and average share of temporary contracts for men aged 15-24 in the OECD.

90

Unem. Rate Spain

OECD Share Temp.

Spain Share Temp.

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Source: Own elaboration from data from the OECD and the Spanish National Institute of Statistics (EPA).

27

Figure 2. Total number of temporary contracts and total number of employees in non-agricultural private sectors.

160000

5800000

140000

5600000

120000

5400000

100000

5200000

80000
5000000

60000

4800000

40000
Number Temporary Contracts
20000
Number Employees

4400000

1981/III
1981/IV
1982/I
1982/II
1982/III
1982/IV
1983/I
1983/II
1983/III
1983/IV
1984/I
1984/II
1984/III
1984/IV
1985/I
1985/II
1985/III
1985/IV
1986/I
1986/II
1986/III
1986/IV

0

4600000

Source: Own elaboration from data from the Spanish National Institute of Statistics (EPA).

28

Figure 3. Number of apprenticeship contracts and percentage of apprenticeship contracts with respect to
employees in non-agricultural private sectors aged between 16 and 19 years old.

25

Percentage of Apprenticeship Contracts
w.r.t employees aged 16‐19

20
15

80000
70000
60000

Number of Apprenticeship Contracts

50000
40000

10

30000
20000

5

10000
0
1981/III
1981/IV
1982/I
1982/II
1982/III
1982/IV
1983/I
1983/II
1983/III
1983/IV
1984/I
1984/II
1984/III
1984/IV
1985/I
1985/II
1985/III
1985/IV
1986/I
1986/II
1986/III
1986/IV

0

Source: Own elaboration from data from the Spanish National Institute of Statistics (EPA).

29

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics18.

HIGH SCHOOL
DROPOUT

HIGH SCHOOL
GRADUATE

Obs

Mean

Obs

Mean

24.934

19.05

68.611

18.70

6.409
417
476
534
1.707
298
1.403
1.270
3.304
2.841
1.022
1.637
1.911
800
172
624
109

25.70
1.67
1.91
2.14
6.85
1.20
5.63
5.09
13.25
11.39
4.10
6.57
7.66
3.21
0.69
2.50
0.44

13.469
1.897
1.558
1.832
3.214
882
3.189
3.970
10.485
7.214
2.097
4.093
7.698
2.203
955
3.402
453

19.63
2.76
2.27
2.67
4.68
1.29
4.65
5.79
15.28
10.51
3.06
5.97
11.22
3.21
1.39
4.96
0.66

SECTOR OF FIRST JOB
High Tech. Manufacturing
1.585
Low Tech. Manufacturing
2.862
High Tech. Services
552
Finance
47
Health and Education
234
Trade
3.553
Hotels and Catering services
2.301
Other low tech. Activities
986
Agriculture
4.643
Mining and Energy
124
Construction
4.608
Public Administration
1.001
Real State
97
Temporary Help Agencies
55
Missing
2.286
Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

6.36
11.48
2.21
0.19
0.94
14.25
9.23
3.95
18.62
0.50
18.48
4.01
0.39
0.22
9.17

5.735
8.415
2.682
201
798
12.792
7.089
3.382
7.137
343
10.105
2.550
360
282
6.416

8.40
12.32
3.93
0.29
1.17
18.73
10.38
4.95
10.45
0.50
14.80
3.73
0.53
0.41
9.40

Unempl. Rate Region at LM Entry
REGION AT LM ENTRY
Andalucia
Aragon
Asturias
Baleares
Canarias
Cantabria
Cast. Leon
Cast. Mancha
Catalunya
Valencia
Extremadura
Galicia
Madrid
Murcia
Navarra
Pais Vasco
Rioja

18

See table 12 in the appendix for a more detailed explanation of each sector.

30

Table 2. Distribution of cohorts in the sample

HIGH SCHOOL
DROPOUT
COHORT
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975

HIGH SCHOOL
GRADUATE

Obs

Mean

Obs

Mean

2.265
2.285
2.289
2.009
2.104
1.988
1.792
1.653
1.618
1.495
1.440
1.401
1.271
1.324

9.08
9.16
9.18
8.06
8.44
7.97
7.19
6.63
6.49
6.00
5.78
5.62
5.10
5.31

4.556
4.641
4.957
4.709
4.809
4.765
4.846
4.818
4.835
5.173
5.005
4.956
5.042
5.175

6.67
6.80
7.26
6.90
7.04
6.98
7.10
7.06
7.08
7.58
7.33
7.26
7.38
7.58

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

31

10
15
20
25
Share High School Dropout Males

600

500

400

Quarter of birth
Number HS Dropout Males in our sample
Share High School Dropout Males

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

32

1976q1

1975q1

1974q1

1973q1

1972q1

1971q1

1970q1

1969q1

1968q1

1967q1

1966q1

1965q1

1964q1

1963q1

300
1962q1

Number HS Dropout Males in our sample

Figure 4. Total number of men in our sample for each birth cohort and share of males who are high-school
dropouts for each cohort.

Table 3. Probability of being a high school dropout.

Linear Trend

After
Trend
After*Trend
UR entry (region)
Trimester Birth 2
Trimester Birth 3
Trimester Birth 4

(1)

(2)

-0.011
(0.008)
-0.003***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.000)
0.007
(0.006)
0.006
(0.006)
0.011**
(0.005)

-0.012
(0.009)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.006***
(0.000)
0.007
(0.006)
0.006
(0.006)
0.011**
(0.005)
0.03**
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.376***
(0.066)
X
53,001
0.012

Trend^2
(After*Trend)^2
Constant
Year f.e.
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

0.164***
(0.011)
53,001
0.009

Quadratic Trend
(3)
(4)
0.014
(0.009)
-0.011***
(0.002)
0.007***
(0.003)
0.005***
(0.000)
0.007
(0.006)
0.006
(0.005)
0.009
(0.005)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.142***
(0.011)
53,001
0.009

0.016
(0.010)
-0.010***
(0.002)
0.007**
(0.003)
0.006***
(0.000)
0.006
(0.006)
0.006
(0.005)
0.008
(0.005)
-0.001***
(0.000)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.361***
(0.065)
X
53,001
0.012

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

33

Table 4. Number of temporary and non-permanent contracts per year

Since 1990 up to 2012
High school dropouts
(1)
Panel A: Temporary
contracts
After
Trend
After*Trend

High school graduates

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.043
(0.027)
0.003
(0.002)
0.005
(0.003)

0.043
(0.028)
0.002
(0.008)
0.005
(0.003)

-0.006
(0.011)
0.005***
(0.001)
0.002
(0.001)

-0.007
(0.011)
0.003
(0.002)
0.002
(0.001)

912

X
X
912

1,008

X
X
1,008

-0.006
(0.011)
0.003
(0.002)
0.003*
(0.001)
0.043**
(0.018)
0.099***
(0.013)
X
X
1,92

0.900

0.059

0.945

0.907

0.060**
(0.023)
0.003*
(0.002)
0.006**
(0.003)

0.059**
(0.024)
0.001
(0.006)
0.006**
(0.003)

-0.007
(0.026)
0.007***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.030)
0.009*
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.002)

912

X
X
912

1,008

X
X
1,008

-0.001
(0.026)
0.008*
(0.004)
0.001
(0.002)
0.052**
(0.023)
0.108***
(0.021)
X
X
1,92

0.061

0.887

0.057

0.905

0.880

After*Treat
Treat
Year f.e.
Potential exp f.e.
Observations

R-squared
0.056
Panel B: Non-permanent
contracts
After
Trend
After*Trend
After*Treat
Treat
Year f.e.
Potential exp f.e.
Observations
R-squared

DiD

Robust standard errors clustered by cohort in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

34

19661
19662
19663
19664
19671
19672
19673
19674
19681
19682
19683
19684
19691
19692
19693
19694
19701
19702
19703
19704
19711
19712
19713
19714
19721
19722
19723
19724

-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Figure 5. Plot of beta coefficients for the probability of working before age 18 for high-school dropouts.

cohort
Note: The coefficients are from a regression of the probability of having the first job at age 18 or before with
dummies for cohorts, dummies for the trimester of birth and the unemployment rate of the region at the
trimester of labor market entry.
Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

35

19661
19662
19663
19664
19671
19672
19673
19674
19681
19682
19683
19684
19691
19692
19693
19694
19701
19702
19703
19704
19711
19712
19713
19714
19721
19722
19723
19724

-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Figure 6. Plot of beta coefficients for the probability of working before age 19 for high-school dropouts.

cohort
Note: The coefficients are from a regression of the probability of having the first job at age 19 or before with
dummies for cohorts, dummies for the trimester of birth and the unemployment rate of the region at the
trimester of labor market entry.

36

Table 5. Probability of working before age 18/19, individual-level data.

Before 18

After

(1)

(2)

0.02
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.02***
(0.00)
-0.01***
(0.00)
0.11***
(0.01)
0.09***
(0.01)
0.05***
(0.01)

0.06***
(0.02)
0.00
(0.00)
0.02***
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.13***
(0.01)
0.10***
(0.01)
0.04***
(0.01)

0.44***
(0.07)

0.09***
(0.02)
0.00
(0.00)
0.02***
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.12***
(0.01)
0.10***
(0.01)
0.03**
(0.01)
0.07***
(0.02)
-0.04**
(0.02)
0.42***
(0.07)

14,071
0.07

14,071
0.07

Constant

0.35***
(0.06)

0.03*
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.02***
(0.00)
-0.01***
(0.00)
0.11***
(0.01)
0.09***
(0.01)
0.05***
(0.01)
0.03**
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.34***
(0.06)

Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

14,071
0.08

14,071
0.08

Trend
After*Trend
UR entry (region)
Trimester Birth 1
Trimester Birth 2
Trimester Birth 3

Before 19
(3)

Cohort 1968.3
Cohort 1968.4

(4)

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

37

180

190

Yearly days worked
200
210
220

230

Figure 7. Annual number of days worked in the first ten years of potential labor market experience: high-school
dropouts

1965q1 1966q1 1967q1 1968q1 1969q1 1970q1 1971q1 1972q1
Cohort
95% CI

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

38

8.4

Log yearly earnings
8.5
8.6
8.7

8.8

Figure 8. Logarithm of yearly earnings in the first 10 years of labor market experience: high-school dropouts.

1965q1 1966q1 1967q1 1968q1 1969q1 1970q1 1971q1 1972q1
Cohort
95% CI

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

39

Table 6. Number of days worked per year

First 10 years of potential experience

After
Trend
After*Trend

High school dropouts
(1)
(2)
‐11.916***
‐9.829***
(3.194)
(3.376)
0.373
‐0.571
(0.245)
(0.826)
‐1.602***
‐1.604***
(0.356)
(0.360)

High school graduates
(3)
(4)
1.852
0.816
(2.375)
(3.223)
0.421*
‐3.272***
(0.208)
(0.485)
‐0.897***
‐0.274
(0.256)
(0.319)

After*Treat
Treat
X
Year f.e.
X
Potential exp f.e.
352
352
416
Observations
0.060
0.849
0.002
R-squared
Robust standard errors clustered by cohort in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

X
X
416
0.889

DiD
(5)
2.838
(2.529)
‐2.529***
(0.385)
‐0.526**
(0.241)
‐17.073***
(2.166)
‐28.503***
(1.893)
X
X
768
0.809

Up to 2012
High school
dropouts
(6)
‐6.503***
(2.272)
0.048
(0.641)
‐0.751***
(0.267)

X
X
912
0.938

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

40

Table 7. Logarithm of yearly earnings

First 10 years of potential experience

After
Trend
After*Trend

High school dropouts
(1)
(2)
‐0.106***
‐0.089***
(0.030)
(0.028)
0.017***
‐0.008
(0.003)
(0.008)
‐0.024***
‐0.020***
(0.003)
(0.003)

High school graduates
(3)
(4)
0.057***
0.007
(0.016)
(0.026)
‐0.001
‐0.040***
(0.001)
(0.004)
0.001
0.003
(0.002)
(0.003)

After*Treat
Treat
X
Year f.e.
X
Potential exp f.e.
352
352
404
Observations
0.032
0.907
0.008
R-squared
Robust standard errors clustered by cohort in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

X
X
404
0.921

DiD
(5)
0.006
(0.019)
‐0.033***
(0.003)
‐0.002
(0.002)
‐0.065**
(0.025)
‐0.368***
(0.023)
X
X
756
0.893

Up to 2012
High school
dropouts
(6)
‐0.075***
(0.020)
0.001
(0.006)
‐0.012***
(0.002)

X
X
912
0.974

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

41

Table 8. Interactions of the effect of the reform with potential experience dummies. High-school dropouts.

Days Worked
(1)

Log.Earnings
(2)

0.033
(0.641)
‐0.726**
(0.267)
‐9.976***
(3.522)
‐4.493*
(2.574)
‐5.512*
(2.767)
259.672***
(85.511)
X
X
912
0.939

0.000
(0.005)
‐0.012***
(0.002)
‐0.094***
(0.029)
‐0.067**
(0.025)
‐0.063**
(0.023)
8.195***
(0.630)
X
X
912
0.974

Trend
After*Trend
After*PotExp0_9
After*PotExp10_19
After*PotExp20+
Constant
Year f.e.
Potential exp f.e.
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

42

Table 9. Robustness checks. Number of days worked per year, high-school dropouts.

First 10 years of potential experience
Reducing Bandwidth

After
Trend
After*Trend
Trend^2
After*Trend^2

8 Trimest
-10.789***
(3.255)
-2.077*
(1.037)
-0.805
(0.833)

12 Trimest
-11.391***
(3.129)
-1.274
(0.794)
-1.199***
(0.388)

Polynomial Trends
2nd
Degree
-10.784**
(4.486)
-0.502
(1.333)
-1.271
(1.409)
0.001
(0.067)
-0.024
(0.094)

Trend^3
After*Trend^3
Year f.e.
X
X
X
Potent exp. f.e.
X
X
X
Observations
176
264
352
R-squared
0.864
0.855
0.849
Robust standard errors clustered by cohort in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

3rd
Degree
-11.214*
(5.782)
-2.255
(3.280)
3.121
(3.917)
-0.261
(0.483)
-0.185
(0.574)
-0.011
(0.019)
0.029
(0.023)
X
X
352
0.850

Dummies
for
transition
cohorts
-8.693**
(3.650)
-0.054
(0.848)
-1.883***
(0.381)

Controlling
Trimesters
Pot. Exp.
-10.726***
(3.480)
0.857***
(0.203)
-1.558***
(0.365)

X
X
352
0.850

X
X
352
0.867

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

43

Table 10. Robustness checks. Logarithm of yearly earnings, high-school dropouts.

First 10 years of potential experience
Reducing Bandwidth

After
Trend
After*Trend
Trend^2
After*Trend^2

8 Trimest
-0.086***
(0.027)
-0.011
(0.008)
-0.007
(0.006)

12 Trimest
-0.095***
(0.029)
-0.011
(0.010)
-0.016***
(0.004)

Polynomial Trends
2nd Degree
-0.093**
(0.034)
-0.012
(0.010)
-0.008
(0.010)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.001)

Trend^3
After*Trend^3
Year f.e.
X
X
X
Potential exp f.e.
X
X
X
Observations
176
264
352
R-squared
0.921
0.912
0.907
Robust standard errors clustered by cohort in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

3rd
Degree
-0.064
(0.042)
-0.041
(0.029)
0.034
(0.033)
-0.005
(0.005)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
X
X
352
0.908

Dummies
for
transition
cohorts
-0.096***
(0.029)
-0.004
(0.008)
-0.022***
(0.003)

Controlling
Trimesters
Pot. Exp.
-0.097***
(0.026)
0.014***
(0.002)
-0.019***
(0.003)

X
X
352
0.908

X
X
352
0.934

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

44

Table 11 . Number of days worked per year in regions with low and high unemployment rate growth in the 1980s.

First 10 years of potential experience
Low UR growth
HS dropouts HS graduates
DiD
HS dropouts
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
After
-16.647***
0.206
0.888
-5.491
(5.037)
(4.369)
(3.219)
(5.205)
Trend
0.587
-4.528***
-3.312***
-1.388
(1.011)
(0.669)
(0.528)
(1.192)
After*Trend
-2.115***
-0.568
-0.872**
-1.411**
(0.626)
(0.428)
(0.329)
(0.614)
After*Treat
-17.094***
(3.391)
Treat
-34.466***
(2.553)
Year f.e.
X
X
X
X
Potential exp f.e.
X
X
X
X
Observations
352
416
768
352
R-squared
0.813
0.880
0.790
0.821
Robust standard errors clustered by cohort in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

High UR growth
DiD
HS graduates
(6)
(5)
1.296
4.197
(3.197)
(2.882)
-2.526***
-2.074***
(0.466)
(0.397)
-0.097
-0.343
(0.310)
(0.289)
-17.223***
(3.066)
-25.041***
(2.727)
X
X
X
X
416
768
0.883
0.802

Note: Regions with low average unemployment rate growth (3.1 percentage points) in 1982-1986 were:
Baleares, Catalunya, Valencia, Murcia & Castilla La Mancha.
Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20) or High School graduates (born
between 1962 1969 and start working before age 22).

45

Table 12. Number of days worked per year and logarithm of yearly wages for high school dropouts after
controlling for the unemployment rate of the trimester of labor market entry.

First 10 years of potential experience
Number of days worked
Logarithm yearly wages
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
‐15.028***
‐14.704***
‐0.156***
‐0.116***
After
(4.462)
(5.070)
(0.036)
(0.035)
‐0.528
‐1.486
0.003
‐0.013
Trend
(1.279)
(1.385)
(0.011)
(0.012)
‐0.363
0.412
‐0.004
‐0.008
After*Trend
(1.684)
(2.002)
(0.014)
(0.016)
1.913
3.116
0.030
0.018
LM entry UR
(2.580)
(2.966)
(0.021)
(0.023)
X
X
Year f.e.
X
X
Potential exp f.e.
352
352
352
352
Observations
0.060
0.849
0.033
0.907
R-squared
Robust standard errors clustered by cohort in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20).

46

-20

-10

0

10

20

Figure 9. Number of days worked per year: placebo test, 2 cohort-years bandwidth

1967q1

1968q1

1969q1
cohort

Estimated Effect

1970q1
95% Confidence Interval

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20).

47

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Figure 10. Logarithm of yearly earnings: placebo test, 2 cohort-years bandwidth

1967q1

1968q1

1969q1
cohort

Estimated Effect

1970q1
95% Confidence Interval

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL) Sample of Native Males who are High School
dropouts (born between 1965 and 1972 and start working before age 20).

48

APPENDIX
Table 13. Aggregation of sectors in the economy.

Sector of the economy

Description of sector

High Tech.
Manufacturing

Manufacturing using capital intensive and ICT
technologies (Chemical industry, electrical industry,
etc.)

Low Tech.
Manufacturing

Manufacturing with low capital intensity (Furniture,
Plastics, etc.)

High Tech. Services

Transport, Telecommunication, Finances, Education,
Health, etc.

Trade

Wholesale trade, retail.
Hotels, restaurants, etc.

Other Low Tech.
Activities

Labor intensive Services (water and waste treatment,
personal services), Agriculture, Energy Industry

Construction

Building activities

Public Administration
& Real State

All public activities but health and education. Real
State activities

Missing

No information about sector of activity

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

49

Figure 11. Share of individuals who find the first job at age 16 by cohort and share of individuals who find the first
job at age 15 or before by cohort.

0,6
Share First Job at 16
0,5

Share First Job at 15 or Before

0,4
0,3
0,2
0,1
0
1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

50

-20

-10

0

10

20

Figure 12. Number of days worked per year: placebo test

1966q1

1967q1

1968q1

1969q1
cohort

Estimated Effect

1970q1

1971q1

95% Confidence Interval

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

51

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Figure 13. Log yearly earnings: placebo test

1966q1

1967q1

1968q1

1969q1
cohort

Estimated Effect

1970q1

1971q1

95% Confidence Interval

Source: Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales (MCVL).

52

