                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        COUNTRY RISK AND THE ORGANIZATION
                        OF INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL TRANSFER




                                  Jonathan Eaton

                                  Mark Gersovitz




                              Working Paper No. 2204




                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 1987




Prepared for the Conference on Debt, Stabilization and Development in memory
                                                       23—25, 1986. Eaton
of Carlos F. Diaz—Alejandro, Helsinki, Finland, August
completed work on this paper while a consultant for the Macroeconomics Division,
Development Research Department, World Bank. He gratefully acknowledges the
earlier support of the National Science Foundation. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                            I'WER Working Paper #2204
                                            April 1987


Country Risk and the Organization of International Capital Transfer



                             ABSTRACT



                                                   the risk of default
     Foreign portfolio investment is threatened by
and repudiation, while direct foreign investment isthreitened by the

 risk of expropriation. These two contractual forms of investment can

 differ substantially in: (I) the amount of capital they can transfer

 from abroad to capital-importing countries; (2) the shadow cost of

 capital and (3) their implications for the tax policy of the host. The

 interaction of public borrowing from abroad with investments abroad by

 private citizens of the borrowing country can imply multiple equilibria

 with very different welfare consequences. One equilibrium involves

 private inflows and repayment of public debt. Another is characterized

 by capital flight and default.




  Jonathan Eaton                               Mark Gersovitz
  Oepartment of Economics                      Woodrow Wilson School
  Rouss Hall                                   Princeton University
                                               Princeton, New Jersey 08544
  University of Virginia
  Charlottesville, Virginia 22901              (609) 452-4797
   (804) 924—7580
                                   —3—




1. Introduction

     Carlos fliaz—Alejandro analyzed many aspects of the international

transfer of capital. Among the factors that he stressed, perhaps none

was given more emphasis than the way the transfer of capital is

organized. It is in this cluster of issues that we find the themes for

our paper.

     On the side of suppliers of capital, the questions that arise most

prominently in Diaz-Alejandro's writings are: (i) whether the cohesion

among creditors that allows them to enforce contracts will also lead to

other sorts of collusive behavior, perhaps reflected in returns to the

providers of capital above their opportunity costs of funds (Bacha and

Diaz-Alejandro, 1982, and Diaz-Alejandro, 1984); and (ii) whether there

is sufficient flexibility in the contract under which capital is

provided, given the contingencies that may arise (Diaz-Alejandro, 1984).

This latter topic subsumes some important aspects of the differences

between lenders and direct investors.

     As for the recipients of capital, one issue is whether the public

 sector obtains capital and compensates its owners in a centraliz?d

 fashion, or whether private entities play this role atornistically

 (Diaz-Alejandro, 1984). In the second case, the issue arises as to what

 actions the public sector takes if private agents do not fulfill their

 contractual obligations (Diaz-Alejandro, 1985). Another related question

 is the role of capital transfers abroad by private agents (so-called

 capital flight), especially when the public sector may be responsible for

 recompensing foreign suppliers of capital (Diaz-Alejandro, 1984).

      All these considerations bear on the central issue of how much a

 country should borrow in an environment of country risk and the dual
                                   -4-




problem of assessing the cost of capital in such circumstances. Quoting

Harberger twice:



        The 'risk premium' charged on loans should not be
        considered as part of the cost of borrowing, so long
        as that premium truly reflects the probability of
        default, and so long as that probability, in turn, is
        accurately perceived by both borrowers and lenders
        In short, the default premium reflects that part of
        the stated interest rate that is (on average) not
        expected to be paid. And if it is not expected to be
        paid, it is not part of the cost ... The above
        statement holds even when the probability of default
        is a function of the size of the debt of the
        individual borrower. (Harberger, 1976, p. 1).



and later,




        [D]eveloping countries typically face an upward-rising
        supply curve of capital funds. The marginal cost
        to the country of borrowing exceeds the average cost.
        This is a genuine negative externality that in
        principle justifies a tax on foreign borrowing (that
        is, each additional foreign loan tends to increase the
        country risk premium to be paid as other foreign loans
        are renewed or new ones made). (Harberger, 1985, p.
        236).




     In Section 2 we characterize optimal borrowing in the presence of

default risk, and discuss the relationships between the world interest

rate, the interest rate charged the borrower, and the social cost of

capital to the national economy. Our results indicate that almost any

relative ordering of these magnitudes is possible.

    Whether market imperfections arise when borrowing is decentralized

among individual firms is a question that has been addressed by Kahn

(1984). In order to compare the implications of alternative
                                   —5—




organizational forms of capital transfer, Section 3 summarizes some of

his results.

     A third issue that we. addr!ss (in Section 4) is the capacity of.

direct foreign investment, relative to the social optimum and to

portfolio investment, to transfer capital to developing countries. Even

when the penalty for expropriation is equivalent to that for default,

different amounts of capital will be transferred. There is no necessary

ordering, but we find a presumption that under laissez-faire direct

investment cannot sustain as much movement of capital as portfolio

investment.1

     In these sections we also examine the optimal taxation of foreign

investment with sovereign risk.2 Portfolio and direct investment have

different tax implications, and either a tax or a subsidy can be the

better policy.

      In section 5 we turn to the simultaneous interaction of public debt

and private investment. One result is that even in a very simple

 framework there may be several equilibria. One is a Pareto optimum which

 satisfies all the standard marginal conditions and in which debt is

 repaid. The presence oflarge public debt—service obligations (and the

 tax obligations they foretell) implies a second, less favorable

 equilibrium characterized by a flight of private capital to foreign

 countries and nonrepayment of public debt.




      This result supports pessimism about the potential for refinancing
      the bank loans of major debtors with direct private investment, a
      component of the recent Baker initiative.

 2    Gersovitz (1985) discusses aspects of taxation of foreign investment
      in developing countries.
                                        -6—



2. Optimal Indebtedness

     We consider a country with n potential domestic projects. Each

project .produces:an output q (inclusive of remaining capital) determined

by the production relationship


     q. =
      ]
              fjk.)
               1 1        f! >
                            1    0,   1'!
                                       1
                                            <0


where k. is the amount invested.
          1

     The national capital stock is It.        There is also an international

capital market in which the gross safe interest rate is given exogenously

to this country at r. The government automatically enforces all loan

contracts among nationals. If it fails to enforce a loan contract with a

foreign lender then the country experiences a penalty equivalent to a

loss of income of P(x).3 We introduce uncertainty by assuming that the

penalty is stochastic: x is a random variable distributed uniformly on

the interval 10, 1] and P'(x) > 0.      The realization of x is not known at

the time loans are extended, but is learned before repayment is made.




    This is a very abstract representation of the penalty that may be
    imposed on recipients of foreign capital who do not honor contracts.
    In fact, the penalties are likely to be quite indirect, such as
    exclusion from: (1) future borrowing (Eaton and Gersovitz, 1981a
    and 1981b); (2) specialized inputs or technological know-how (Eaton
    and Gersovitz, 1984); and (3) foreign trade (Gersovitz, 1983, Kahn,
    1984, and Alexander, 1985). Eaton and Gersovitz (1983) contrast the
    penalties available to financial lenders and direct investors,
    whereas in this paper we investigate the implications of different
    ways of organizing the transfer of capital when the penalty is of
    the same type and magnitude. As argued in Gersovitz (1985) and
    Eator et. al. (1986) the form of the penalty may have important
    consequences for comparative statics and for policy prescriptions.
    In this paper, we adopt the simple formulation of the penalty as a
    first step.
                                            —7—




     Upon learning x, the government chooses to enforce existing debt

contracts with foreigners, or not, depending upon the consequence for

national income.

     With repayment, national income is                where



     14 =      — 5K.                                                              (2.1)



Here s is the gross interest rate charged by foreign lenders,
     n
Q    a     P' domestic           output exclusive of any penalty, and
     1=1

KI     1 Ic. — K, foreign debt. If it chooses not to enforce contracts
      i= 1

then national income is



      yE() =    Q
                    —   P(x).                                                     (2.2)



The decision consequently depends upon whether



      P(x)     5K1.                                                               (2.3)



      The probability of default is x where P(x*) = sK1.                   If x C x" then
                                                               4
 the government defaults while x >          x     it repays.       •We define the function




      h(slé)        I -   x"   = 1 -   p(sIé)
 as the probability of repaying given that an amount sK1 is owed.




       We arbitrarily resolve ties in favor of repayment.
                                                  —8—




     International loan markets determine an interest rate s, given the

loan amount K, that satisfies the zero expected profit condition5



     s h(sK )
                 f
                     = r.                                                           (2.4)


A possibility, of course, is that for some levels of K no value of s

satisfies this relationship. These levels will simply not be available.

     At the time borrowing decisions are made, the penalty is not known.

We assume (i) that the government's objective, at this stage, is to

maximize the expectation of a function U of national income and (ii) that

the government directly controls the amount invested in each project, the

k.'s. Substituting (2.1) and (2.2), the objective function is



             =
                              EQ - P(x)]   dx +   h(K)    U(Q-K),                   (2.5)


         f           .                       ..   .
with K as defined above and condition (2.4) relating s and K                   f
     The first—order condition for a maximum is



     dW =
                 1-h(K) u       [Q - P(x)]    f!(k.) dx



     +       h(K)    U'(Q —   slé)   If(k.) — s     —
                                                        4! K]   = 0 i1, ...,   n.   (2.6)
                                                        dK


From the zero expected profit condition (2.4)




    Either lenders' risk neutrality or the perfect diversifiability of
    this country's risk of defaulting is justification for this
    assumption.
                                                 —9—



                       f
    ds             -s/K




where



             =
             —
                 h'(slé)   sK
                   h(K)
the (negative) elasticity of the repayment probability with respect to

what is owed.

        Using the expression for t,             condition   (2.6) becomes



        f!(k.) =      Ir/(l+s)I     4'                                           (2.8)


where



                                         )
        4'   E (h(sK)      +
                                jt1shC       UIYE(x)]   dx/Ut(YN)}l.


        Note first that the right-hand side of expression (2.8) is

independent of i. Not surprisingly, optim!lity requires equating the

marginal product of capital across projects.

        In the case of constant marginal utility 4':               1, while risk aversion

implies that 4'        > 1.      Risk-averse borrowers should borrow less than

 risk-neutral borrowers. The reason is that, at the optimum, an increase

 in borrowing raises income by f!(k.) in the (high-income) default state

 and therefore must lower it in the (low—income) no—default state. An
increase in risk aversion pushes the borrowing
                                                                country toward doing just
the opposite.6

     At the optimum an increase in borrowing can never lower total

debt-service obligations. Otherwise an increase in                      would raise income

in all states of the world. This condition ensures that 1 ÷ e > 0.

Since g C 0, condition (2.8) implies that for c < 0, even risk-neutral

borrowers should borrow less than what equates the marginal product of

capital to the world interest rate. The reason is that borrowing more

raises the probability that the country will suffer the penalty.

     Three special cases illustrate various possibilities in the

relationships among the nominal interest rate, the cost of capital and

the amount borrowed at the optimum:

     First, if the penalty is nonstochastic then credit will be available

up to an amount P/r at rate r. None is available above that amount at

any nominal rate. For                 C P/r,      = 0 and the standard equating of the

marginal product of capital to the world safe interest rate is optimal.

At       =   P/r   credit is rationed, but competition keeps the rate charged at

r.


     Second, if the penalty is discretely distributed, as, for example,

if P(x) =
              P1
                   for x in [0, it] and P(x) =            for   x in (it, 1] then for

P1/r C        <       (1 -   lt)/r,   c =   0.   Equating the marginal product to the



6
     This result is sensitive to the way in which the risk of default is
     introduced into the model. Since it is the penalty that is unknown
     at the time of the borrowing decision, default occurs in the
     well-endowed, low-penalty state. An alternative specification (used
     in Eaton and Gersovitz, 1981a) is one in which the penalty is
     constant in utility terms and income is stochastic. Risk aversion
     consequently implies default in poorly-endowed states. This
     insurance aspect of borrowing and default could imply that risk
     aversion makes more borrowing optimal.
                                              —11—




safe world interest rate is optimal for a risk-neutral country. Even

though there is the possibility of default, a marginal increase in the

amount borrowed does not increase its likelihood, and therefore.the

marginal cost of borrowing.                   .
                                                         -



     Third,   if P(x) =     x/(1   -
                                        x),   so that an infinite penalty is possible,
                                                             £
then the probability of repayment is1/(l + sK ).                      The zero-profit

condition (2.6) implies an inverse loan supply function



     s =   r/(1   —   ne)                                                                 (2.9)




     no capital available at a level above hr. With risk neutrality

optimal borrowing implies that



     f!(k.) =     nf(1—rK)    =    s.                                                     (2.10)



     In general, there is no ordering of the marginal product of capital

and s, the nominal interest rate, at the optimum. In the nonstochastic

case r = s but if credit is rationed then the marginal product of capital

exceeds both r and s. In the case of the binominal distribution of the

penalty and an interior value of Ié, s =              r/(l   -   n)   >   r,   but with

risk-neutrality the marginal product of capital should equal r. Finally,

 in the third special case we considered, optimality happens to involve

 e4uating the marginal product of capital to s, contrary to the first

 quotation from Harberger.

     Note also that the marginal cost of capital does not necessarily

 increase monotonically in the amount borrowed. In the case of the

 binomial distribution of the penalty the marginal cost is r both for
                                   -12-



in [O,P1/r) and for    in (P1/r, (1-n) P2/r), but at      =          the
                                                              P1/r
marginal cost is infinite since an infinitessimal increase in          raises

interest costs by nP1/(1—n).



3. Decentralized Borrowing

     We now turn to the case in which each investment project is managed

by a private national who borrows and invests in order to maximize his

utility from the profit generated by the project.7 This is the case

considered by Kahn (1984), and our analysis largely follows his. The

government's failure to enforce the loan obligations of
                                                          y    borrower
provokes the implementation of the same penalty, and its severity is

independent of the amount owed. The choice to enforce foreign debt

contracts or not thus remains an all-or-nothing decision for the

borrowing country. It suffers the same penalty regardless of how much is

not repaid, so if it does not enforce one debt contract, there is no

point in enforcing any other.

     One reason for foreign lenders to adopt this attitude is their

reliance on the government of the borrowing country to enforce even

private contracts. Diaz—Alejandro's (1985) account of the 1982 financial

crisis in Chile indicates that foreign lenders took exactly this stance

when several private banks with large debts to U.S. banks declared

bankruptcy. As part of its free-market orientation the Chilean

government had explicitly not guaranteed these debts, but the U.S. banks

threatened to embargo loans to the Chilean government if these debts were

cancelled. The government chose to assume them.



    An incentive, of course, might arise for borrowers to merge their
    projects into single firms. We do not pursue this issue here.
                                         —13—



     The amount borrowed in a decentralized allocation depends, among

other things, on how the government distributes the cost of default, if

itshould occur, among borrowers. In general, in the event of default an

individual borrower suffers.an additional cost tt(k,x).8 If the burden

is distributed among borrowers according to their share of total
                                    -




borrowing, for example, then                                               -




     t      (k,x) =   (k/K)P(x).

     Let u.(n.) denote the utility of the owner of the firm as a function

of firm profit, it..       He chooses        and       to maximize an objective

function




     w.      51—h(5K) u.[f.(k.) -       rk - tt(k,        x)] dx



            + h (5K) u. [f.(k.) -       rk   —   sk]                           (3.1)




where       is the interest rate on domestic capital and Ic. =            + .K.


     The two first—order conditions for a maximum are




        f(k.) =   r   + — Ic'?                                                 (3-2)
        1    1
                        dk'?
                          1.




 8

        For some borrowers this cost could be negative. If, for example, a
        consequence of default is a loss of opportunities for international
        trade then tL    might be negative for projects producing import
        substitutes.
                                                                        -14-




and



                                                                               I
        f!(k ) =            [r       I+c                   +       11-h(sK
                                                                    0      u'(x)
                                                                             1   t'(kf,x)dx/
                                                                                  k 1

                                                -r -       -d
                                                           U
                        —   h(sk1) _&._ 1
                            ______                             1
                                         11-c         _•                                              (3.3)
                                Kf
                                                       1


where



                [h(sjé) +            51-h(sK1) u!(x)
                                                1
                                                     dx/u'1
                                                        1


      u!(x) E           uIf.(k.) - rk ti(kf,x)]        -




            E   u'[fjk.)             -            f
                                          rk.1- sk.]
        1           11                            1


      u'        u.[f.(k.)                rk — t'(1c, 5kg)]


            E u.1fjk)
              111                        rk.1 -   -
                                                  sk.J
                                                           f
        1                                           1


and



        1       ..
                3
                            J




foreign borrowing by other firms.
      The conditions that I +                              >       0,    that c not increase as K1 rises, and
that 'kk >          0   ensure that the second-order conditions for a                          maximum are

satisfied.
                                     -Is—



      Whether there is too much or too little borrowing under laissez

faire, in comparison with the social optimum, depends on four factors:9

        (i) Risk. If. the tax system distributes the burden of the

penalty iii proportion to income, and private and public attitudes toward

risk coincide, then •.    4.   Greater risk aversion on the part of the
private sector than on the part of the public leads to less borrowing

than is socially optimal. If the government is more risk averse then

there is too much borrowingJ0

      (ii) The "Commons" Nature of Interest Costs. An increase in the

foreign debt of any single borrower reduces the probability of repayment

(if E C 0), raising the likelihood that others will experience the

penalty. This cost is not internalized by any single borrower. This

effect acts to raise borrowing above the socially-optimal level. It is

more important the larger a,   the   elasticity of the repayment probability

with respect to debt-service obligations, and the smaller 14/K1, the

firm's share of total borrowing.

      (iii) The Redistribution of the Penalty. If tk > 0 then an

individual borrower increases his share of the total burden of the

penalty by borrowing more. This effect acts to discourage borrowing.

This disincentive to borrow may outweigh the effect of additional

borrowing on the cost of capital to other borrowers. In this case,

relative to the social optimum there is underborrowing as long as private

borrowers are at least as risk averse as the public.




       All but the first play a role in Kahn's analysis. He assumes risk
       neutrality.
 10    Again, alternative specifications of the source of uncertainty imply
       different results.
                                              -16-



       (iv) The Incidence of the Penalty. Whether an individual borrower

benefits or loses from a decision to default depends upon whether
  f> t if
sk.    (k.,
                     f
                  sl( ).    To the extent that private borrowers as a groupbear
                                                       .                          H



less than the full penalty of default, more will be borrowed than is

socially optimal. The opposite is the case if private borrowers suffer

more from default than the nation as a whole.

       Note that under       laissez-faire,     borrowing does not typically equate

the marginal product of capital across sectors. It is relatively lower

in projects that contribute only a small share to total foreign

borrowing, since here the external effect associated with borrowing is

greater. It will also be lower in projects whose owners bear less of the

burden of the penalty of default. A tendency may emerge, for example,

for more to be invested in production of import substitutes or non-traded

goods; see Gersovitz (1983), Kahn (1984) or Alexander (1985).

       In summary, decentralization of borrowing decisions can lead either

to under or to overborrowing. The effect on different projects can vary.

Either taxation or subsidization of borrowing may be optimal. In one

particular case (if            =        =    or k/K = 0, t(k, s!J) = skf,             and
   =   0) the laissez—faire allocation corresponds to the social optimum.
With 4.   = •, the       sign of the optimal tax on foreign borrowing by firm i

is the sign of the expression



             -f
   -   £_.         -. 51-h(5K) u!(x) t(k,x)dx/!-l- __ h(sIé)                u- u
                                                                             r    d

                                                                                       (34)
                                   —17—




4. Direct Foreign Investment

      We now turn to the case in which foreigners invest directly in

domestic projects. Foreign investors can borrow in the world capital

market at the safe interest rate, r, and always repay their loans in this

market.

      In the absence of expropriation foreign investors earn the after-tax

profit on their investment, it., net of interest payments to foreign

lenders. National income equals total output, less payments to foreign

investors (equal to profits plus loans from abroad).   Like default,

expropriation imposes a cost P(x) on the country where again P(x) > 0

and x is perceived as uniformly distributed'on [0,11 at the time

investments are made. Its exact value is known at the time of the

expropriation decision, however.

      For purposes of comparison with our analysis of default, we treat

expropriation here as an all-or-nothing event.   This assumption may be

 less appropriate for expropriation, since it is more likely to occur on a

 selective basis, with expropriation of each project provoking a separate

 penalty.

       If expropriated, foreign investors receive nothing from their

 investment in this country. They do not pay any local factors of




 11    The contrast between the reactions of foreign investors to
       expropriation and to default.was notable in the case of Peru in the
       1970's. See Eaton and Gersovitz (1983).
                                   —18—




 production, but do repay loans from abroad.12 In the absence of

 expropriation the investor remits an amount



                     +   rkf,                                         (4.1).



profit plus the payment on foreign loans. In contrast, portfolio

investors providing an amount kf would receive sk in the absence of

default. The tact that remittances of direct investors
                                                         depend directly

upon output, while those of portfolio investors do not, is the basic

difference between these contractual forms.

                                                                n
     Defining total remittances with no expropriation as S E            and
                                                               i=1
                                                 n
total domestic output (less any penalty) as Q     f,(kj, national
                                                i= 1

income without expropriation is



         =   Q
                 -   s                                               (4.2)



while in the event of expropriation it is



         (x) = Q -         P(x).                                     (4.3)



The government will choose to expropriate or not as



     S   P(x).                                                       (4.4)


12
        expropriation led to default on the borrowing of direct
     investors, then direct investors would transfer all risk to foreign
     lenders. The analysis would be the same as that of the previous
     section, only with foreign investors replacing domestic owners of
     firms as borrowers.
                                                -19—




    4.1 Laissez—faire Investment

    The expected profit from an investment in project                      iis


       =    -rk + h(s)          [f.{k.) -   yj.                                      (4.5)




Here, as before, h(s)             1 -   P(S);        y. is payment to local factors of
                                                                                 f
production. A risk-neutral foreign investor will choose ak that

satisfies the first-order condition




     f!(k.) =       {r   -   h'(S)       [fjk.) -       y.]}   /   h(S).                 (4.6)




                                                                           investors will bid
     Competition among potential risk-neutral foreign

   up to the point at which                 =   0,   so that




     y. =      fjk.)     -rk I h(S).                                                     (4.7)




If there is no expropriation then the foreign investor remits



           =             -      = rk    I   h(s).                                        (4.8)




 Summing across potential investments,



                                                                                          (4.9)
      S =      ne   I   h(S),


 which implicitly defines S as a function of                           Differentiating    this


 relationship with respect to k indicates that
                                                 -20-



        dS    —             r           r/h(S)
        dkf       h'(S)    S + h(s) —    i-f-s                      (4   .10)


where, parallel to. the case of portfolio investment



        s     h'(S) 5/ h(S)



the (negative) elasticity of the probability of non-expropriation with

respect to remittances.

        Substituting these relationships back into the first-order condition



                           1 +
        f(k.) =       r          1+s1   ]   I h(S)                  (4.11)


where



      if          X   kf



foreign borrowing by other foreign investors.13

      A comparison of the marginal products of capital under laissez-faire

direct foreign investment and under laissez—faire foreign borrowing (for

the   risk-neutral case), assuming that default and expropriation
provoke equivalent penalties, indicates no necessary ordering. Two
effects      operate in different directions:




13
      Again, the conditions that 1 + C > 0 and that S not rise as    rises
      insure that the second—order condition for a maximum is satisfied.
                                           —21—



     (1) If the marginal unit of foreign borrowing raises the share of

the penalty of default born by the individual borrower then the flow of

capital under direct investment tends to exceed that under portfolio

investment. To the extent that the penalty of default is borne by those

making the borrowing decision, while those making the investment decision

avoid the penalty of expropriation, more capital is transferred under

direct investment.



        (2) -   The term



                r [1 +   6(j/K)]   /   (1 + c)


is the expected marginal cost of an additional unit of foreign borrowing

both for a domestic firm (less any penalty assessment) and for a foreign

investor. Domestic firms earn a return f(k.) regardless of whether or

not there is default, but foreign investors earn this return only if

 there is no expropriation. Consequently, with risk neutrality, no
                                            i      f      U = sk.,
                                                                f
 marginal penalty assessment, and t              (k.,   sK )




        f(k1) =


 with   borrowing, but



        h(s) f(k') =



 with    direct investment. To the extent that this effect is relevant,

 portfolio investment can sustain moremovement of capital.
                                               -22-



      4.2 Taxing Foreign Investment

     We now introduce taxes on income remitted by foreign investors. To

simplify things we assume that all projects are identical (that is, that

f.(k) =    f(k)      for all i) and thatthere is no national capital (K = 0).

In addition, we assume that C is constant, implying that



     P (x) =k (1 _x)1'€ k>0.


The expected profit to a foreign investor who invests k in a typical

project is now



           =   -rk   + h(S) (1 -     t)   [f(k) -   y]                    (4.4')



where t is the tax rate on income remitted. The first-order condition

for a maximum is



     (1-t)h(S)f'(k) -          r   + h'(S)      (1-t)[f(k) -   y] =   0   (4.6')



and the zero-profit condition is



     y =   f(k)      - Tk /
                              h(S)(1-t).                                  (4.7')



Expressions (4.9) and (4.10) continue to apply; taxing foreign investment

does not affect the relationship between investment and after-tax

remittances. Substituting (4.10) into (4.6t) and invoking symmetry, the

first-order condition becomes
                                          —23—




      (1—t) h(S)f'(k) =    rEt   +   c(n'-l)/n]   /   (In).         (4.6")




This condition, along with tbe aggregate zero-expected profit condition



      rnk =   h(S)S,                                                (4.9')




determine Ic and S.




      An increase in the tax rate t affects k and S as follows;



      dk —    h(S)k(I+c)                                            42
                                                                    (.1)
      dt


      dS   rak                                                      (4.13)
      dt —


where



             (i-t) h(s) [q(i+e) + ci



and


        fl E f"(k) k/f'(k).



        As long as l+c > 0, so that increasing remittances in the

 no—expropriation state raises expected remittances overall,      C 0. Under

 this condition, an increase in the tax on remittances reduces both

 foreign investment and after-tax remittances should expropriation not

 occur.
                                                     -24-



       4.3 Optimal Taxation

       We posit, as in section 2, a government seeking to maximize the

expectation of a.function U of national income. The objective function

may be written



       W =                IJ[nf(k)     -
                                           P(x)]dx   t h(s) U[nf(k) -   SI.       (4.14)



Differentiating the expression with respect to t gives



            =    [    nf'(k)       -
                                       h(s)           0'                          (4.15)



where, as in section 2,



       $        [h(s) + f1h(S) U'((x)) I


       Incorporating           (4.12) and (4.13) into (4.15), using (4.6")



            =   flh    {$[l+e(n—l)/nI -       h(S)}.                              (4.15')



With       < 0, from an initial situation in which t =              0, an increase in t
raises or lowers expected welfare depending upon whether



       h(s)       441 + c(n-1)/n}.                                                (4.16)



       If a firm's investment has a negligible spillover onto other firms

(c = 0 or n = 1) and if the government is risk neutral (so that $ = 1)

then a subsidy on direct foreign investment is optimal. The reason is

simply that the country benefits from an additional unit of capital if it
                                   -25-




should expropriate, and this benefit is not captured by the firm

undertaking the investment.

      To the extent that investment by: a single borrower raises the

expeëted cost of capital for other firms, more investment takes place

under laissez-faire, given the underlying probability of expropriation.

      If the country is risk neutral then condition (4.16) becomes



      — e (n—1)/n   1 —h(S)



with the "commons effect" in the left-hand side and the probability of

expropriation on the right—hand side. To the extent that the externality

effect is large, too much capital is invested. If the probability of

expropriation is low, then the likelihood of the country benefitting from

an increase in its capital stock in the event of expropriation is low.

In this case a tax on foreign investment is appropriate. If

expropriation is likely, but externalities small, then a subsidy is

optimal.
      Risk aversion tilts the argument in favor of a tax. A tax shifts

income from the high endowment states (expropriation) toward the low

endowment state (protecting property:rights). A subsidy does the
            14
opposite.



      To summarize the results of the last two sections, decentralized

investment, whether it takes the form of borrowing by domestic firms or

direct investment by foreigners, may generate an externality by raising



 14   Again, alternative specifications of the nature of uncertainty can
      imply different results.
                                        -26-



the interest costs of other firms. This is Kahn's "commons effect," and

it leads to overborrowing relative to the social optimum.
   -
           Both decentralized borrowing and decentralized investment, however,

are subject to forces that could lead.to underborrowing. An increase in

a borrower's share of the burden of the default penalty, should default

occur, is a disincentive to borrow that does not reflect a social cost of

borrowing. The possibility of expropriation is a disincentive to invest

that does not reflect a lower social return on an investment.

           If loans to individual firms or if individual investment projects

stand alone in terms of the penalties that default or expropriation

provoke, then there is no externality across projects. The commons

problem disappears. If, in addition, borrowers suffer the full penalty

of default on their own loans then, with risk neutrality, the private and

socially-optimal levels of portfolio borrowing coincide. The amount of

foreign direct investment that takes place will be too low, relative to

the optimum, however, since investors lose their return in the event of

expropriation.
       -
           As argued above, investors seem more likely to adopt a stand-alone

principle in the case of direct foreign investment. This is an

additional reason that decentralized direct foreign investment can

sustain less capital movement than portfolio investment, under

laissez-faire.




5. Public Borrowing and Private Investment: The Capital Flight

   Phenomenon

           A number of countries with large public debts to foreign banks seem

also to have large amounts of private capital invested abroad, a
                                  —27—




phenomenon referred to as capital flight. Cuddington (1985) and Dooley

et al. (1983) provide alternative estimates of these flows for several

countries. To some extentstandard portfolio diversification motives can

explain these two-way flows. What is peculiar about capital flight from

large debtors is that capital inflows largely take the form of public and

publicly-guaranteed debt while outflows are private.

     Khan and Haque (1985) explain, this phenomenon on the basis of an

asyninetric risk of expropriation: Nationals investing domestically face

a risk of expropriation by their own   government   that exceeds the risk of

default on foreign loans. This risk is avoided by investing abroad.

     Their analysis does not relate the government's expropriation

decision to outstanding debt. In fact, prospective external debt-service

obligations may contribute to the private sector's fear of expropriation,

or other forms of taxation, as a means for the government to raise funds

to service debt. If capital located abroad escapes taxation and is free

of expropriation risk, then capital flight can emerge as a consequence of

heavy foreign borrowing.

     The same phenomenon :may explain the hesitation of foreign private

 investors to invest directly in the country. Investors can negotiate

 ex ante with the borrowing government a promised return on

 publicly-guaranteed portfolio loans. Failure to pay the promised return

 constitutes default, and investors can invoke the associated penalty

 straightforwardly. In contrast, the host-country government can affect

 •the return on direct private investment through myriad tax, exchange

 control, minimum wage and other types of policy. It is difficult to

 draft and to adjudicate a binding contract that specifies contingencies

 under which a government may or may not adopt various policies that
                                   -28-



affect the return on a direct investment. Investors consequently would

find it difficult to demonstrate that a host-country government has

renegged on any ex ante guarantee. Informational asymmetries between the

host-country government and foreign firm might expose one side or the

other to severe moral hazard problems if a contract were entered into and

enforced.

     In this section we explicitly introduce two forms of capital, public

and private, into the production process. Total domestic output is a

function of the domestic supplies of public capital P, private capital K,

and L, other factors of production that are internationally immobile and

in fixed supply domestically. These are called labor here. Output Q is

determined by the relationship



     Q =    F(P,K,L).                                               (5.1)




Production is at constant returns to scale.

     Marginal productivity conditions do not determine factor rewards,

however. Payments to private factors (K and L) exhaust output. The

government cannot capture the contribution of public investment to output

by charging directly for the use of its capital. The (pre-tax) returns

to private capital, , and labor ,   are homogenous-of-degree-zero
functions



       = gK(p       K, L), 4 < o                                    (5.2)

       =    gL(p,   K, L),   c o                                    (5.3)

that satisfy the relationship
                                    —29—




    gK (P, K, L) K ÷ gL (P, K, L) L =      F (P, K, L).                      (5.4)




hence payments to private factors alone exhaust output. The safe world

interest rate is r and the national supply of capital is .             At   this

point we assume that the penalty for default on public debt is too large

to make this option attractive.



     5.1 The Centralized Solution

     Standard marginal productivity conditions dictate the centralized
                                                 *
optimum; optimal values of P and K, denoted P and K ,            satisfy


        (P, K*, L) =           It, L) =    r.                                (5.5)




Total external indebtedness D is



     DP* +K*-K.
             —


     5.2 Decentralized Solutions

     We now assume that the government cannot allocate private capital

directly, and must borrow to finance public investment. It can tax

income from labor, and from capital invested domestically. It cannot tax

the wealth of its nationals directly, but only the income that this

wealth generates after it is invested. ilence It         is   not directly available

                                                     -
as a tax base to finance P.

     The optimal allocation can be supported by choosing proportional tax
       *                  *
rates t. for capital and tL for labor that satisfy
                                            -30-


        r = FK(P       K, L) =    (i-c)    gKp     K, L) =   (i—c) j        (5.5)


            =
        w
                FL(P*, K*, L) =   (i-ti)   gL(p K, L) =      (i_t4)   c     (5.6)


where w is the after-tax wage. Multiplying (5.5) by K* and (5.6) by L,

adding the results and invoking homogeneity ensures that



        Q - wL -     rK* = FP* =    rP,                                     (5.7)



The tax revenue exactly pays for the debt-service obligation on public

debt.

        This     equilibrium is compatible with competitive behavior of private
investors        since the after-tax return on private investment equals the

world       interest rate.

        5.3      Capital Flight and Country Runs

        A difficulty arises with the sequencing of decisions. We assume

that the government cannot undertake public investment subsequent to

private investment. If it attempts to implement the optimal allocation

it must first borrow and invest P            , generating a debt-service obligation
rP



        We assume that there is a limit on the revenue that can be raised

from taxing labor income. We specify the limit as a function TL(P,K,L),

and assume here that



        TL(P,K,L) > 4gL(p*,K*,L)L;                                          (5.8)
                                             —31—



the optimal tax rate is feasible. In the extreme, all labor income is
                    L    L
taxed, meaning that T = g L.

    We impose two restrictions, on this function. The first is that

Svenüe extracted from labor income cannever repay fully the public debt

if the optimal amount is borrowed, i.e.,



      L
     T (P , K, L) < rP
                             *
                                 .                                   (5.9)


The second is that an increase in the capital stock cannot generate a
                                    L
more than proportional increase in T ,              i.e.

     T K/TL < 1.                                                     (5.10)



            S
     Given P and L, if the government services its debt then the tax

burden on private investors will equal at least



      K
     T (P,K,L) = rP'
                         *
                             — T     L5
                                 (P ,K,L).                           (5.11)



The maximum after-tax return on capital as a function K is



     tuCK) =
               K *
               g   (P ,K,L) -        IrP
                                             L
                                           - T
                                                 (P,K,L)I/K.         (5.12)




     We now demonstrate the potential for multiple equilibria. One

equilibrium is the social optimum just derived, in which K =     K*, t =
and (1-4) g( =      r.   Tax revenue covers debt-service obligations, and debt

is repaid.
                                          -32-



      Another equilibrium is one with zero private investment. Since

      C    r   the country cannot attract only a small but strictly positive

amount of private capital. The government will have an incentive tO tax

any such amount at such a high rate that the after-tax return is

noncompetitive. In this case tax revenues do not cover debt-service

obligations. The country is insolvent. A certain threshold level of

private investment is needed to generate a competitive after-tax return.

      Other equilibria with private capital in the range (0, K) are also

possible, with an after-tax return on capital equal to the world rate.

      The potential for multiple equilibria can be modelled most starkly

by eliminating the fixed factor, labor, assuming that tL =       TL(P,K   L) = 0

so that private capital income is the only tax base. The function



                =   4 - rP'/K                                          (5.13)




is the actual after-tax return on capital. At the optimum,




while



        lim 4s(K) =    4 (p* ,   L) C r
      IC




and
                                             —33—




     urn 'I'    (K) =   -.
     KO

ontinuity of gK ensures that there are at least two equilibria in which
     =    r   (unless, by coincidence, max          5(K) =   r)   and one in which K =   0.
                                        K
If we posit the Marshallian adjustment mechanism



     I = A [5 (K) -rJ,            A >   0.

then both the equilibrium with the maximum amount invested and that with

K = 0 are stable. Figure 1 provides a simple illustration of this
                                            *
result.       Stable equilibria are at K = K and K =               0;   K = K is an unstable

equilibrium.

     In conclusion, the interaction of public and private borrowing gives

rise to situations of multiple equilibria, some of which Pareto-dominate

others. If the government must incur public debt before capital is

allocated then the tax burden implied by that debt leads to ranges in

which the after—tax return to private capital increases with the total

amount invested. One equilibrium is the Pareto—optimal one, with a

substantial amount of private investment earning a competitive return and

public loans repaid. No private investment (or a low level if capital

controls keep some capital from escaping) and insolvency characterize
                             15
another equilibrium.




15
     Diamond and Dybvig (1983) explain the potential for bank runs in a
     frimework that          is
                       formally similar to this one. In their model a
     nonconvexity in dynamic technology, along with the existence of
     deposit contracts, leads to the possibility of runs.
                                 -34-



    The model sketched here illustrates the potential for multiple

equilibria in a very simple context. The result survives several

modifications. Introducing the potential, for willful default, rather

than insolvency, in particular, would not change the character of the

results as long as the temptation to default grows as the domestic tax

base falls.



6. Conclusions

    'A frequent subject of Carlos Diaz-Alejandro's writings is the

complex and often stormy interactions of foreign capitalists, domestic

governments and local entrepreneurs. An analysis of foreign investment

that ignores the imperfect nature of property rights and contract

enforcement in international markets cannot explain these relationships.

Furthermore, the way that recipients and suppliers of capital organize

capital transfer has important implications for the functioning of

markets and for optimal policy in capital-importing countries.

Recognizing these features of the world economy makes evident the

fragility of the institutions that sustain movements of capital between

countries, and the potential for instability and conflict that they

generate.

     In this paper we have considered the implications of alternative

institutional arrangements for transferring capital between nations in

the presence of country risk. The effort has been an exploratory one and

the source of risk itself has not been discussed. Introducing

uncertainty about the production process as well as the penalty would

change the nature of the insurance that the option to default or

expropriate implicitly provides. It would also, of course, introduce
                                  —35—




additional reasons why direct and portfolio investment would allocate

risks differently.

     Mother issue is the interaction of foreign capital with domestic

factor markets. What,ih particular,. happens, when default is an option

domestically as well? Third, we have treated the stock of national

capital as given. What implication do our results have for accumulation

patterns in a dynamic context?
                                  -36—



                               REFERENCES



Alexander,Lewis S. (1985), "Trade and Sovereign Lending," (Unpublished,
    Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve hoard of Governors).

Bacha, Edthar Lisboa and Carlos F. Diaz—Alejandro (1982), International
     Financial Intermediation: A Long and Tropical View, Essays in
     International Finance No. 147, Princeton, NJ.

Cuddington, John T. (1985), "Capital Flight: Issues, Estimates and
     Explanations," (unpublished, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank).

Diamond, Douglas and Philip E. Dybvig (1983), "Bank Runs, Deposit
     Insurance and Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, 91: 401-409.

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F. (1984), "Latin American Debt: I Don't Think
     We Are in Kansas Anymore," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     2: 335—389.

Diaz—Alejandro, Carlos F. (1985), "Good—bye Financial Repression, Hello
     Financial Crash," Journal of Development Economics, 19: 1-24.

Dooley, Michael P., William 1-lelkie, Ralph Tryon and John Underwood
     (1983), "An Analysis of the External Debt Positions of Eight
     Developing Countries through 1990," International Finance Discussion
     Paper No. 227, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
     Washington, D.C.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1981a), "Debt with Potential
     Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical Analysis," Review of
     Economic Studies, 48: 289—309.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1981b), Poor Country Borrowing and
     the Repudiation Issue, Princeton Studies in International Finance-
     No. 4, Princeton, NJ.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1983), "Country Risk: Economic
     Aspects;" in Richard J. Herring, editor, Managing International
     Risk.. New York: . Cambridge University Press.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1984), "A Theory of Expropriation
     and Deviations from Perfect Capital Mobility," Economic Journal,
     94: 16-40.

 Eaton, Jonathan, Mark Gersovitz and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1986), "The Pure
      Theory of Country Risk," European Economic Review, 30: 481-513.

 Gersovitz, Mark (1983), "Trade, Capital Mobility and Sovereign Immunity,"
      Research Program in Development Studies Discussion Paper No. 108,
      Princeton University.
                                  -37-




Gersovitz, Mark (1984), "The Effects of Domestic Taxes on Foreign Private
     Investment," Research Program in Development Studies Discussion
     Paper No. 114, Princeton University.

Gersovitz, Mark (1985), "Banks' International' Lending Decisions, What We
     Know and Implications for Future Research," in Gordon W. Smith and
     John T. Cuddington, editors, International Debt, and the Developing
     Countries. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Harberger, Arnold (1976), "On Country Risk and the Social Cost of
     Foreign Borrowing by Developing Countries," (unpublished, University
     of Chicago).

Harberger, Arnold (1985), "Lessons for Debtor-Country Managers and Policy
     Makers," in Gorden W. Smith and John T. Cuddington, editors,
     International Debt and the Developing Countries. Washington, D.C.:
     The World Bank.

Kahn, Robert B. (1984), "External Borrowing and the Commons Nature of
     Foreign Exchange," (unpublished, Washington, D.C: Federal Reserve
     Board of Governors).

Khan, Mohsin S. and Nadeem Ui Haque (1985), "Foreign Borrowing and
     Capital Flight: A Formal Analysis," International Monetary Fund
     Staff Papers, 32: 606-628.
r


                                              I




                                              I


                                                                 '4i (K)

                                              1

0
                                                  *
           K                                  K              K




                          Figure 1.

    The Anticipated After—Tax Return on Private Investment
                   And Multiple Equilibria




                                                                    p
