                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF DISRUPTIVE PEERS

                                           Scott E. Carrell
                                           Mark Hoekstra
                                             Elira Kuka

                                        Working Paper 22042
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22042


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016




We are grateful to the Florida Department of Education and Hidahis Figueroa at the Department of
Research and Evaluation of the School Board of Alachua County for providing us the data. We also
acknowledge financial support from the UC Davis Center for Poverty Research. We would also like
to thank seminar participants at the Brigham Young University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, the Fall 2015 NBER Education Program Meeting, the 2015 Annual Meeting of the Southern
Economic Association, the 2015 Stata Texas Empirical Microeconomics Conference, and the 2015
Annual Meeting of the Western Economic Association for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Scott E. Carrell, Mark Hoekstra, and Elira Kuka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Effects of Disruptive Peers
Scott E. Carrell, Mark Hoekstra, and Elira Kuka
NBER Working Paper No. 22042
February 2016
JEL No. I21,I24,J12,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

A large and growing literature has documented the importance of peer effects in education. However,
there is relatively little evidence on the long-run educational and labor market consequences of childhood
peers. We examine this question by linking administrative data on elementary school students to subsequent
test scores, college attendance and completion, and earnings. To distinguish the effect of peers from
confounding factors, we exploit the population variation in the proportion of children from families
linked to domestic violence, who were shown by Carrell and Hoekstra (2010, 2012) to disrupt contemporaneous
behavior and learning. Results show that exposure to a disruptive peer in classes of 25 during elementary
school reduces earnings at age 26 by 3 to 4 percent. We estimate that differential exposure to children
linked to domestic violence explains 5 to 6 percent of the rich-poor earnings gap in our data, and that
removing one disruptive peer from a classroom for one year would raise the present discounted value
of classmates' future earnings by $100,000.


Scott E. Carrell                                     Elira Kuka
Department of Economics                              SMU, Department of Economics
University of California, Davis                      3300 Dyer Street Suite 301
One Shields Avenue                                   Umphrey Lee Center
Davis, CA 95616                                      Dallas, TX 75275-0496
and NBER                                             United States
secarrell@ucdavis.edu                                ekuka@smu.edu

Mark Hoekstra
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3087 Allen Building
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
markhoekstra@tamu.edu
1     Introduction

A large and growing literature has documented the importance of peer effects in education.
This line of research has focused primarily on how peers affect contemporaneous outcomes
such as test scores and disciplinary infractions in school. In contrast, relatively little is known
about the long-run impact of childhood peers, particularly with respect to labor market
outcomes in adulthood. This lack of evidence has important implications for the evaluation
of education policies that affect peer composition. For example, if peer effects diminish
over time and do not affect adult outcomes, then concerns over how educational policies
such as tracking or school vouchers affect peer composition may be overstated. On the other
hand, if peers in early childhood do impact outcomes into adulthood, then it underscores the
importance of concerns regarding changes in student composition. In addition, the presence
of long-run peer effects also has important implications for understanding the role of sorting
into schools and peer composition as determinants of income inequality. To the extent that
disadvantaged groups attend schools with more disruptive peers, this differential exposure
may contribute to income inequality later in life.

This paper documents the existence of long-term peer effects by estimating the effects of el-
ementary school peers on high school test scores, college attendance and degree attainment,
and earnings at age 24 to 28. It does so by linking administrative and public records data
on elementary school students from a Florida county to long-term educational and earnings
records. An important feature of these data is that they identify children whose families
are characterized by domestic violence. This is critical for our study for two reasons. First,
exposure to domestic violence is exogenous to the the student’s classmates, which is critical
for overcoming the reflection problem (Manski, 1993). In addition, exposure to domestic
violence has been shown to be a particularly good proxy for a disruptive peer. Previous
research by Carrell and Hoekstra (2010, 2012) has shown that exposure to these peers sig-
nificantly disrupts contemporaneous achievement and behavior, and that these effects are


                                                2
driven by boys and children whose families have not yet reported the domestic violence.
These contemporaneous effects are large; Carrell and Hoekstra (2010) report that having
one additional classmate exposed to domestic violence reduces achievement by one-fortieth
of a standard deviation, and increases disciplinary infractions by 17 percent. These findings
are also consistent with a much larger literature documenting that children exposed to do-
mestic violence are associated with a number of emotional and behavioral problems including
aggressive behavior, bullying, depression, animal cruelty, diminished academic performance,
and violence in adulthood (Edleson, 1999; Wolfe et al., 2003; Fantuzzo et al., 1997; Koenen
et al., 2003; Holt, Buckley and Whelan, 2008; Baldry, 2003; Carlson, 2000; Currie, 2006;
Black, Sussman and Unger, 2010). The purpose of this paper is to document whether expo-
sure to these elementary school students, hereafter referred to as “disruptive” peers, affects
long run educational and labor market outcomes.1

To distinguish the long-run effects of disruptive peers from confounding factors, we fol-
low Hoxby (2000b) in exploiting the idiosyncratic variation in the population by including
school-by-grade fixed effects.2 Intuitively, we ask whether students in cohorts with an id-
iosyncratically high number of disruptive peers have worse long-run educational and labor
market outcomes than students in the same school whose cohort had fewer disruptive peers.
The identifying assumption is that all other determinants of long-run educational and la-
bor market outcomes are orthogonal to this within-school-grade variation in peer domestic
violence. Empirical evidence in this study and in previous work by Carrell and Hoekstra
(2010, 2012) has shown that the within-school variation in disruptive peers is uncorrelated
with cohort size and exogenous student characteristics such as own domestic violence, gen-
   1
     In referring to these students as “disruptive”, we do not mean to assume that the only mechanism
through which any long-run effects arise is through classroom disruption. Rather, while we would expect
much of any long-run effect to be due to classroom interaction, it could also be due to interactions separate
from classroom disruptions.
   2
     While Hoxby (2000b) used population variation to address the question of the impact of class size,
that approach has been widely used subsequently in studying peer effects in K-12 education (Hoxby, 2000a;
Lefgren, 2004; Lavy and Schlosser, 2011). In contrast, researchers examining peer effects in college have been
able to identify effects using random assignment of roommates or squadrons (Sacerdote, 2001; Kremer and
Levy, 2008; Carrell, Malmstrom and West, 2008; Carrell, Fullerton and West, 2009).


                                                      3
der, race, and subsidized lunch status, as well as with predicted earnings based on the full
set of fixed effects and covariates. We also show our estimates are unchanged when includ-
ing these individual-level and cohort-level controls, which is consistent with the identifying
assumption.

Results show that exposure to disruptive peers in childhood has important long-run conse-
quences for both educational attainment as well as subsequent earnings in adulthood. Esti-
mates indicate that exposure to one additional disruptive student in a class of 25 throughout
elementary school reduces math and reading test scores in grades 9 and 10 by 0.02 stan-
dard deviations. More targeted measures of disruptive peers, such as male peers exposed to
domestic violence, or peers exposed to as-yet-unreported domestic violence, result in larger
effects on high school test scores and significant declines in college degree attainment. Most
importantly, exposure to an additional disruptive peer throughout elementary school leads
to a 3 to 4 percent reduction in earnings at age 24 to 28.

Collectively, these findings demonstrate that exposure to disruptive peers in elementary
school has important implications for adult outcomes. We estimate that one year of ex-
posure to a disruptive peer in elementary school reduces the present discounted value of
classmates’ future earnings by around $100,000, suggesting large efficiency losses due to
disruptive students. In addition, the uneven distribution of disruptive peers across schools
has important consequences for income inequality. We estimate that the increased expo-
sure to (our measure of) disruptive peers by children from lower- relative to higher-income
households explains around 5 or 6 percent of the rich-poor earnings gap in adulthood.

This study’s findings contribute to two different literatures. The first is a small literature
that documents the persistence of peer effects on outcomes measured after the peer inter-
actions. For example, Gould, Lavy and Paserman (2009) examine whether idiosyncratic
cohort-to-cohort variation in exposure to immigrants during elementary school affects the
passing rate on a high school matriculation exam that is necessary to attend college. They


                                              4
show that a 10 percentage point increase in the concentration of immigrants leads to a 2.8
percentage point decline in the passing rate. Bifulco, Fletcher and Ross (2011) report that
a higher percentage of high school classmates with college-educated mothers decreases the
likelihood of dropping out and increases college attendance, though Bifulco et al. (2014)
show that this effect diminishes over time and that there is no evidence of an effect on la-
bor market outcomes. Anelli and Peri (2015) analyze the long-term effects of high school
gender composition and find that a higher proportion of female peers reduces the likelihood
males choose a “prevalently male” major, but has no effect on graduation and labor market
outcomes. Finally, Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2013) show that a higher proportion of
females in ninth grade reduces mean educational attainment and the likelihood of selecting
the academic (as opposed to vocational) track, but helps women by leading to lower teenage
birth rates and higher earnings. They also find that higher peer father earnings leads to
better outcomes, especially for men.

Our study contributes to this literature in several ways. The first is that our measure of peer
quality—children from families with domestic violence—is a measure that is both exogenous
to peers and also identifies students who are particularly disruptive to contemporaneous peer
learning. This enables us to better measure the impact of the type of disruptive peer in the
Lazear (2001) model of education. Second, to our knowledge, we are first to identify the
long-term effects of elementary school peers on adult earnings.

Finally, in assessing the long-term effects of elementary school peers on earnings, we join
an emerging literature that has analyzed the long-run effects of early childhood educational
inputs more generally. For example, previous studies have analyzed the long-run effects
of the Head Start program (Garces, Thomas and Currie, 2002; Ludwig and Miller, 2007),
kindergarten classroom assignment (Krueger and Whitmore, 2001; Chetty et al., 2011; Dy-
narski, Hyman and Schanzenbach, 2013), and teacher value added (Chetty, Friedman and
Rockoff, 2014). Our paper complements this broader literature by documenting that expo-



                                              5
sure to disruptive peers during childhood leads to lower subsequent academic achievement
in high school, a diminished likelihood of graduating with a college degree, and reduced
earnings.




2         Data

To conduct our empirical analysis we utilize and extend the original dataset in Carrell and
Hoekstra (2010, 2012). This original dataset contains information on (national percentile)
math and reading test scores, as well as demographic characteristics for children attending
grades 3 to 5 in the Alachua County (Florida) primary schools between the academic years
1995–1996 and 2002–2003. The dataset contains approximately 41,500 observations of 20,000
unique individuals, with around 14,000 observations per grade.

These student-level data were linked to domestic violence data that were gathered from
public records information containing information on all domestic violence cases filed in civil
court in Alachua County between January 1, 1993 and March 12, 2003. These cases were
filed when one member of the family petitioned the court for a temporary injunction for
protection against another member of the family. The data include the names and addresses
of the individuals involved and the date on which the case was filed. The names and addresses
are used to link the student level information to the domestic violence data, while the date
of filing is used to compute whether the domestic violence is already or yet-to-be reported
at the time that the child was observed in elementary school.3

We then linked these data to long-run education and earnings outcomes. Specifically, we
worked with the Alachua County School District and the Florida Department of Education
(FLDOE) to link longer-term outcomes, as of the end of 2010, for the students in the original
dataset. We obtain (raw) test scores for grades 6 through 10.4 While this does not allow
    3
        For cases in which the same petitioner filed multiple requests, we used the first request.
    4
        In order to have consistent test scores across grades and cohorts, we transform all the (national percentile


                                                           6
us to observe test scores for students who switched to private schools or moved out of state,
we do observe test scores for students outside of Alachua County so long as they attended
public schools within the state of Florida.

Moreover, the FLDOE provided us with information on each student’s college enrollment,
courses completed, and degrees attained as of the end of 2012. However, the FLDOE col-
lects such data only for students enrolled in public post-secondary Florida institutions. To
supplement these data, we collect additional college enrollment and completion data from
the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), which has data from the majority of colleges
and universities in the U.S.5 Finally, the FLDOE also provided quarterly earnings for the
students working in the state of Florida for the years 2000–2013. These earnings are trans-
formed to 2013 real values, and are averaged for each individual across all quarters between
ages 24 and 28.6

Table (1) presents summary statistics for our main independent variables. These statistics
show that around 38 percent of the sample is black and just over 50 percent are on subsidized
lunch. Just under five percent of the students have been exposed to domestic violence at
home, which is evenly split among boys and girls. In addition, of those students linked to
domestic violence, around half are from homes that reported the domestic violence prior to
the year and grade in which we observed them. The other half are from homes with as-yet-
unreported domestic violence that was reported sometime after the year and grade in which
we observed them.7 Around 75 percent of the students in our sample have ever enrolled in
college, 28 percent have received some type of college degree, and around 20 percent have
received a bachelor’s degree. Average quarterly earnings is around $5,000 dollars for those
or raw) scores into z-scores.
   5
     See    http://www.studentclearinghouse.org/colleges/enrollment_reporting/participating_
schools.php for the full list of reporting colleges and universities.
   6
     We note that, as we describe in more detail in the results section, we get similar results when we perform
a more complicated first-within-then-between analysis that exploits the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell Theorem.
   7
     As discussed in Carrell and Hoekstra (2012), the panel nature of our data allow us to exploit the timing
of the reporting of the violence. Kaci (1994) finds that on average violence had occurred in the family for
over four years prior to the reporting of the incident.



                                                      7
observed with positive quarterly earnings between ages 24 and 28.




3       Empirical Strategy

The two main threats to identification in the peer effects literature are the reflection and
the selection problems. The reflection problem arises since it is hard to disentangle whether
disruptive peers affect a student’s outcomes or whether the student negatively affects her
peers (Manski, 1993). To overcome this problem, we define peer quality as the proportion
of one’s peers whose families have been linked to domestic violence. Thus, we assume that
a child’s peers do not cause that child’s family to be characterized by domestic violence.
While we would argue that this assumption is reasonable ex ante, we also note that Carrell
and Hoekstra (2010) explicitly test for whether own domestic violence is affected by peer
domestic violence, and find no evidence of such a correlation.8

The selection problem arises because students self-select into schools and peer groups that
are similar to them (Hoxby, 2000a). In the absence of being able to randomize students
into peer groups, the main approach to overcome selection has been to exploit the natural
variation in cohort composition across time within a given school (Hoxby and Weingarth,
2006; Vigdor and Nechyba, 2006; Hanushek et al., 2003; Lefgren, 2004; Bifulco, Fletcher
and Ross, 2011). We also follow this approach and argue that while there is selection into
schools, there is natural year-to-year population variation in the proportion of peers linked
to domestic violence across cohorts within the same school. This is precisely the variation
that we exploit in order to identify the impact of disruptive peers.

We also perform an empirical test of whether this year-to-year variation at the school-grade
level is consistent with a random process. Following the resampling technique used in Carrell
    8
    We also note that to the extent one believes that domestic violence is affected by one’s child’s classmates,
one would then expect boys to be over-represented amongst families linked to domestic violence since boys
have more behavioral problems. However, as noted in Table 1, boys and girls are equally likely to be linked
to a family with domestic violence.


                                                       8
and West (2010), for each cohort in each school and grade combination, we first randomly
draw 10,000 cohorts of equal size, drawn from the relevant school/grade. Secondly, for each
of the random cohorts we compute the average proportion of peers exposed to domestic
violence. Thirdly, we compute empirical p-values for each of these random draws, where the
p-value represents the proportion of simulated cohorts with average exposure to disruptive
peers smaller than the average actually observed in that cohort. If the year-to-year variation
at the school-grade level is random, we expect the distribution of the p-value to be uniform.
Hence, we use a Kolmogorov-Smirnov one sample equality of distribution test to test whether
the distribution of p-values is uniform, and we reject uniformity only 2 times out of 65.

We begin our analysis by focusing on a baseline model in which we control for school-by-grade
fixed effects, grade-by-year fixed effects, and the proportion of peers in one’s school-grade-
year cohort linked to domestic violence. Specifically, we estimate the following model:

                                  P
                                   k6=i  DVkgst
                yigst = θ0 + θ1                 + θ2 DVigst + θ3 Xigst + λgs + σgt + isgt ,   (1)
                                      ngst − 1

where i, g, s and t respectively represent the individual, grade, school and academic year.
y represents the outcome variables of interest - test scores for grades three through ten,
college enrollment, college graduation, labor force participation, and earnings.9 Test scores
are calculated by taking the average of the reading and the math score for each student
in each grade. λ and σ are grade-school and grade-year fixed effects. The coefficient of
interest is θ1 , which is the coefficient on the proportion of peers from families linked to
domestic violence. DV is an indicator variable that controls for own family violence, and X
is a vector of additional controls that are included in some specifications. Individual-level
controls include gender, race, neighborhood median family income (measured by zip code of
home address), and subsidized lunch status, while cohort-level controls measure these same
variables as well as both cohort size and median zip code family income at the school-grade-
  9
      Note that these outcomes are grade invariant.



                                                       9
year level. Lastly, all standard errors are clustered by the set of students who attended third
through fifth grade in the same school.

In addition, because our primary goal is to assess the long-run consequences of exposure to
disruptive students, we also use more targeted measures of disruptive students by focusing
on certain subsets of children from families linked to domestic violence shown in previous
research to have especially large effects on contemporaneous outcomes. Specifically, in some
specifications we focus on the impact of boys from families linked to domestic violence,
since Carrell and Hoekstra (2010) show that it is the boys from these families that are
most disruptive to contemporaneous peer achievement. This is also consistent with Evans,
Davies and DiLillo (2008), who find that boys exposed to domestic violence are significantly
more likely to exhibit externalizing behaviors. In addition, we also present specifications in
which we allow children from families with as-yet-unreported domestic violence to affect their
peers differently than children from families who had already reported the domestic violence.
Carrell and Hoekstra (2012) show that the negative contemporaneous impact these children
have on their peers abruptly disappears once the family reports the domestic violence to the
court, and survey evidence suggests that reporting domestic violence helps stop the physical
abuse (Kaci, 1994). As a result, we would expect that children exposed to an idiosyncratically
high number of peers with as-yet-unreported domestic violence will exhibit worse outcomes
than children in other cohorts in that same school.

Finally, we note that because our data are composed of a panel of students who attended
grades three through five in Alachua County, some students are observed only once while
others are observed multiple times. Consequently, all of our results are estimated using
probability weights, where the weight is the inverse of the number of times a student is
observed in the sample. In addition, we note that while we do not observe students while
they are in the first or second grade, we expect a high level of correlation between one’s peers
in those grades and one’s peers in grades three through five. Thus, while our estimates are



                                              10
identified using average peer exposure across the third through fifth grades, we believe our
estimates are properly interpreted as the cumulative impact of disruptive peers throughout
the five grades of elementary school.

The main threat to identification for our research design is the possibility that students and
families select into or out of schools on the basis of peer domestic violence. For example, our
estimates could be biased if motivated parents, with higher achieving children, move their
children across schools when they notice an idiosyncratically high proportion of disruptive
peers in their child’s grade. We note that this would be a relatively extreme response given it
likely involves moving one’s residence. Instead, we believe it is much more likely that certain
types of parents may lobby school principals to ensure their child is not put in the same
classroom as certain other children perhaps known to be disruptive, rather than moving to
a new residence and school altogether. Importantly, this type of avoidance behavior within
schools does not invalidate our design or bias our estimates. This is because our estimates
capture the reduced-form (average) effect of treatment at the cohort level, rather than the
classroom level.

Nevertheless, we perform three exercises to address the possibility of selection into and out
of cohorts across schools. First, we formally test for selection by analyzing whether cohort
size or other family characteristics are correlated with the proportion of peers with domestic
violence. We find no evidence of such relationship. Results are shown in Table 2, which shows
the correlation between our three measures of disruptive peers and gender, race, subsidized
lunch status, and neighborhood income level. Among the 30 estimates, only one is significant
at either the 5 percent or 10 percent levels, which is approximately what one would expect
due to chance. None is significant at the 1 percent level. Thus, we find little evidence to
suggest that students are entering or leaving schools in a way that is systematically correlated
with our three different proxies for disruptive peers.

Similarly, in a related approach we estimate effects both without and with individual and


                                              11
other peer controls, and show that the inclusion of controls does not affect our estimates. If
our estimates were sensitive to these controls, then we would worry that even conditional on
school-by-grade fixed effects, students more exposed to disruptive students may be otherwise
different from those who are less exposed.

Finally, we also combine all of our covariates into a predicted log earnings measure for each
individual, and show that predicted log earnings is uncorrelated with whether the individual
was exposed to an idiosyncratically high or low concentration of disruptive peers during
elementary school. Specifically, we regress log earnings on the full set of fixed effects and
controls, excluding peer domestic violence, and use the estimated coefficients to predict
earnings for each individual who is subsequently observed with positive earnings. We then
graph predicted log earnings against the percent change in residual exposure to disruptive
peers (relative to the average peer exposure for that school and grade) after controlling
for school-grade and grade-year fixed effects. Results are shown in the red dashed lines and
corresponding local averages in Figure 1. Importantly, across all three measures of treatment,
the relationship between predicted earnings and treatment is flat. That indicates there is
no reason to believe that students across these different cohorts should have had different
earnings levels, absent the effect of exposure to disruptive peers. In addition, this shows that
income-earning potential for those observed with earnings is not systematically correlated
with treatment. This suggests that attrition out of the state is unlikely to bias our estimates,
though we note that we also directly test for selection into the labor force.

Figure 1 also highlights our main findings on the long-run impact of disruptive peers on
earnings. In contrast to predicted earnings, which do not vary with intensity of treatment
as graphed on the x-axis, actual earnings (shown in solid black) do vary significantly with
whether one was exposed to an idiosyncratically high or low proportion of peers linked to
domestic violence. Consistent with expectations, the raw data shown in Figure 1 indicate
that children who were exposed to an above-average concentration of disruptive peers in



                                              12
elementary school have much lower-than-predicted earnings. Thus, while we will document
the magnitude of these effects empirically in the next section, Figure 1 provides an illustration
of both the validity of the research design as well as the qualitative long run impact of peers
on earnings.




4     Results

To examine the long-run consequences of exposure to disruptive peers during elementary
school, we focus on three sets of outcomes. First, we replicate the findings of Carrell and
Hoekstra (2010, 2012) by examining the impact of disruptive peers on test scores during
elementary school. We then ask whether the impacts of those disruptive peers are evident
in middle and high school test scores, college attendance and degree attainment, and labor
market earnings as adults aged 24 to 28. Importantly, for each outcome we restrict our data
to the sample of students old enough to have been observed with that outcome.

In addition, we focus on three different measures of disruptive peers. The first is the pro-
portion of peers exposed to domestic violence, who were shown by Carrell and Hoekstra
(2010) to have marginally significant impacts on contemporaneous achievement. We then
focus on two other measures of disruptive peers previously shown to have larger impacts on
contemporaneous learning: male peers from families exposed to domestic violence, and peers
from families with as-yet-unreported domestic violence.



4.1    Test Scores

We begin by showing the impact of disruptive peers on contemporaneous and subsequent
standardized test scores. Results are shown in Table 3, where the first two columns of Panel
A replicate Carrell and Hoekstra (2010) by assessing how children linked to domestic violence
affect the third- through fifth-grade test scores of their peers. The specification in column (1)

                                               13
includes only grade-year fixed effects, school-grade fixed effects, and own domestic violence
status as controls, while column (2) additionally controls for other individual and cohort-
level controls. The estimate in column (1) of -0.48, which is significant at the 5 percent level,
suggests that adding one disruptive student to a class of 25 reduces achievement by 0.02 of a
standard deviation (1/25 * -0.48). Estimates in columns (3) and (4) indicate a more modest
and statistically insignificant impact during grades 6 through 8, though the effect of that
same disruptive peer during elementary school is again a reduction of around 0.02 standard
deviations in grades 9 and 10.

Panel B of Table 3 shows estimates of the impact of male and female peers from families
linked to domestic violence. As shown by Carrell and Hoekstra (2010), it is the boys from
these troubled families that most negatively affect peer academic performance. The estimate
in column (1) indicates that adding one disruptive male peer to a class of 25 reduces grade
3 – 5 test scores by 0.03 standard deviations (1/25 * -0.81), while female peers from families
linked to domestic violence do not appear to reduce their peers’ academic performance.

Estimates of the impact of peers exposed to as-yet-unreported and reported domestic violence
are shown in Panel C of Table 3. Consistent with Carrell and Hoekstra (2012), results
indicate it is the children from families who have not yet reported the domestic violence
that negatively impact their peers’ contemporaneous achievement. Estimates in columns (1)
and (2) indicate that adding one peer with as-yet-unreported domestic violence significantly
reduces test scores by between 0.03 and 0.04 standard deviations. As with the results in
Panels A and B, this peer effect appears to diminish in grades 6 – 8, though it is again
statistically significant and of similar magnitude in grades 9 – 10.

Importantly, estimates across all grade levels in Table 3 change little when including individual-
level and cohort-level controls. This is consistent with the identifying assumption, and pro-
vides additional evidence beyond that documented by Carrell and Hoekstra (2010) and in
Figure 1 and Table 2 that there is little evidence that high-ability students selected out


                                               14
of schools when they were subjected to an idiosyncratically high proportion of disruptive
peers.



4.2      College Attendance and Degree Attainment

We now turn to the question of whether having disruptive peers in elementary school also
leads to worsened college attendance and degree attainment. Results are shown in Table 4,
which takes the same form as Table 3. Columns 1 and 2 show results for college enrollment
without and with additional individual and cohort-level controls; columns (3) and (4) show
results for the likelihood of receiving any college degree; and columns (5) and (6) show results
for four-year degree.

Results in Table 4 indicate that elementary school exposure to boys from troubled families
and to children from families with as-yet-unreported domestic violence has significant impacts
on college enrollment and degree attainment. For example, estimates in column 2 suggest
that adding one disruptive boy to a class of 25 throughout elementary school leads to just
over a 1 percentage point (1.6 percent) reduction in college enrollment (1/25 *-0.29), which
is significant at the 10 percent level. Similarly, the estimate of -0.47 in column (4) of Panel
B indicates that exposure to that disruptive boy reduces the probability of receiving any
degree by a statistically significant 2.0 percentage points, or 7 percent.

Estimates in Panel C suggest similarly large negative impacts of elementary school exposure
to peers from families linked to as-yet-unreported domestic violence. For example, estimates
in columns (2) and (4) indicate that exposure to one peer in a class of 25 leads to a 1.6
percentage point (2.2 percent) reduction in college enrollment and a 2.6 percentage point
reduction in the likelihood of receiving any college degree. Both estimates are statistically
significant at the one percent level. In short, there is strong evidence that exposure to
disruptive peers during elementary school leads to significantly worse outcomes with respect
to both college attendance and degree attainment years later.

                                              15
4.3     Labor Market Outcomes

Finally, we turn to labor market outcomes. Results for the baseline specification are shown in
Panel A of Table 5. Columns (1) and (2) show evidence that the proportion of peers during
elementary school linked to domestic violence has little effect on labor force participation.
However, there is strong evidence that these peers reduce earnings. Columns (3) and (4)
show estimates for average quarterly earnings, including zeros; columns (5) through (8)
show estimates for the level and log of quarterly earnings conditional on being observed
with positive earnings. Estimates across columns (3) through (8) in Panel A indicate that
elementary school exposure to one additional disruptive student in a class of 25 reduces
earnings by between 3 and 4 percent. All estimates are significant at the 10 percent level,
and all but one is significant at the 5 percent level.

Somewhat surprisingly, when we define our peer domestic violence variable by gender of the
student as in Panel B, we do find some evidence that peers impact labor force participation.
Specifically, exposure to boys from domestic violence families is associated with reduced labor
force participation, while exposure to girls is associated with somewhat increased labor force
participation.10

While we do not have a good interpretation of exactly why some measures of peers have
effects on labor force participation, it is important to note that the estimated peer effect of
disruptive male students does not depend on whether we include individuals not observed
with earnings as in columns (3) and (4), or condition on positive earnings as in columns (5)
through (8). All of those estimates are statistically significant at the 5 percent level, with
  10
     We suspect that the reduction in labor force participation associated with disruptive males is due to a
combination of increased unemployment and perhaps incarceration among those exposed to them. A more
worrisome explanation is that high-ability peers who are exposed to an idiosyncratically high number of
disruptive boys in elementary school systematically leave the state. However, we find comfort in the fact
that for our other measures of disruptive peers in Panels A and C we find no evidence of any impact on the
likelihood of being observed with positive earnings, and still find statistically significant and economically
meaningful impacts on all three measures of earnings. In addition, we note that predicted earnings for
those subsequently observed with positive earnings, as shown in Figure 1, are uncorrelated with the level of
exposure to disruptive peers.



                                                     16
estimates conditional on positive earnings indicating that exposure to one of these disruptive
boys reduces earnings by 4 to 5 percent. For example, the estimate in column (5) of -6,529
indicates that exposure to one more disruptive male in a class of 25 throughout elementary
school reduces earnings by $261. That drop in earnings represents a reduction of 5.2 percent,
given average quarterly earnings of $5,018 as shown in the bottom of Table 4.

Results in Panel C of Table 5 also show strong evidence that disruptive peers, as defined as
those exposed to as-yet-unreported domestic violence, reduce adult earnings. While there is
no effect of peers with unreported domestic violence on labor force participation (columns (1)
and (2)), all estimates on earnings in columns (3) through (8) are negative and statistically
significant at the 5 percent level. Estimates in columns (5) through (8) that condition on
being observed with positive earnings imply that exposure during elementary school to one
more peer from a family with unreported domestic violence in a class of 25 is associated with
a 5.4 to 6.7 percent reduction in earnings.

Importantly, estimates across all specifications are unaffected by the inclusion of other indi-
vidual and cohort-level controls. This suggests that other observable determinants appear
to be uncorrelated with the idiosyncratic year-to-year variation in disruptive peers we are
exploiting, which is consistent with the identifying assumption. In addition, we note that
while the outcome of interest in Table 5 is earnings averaged across all quarters—either
including or excluding quarters with zeros, depending on the column—results are similar
when we use a more complicated estimator that adjusts explicitly for calendar year and age
effects.11

In summary, we find strong evidence that exposure to disruptive peers during elementary
  11
    Specifically, we perform a first-within-then-between analysis that exploits the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell The-
orem. We first partial out age and year effects from both log earnings and the peer domestic violence
treatment measure, then average residual earnings by individual, and then regress average residual earnings
on residual treatment. Estimates are very similar. For example, the first-within-then-between estimates
corresponding to the estimates of -0.89, -0.98, and -1.34 shown in Column 8 of Panels A, B, and C in Table
5 are -0.90, -1.04, and -1.34, respectively. Because the results are so similar—which is in part because grade-
by-year effects included in our analyses capture many of the differences in labor market conditions across
individuals—we focus on the simpler analysis that uses average earnings.


                                                      17
school leads to significantly lower earnings in adulthood. These effects are consistent across
several different measures of disruptive peers and are robust to different ways of modeling
the relationship between earnings and disruptive peers.



4.4       Subgroup and Quantile Analyses

We now turn to the question of which students are most affected in the long-run by exposure
to disruptive peers during elementary school. Specifically, we test for differences by gender,
by parental socioeconomic status (as proxied by subsidized lunch status), and by race. In
addition, we also perform a quantile analysis of the test score and earnings results.

Subgroup results are shown in Table 6. Panel A shows results for Grade 9 and 10 test scores;
Panel B shows estimates for graduating from college with any degree; Panel C shows results
for the likelihood of being observed with positive earnings; Panel D shows results using
earnings (including zeros), and Panel E shows results using log earnings (which exclude
zeros).

Results regarding gender show that, in contrast to what Carrell and Hoekstra (2010) found
when examining contemporaneous outcomes, there are few meaningful differences between
the men and women with respect to the long-run impacts of disruptive peer exposure. Esti-
mates for men and women are similar for all outcomes including grade 9 and 10 test scores,
degree attainment, and earnings. In only 1 of the 15 cases are the estimates for men and
women statistically different from each other (earnings levels including zeros for the peer
domestic violence measure). But even there, we note that the estimates for the other two
measures of disruptive peers are neither statistically nor economically different between men
and women. In fact, the only difference (which is not shown in Table 6 for brevity pur-
poses) is that while disruptive boys and girls both lead to reduced peer boys’ adult earnings,
disruptive girls also reduce girls’ adult earnings.



                                               18
In the third and fourth columns of Table 6, we examine the impact of disruptive peers on
the outcomes of children who come from lower- and higher-income households, measured
by subsidized lunch status during elementary school. The point estimates indicate that
students with higher socioeconomic status experience larger declines in their high school test
scores and degree attainment, though the results on earnings are more mixed and depend
on specification.

The most interesting subgroup effects are shown in the last two columns of Table 6, which
show that while there are relatively few differences between whites and blacks with respect to
high school test scores and degree attainment, there are significant differences with respect to
earnings. White students experience significant declines in earnings due to disruptive peer
exposure; the estimate from the log specification implies that exposure to one disruptive
student in a class of 25 reduces earnings by 5 percent. This is more than twice the estimated
effect for blacks, which is not statistically different from zero.

In addition, we also perform a quantile analysis to examine how the long run effects differ
across the test score and earnings distributions. Results for high school test scores and
log earnings are shown in Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2, respectively. Results for test
scores suggest that the biggest effects of disruptive peers are on those in the top half of the
achievement distribution, while results for earnings suggest the largest effects are at the very
bottom of the earnings distribution, though effects are present and roughly similar across
the rest of the earnings distribution.

In summary, results from Table 6 yield three patterns with respect to the heterogeneous
impacts of disruptive peers. First, students seem to experience similar effects across gender
and socioeconomic status. Second, white students seem to experience larger declines in
earnings due to disruptive peers relative to black students. Third, while the test score
impacts seem to affect the top of the distribution the most, the earnings effects are largest
for students at the bottom of the earnings distribution.


                                               19
5      Discussion and Interpretation

Given the large long-run peer effects documented in the previous section, a natural question
is the exact mechanism through which those effects arise. One such potential mechanism
is the impact of disruptive peers on educational attainment. Our findings above indicate
that exposure to an additional disruptive peer reduces the likelihood of receiving any type of
college degree by 0.7 to 2.6 percentage points, depending on the measure of disruptive peer
used. In a review of the literature on the economic returns to community college degrees,
Belfield and Bailey (2011) report that the return to those degrees is between 10 and 30
percent. If these returns hold in our sample, an additional disruptive peer would lead to as
much as a 0.78 percent decrease in earnings through this one educational channel (-0.026*30).
Similarly, a back-of-the-envelope calculation indicates that the 9th and 10th grade test score
reductions we observe can explain only around 15 percent of the total reduction in earnings.12
In addition, the results of the subgroup and quantile analyses are difficult to reconcile with
the hypothesis that the effects work largely through educational achievement or attainment.
For example, disruptive peers have the largest effects on the test scores of high-achievers,
while the earnings effects are largest at the bottom of the earnings distribution. Similarly,
while the effects on earnings are largest amongst whites, both whites and blacks experience
similar effects on educational achievement.

For all of these reasons, we expect that a significant proportion of the earnings effects doc-
umented above likely comes from non-cognitive skills. Unfortunately, the nature of non-
cognitive skills makes it difficult to test this directly. In Appendix Table A.2, we provide
some evidence by showing the impacts on suspensions during high school. While the results
are not perfectly consistent with the impacts on earnings shown in Table 5, they do suggest
  12
    We estimate that adding one disruptive student to a classroom of 25 reduces earnings by 3.56 percent.
By comparison, the same disruptive student reduces test scores by 0.025 standard deviations. Using a simple
hedonic regression of log earnings on grade-by-year fixed effects, school-by-grade fixed effects, and test scores,
we estimate that a one standard deviation increase in test scores is associated with a 20 percent increase
in earnings. That implies a 0.025 standard deviation reduction in test scores would result in a 0.5 percent
reduction in earnings, which is 14 percent of our overall effect of 3.56 percent.


                                                       20
that exposure to disruptive peers during elementary school can have long-run impacts on the
type of behavior that may have significant implications labor market success. In addition,
it is important to note that the likelihood the earnings effects work through non-cognitive
channels is broadly consistent with the existing literature on the long-run impacts of other
childhood interventions, much of which finds large long-run effects that are difficult to ex-
plain through achievement. For example, recent studies on the Perry Preschool Program
and Project Star have shown that the impact of these programs on non-cognitive skills can
explain a larger share of actual earnings gains compared to their impact on cognitive per-
formance (Almlund et al., 2011; Chetty et al., 2011; Heckman, Pinto and Savelyev, 2013).
Similarly, Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014) document large effects of teacher quality on
earnings despite evidence that test score gains due to better teachers fade out in subsequent
years. Finally, the likelihood that the long-run effect of peers linked to domestic violence
works through a non-cognitive channel is also consistent with recent research on peer effects
in crime; Stevenson (2015) finds that the juvenile correctional center peers that increase
future crime the most are those who come from difficult or dangerous homes.

In addition, it is also helpful to place the magnitudes of these effects in a larger context by
comparing them to other educational inputs. With respect to college attendance, our findings
indicate that one year of exposure to a disruptive boy peer reduces college enrollment by 0.2
percentage points.13 These effects are relatively small compared to the impact of other inputs.
For example, Dynarski, Hyman and Schanzenbach (2013) and Chetty et al. (2011) report
that being randomly assigned to a small class rather than a regular class with 50 percent
more students in Project STAR for roughly two years increased college enrollment by 2.7 and
1.8 percentage points, respectively. Garces, Thomas and Currie (2002) estimate that Head
Start increased college enrollment by 9.2 percentage points, while Chetty, Friedman and
Rockoff (2014)estimate that a one standard deviation increase in in teacher quality in one
  13
    Given a coefficient of -0.28 in Column 2 of Panel B in Table 4, we scale first by 1/25 to obtain the effect
of cumulative elementary school exposure in a class of 25, and then divide by 5 to obtain the effect of each
year of exposure.


                                                      21
grade increases college attendance by 0.82 percentage points. Thus, our estimates imply that
with respect to college enrollment, a year of exposure to a disruptive male peer is equivalent
to a 7 to 11 percent increase in class size for one year, a 2 percent reduction in Head Start
participation, or a one-fourth standard deviation reduction in teacher quality.

We can also put the magnitude of our earnings estimates in the context of existing papers
on the effects of long-run educational interventions. Chetty et al. (2011) estimate that a
one-standard deviation increase in overall “class quality” (which includes class size, teacher
quality, peer quality, etc.) for one year results in a 9.6 percent increase in earnings. Given
our estimate that one year of exposure to a disruptive peer reduces earnings by 0.6 to 0.8
percent,14 it implies that adding one disruptive peer is equivalent to reducing overall class
quality by around 7 percent.

Similarly, Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014) estimate that a one standard deviation in-
crease in teacher quality in one grade increases earnings by 1.3 percent. Thus, our estimates
of the impact of one disruptive peer for one year imply an effect that is equivalent to ap-
proximately a one-half standard deviation reduction in teacher quality. Estimates for more
targeted measures of disruptive peers are larger; a year of exposure to a boy from a fam-
ily linked to domestic violence and to a child linked to as-yet-unreported violence has the
same effect on earnings as a 0.7 and 0.9 standard deviation reductions in teacher quality,
respectively.

Along similar lines, we can compare our estimates to potential policy experiments. Chetty,
Friedman and Rockoff (2014) estimate that replacing a teacher estimated to be in the bottom
5 percent of the distribution with an average teacher for one year would increase the present
discounted value of earnings of the students in that classroom by $250,000. Under similar
assumptions,15 we estimate that one year of exposure to a disruptive student reduces the
  14
     Coefficients in columns 5 through 8 of Panel A in Table 5 indicate that exposure to a disruptive peer
throughout elementary school in a class of 25 reduces earnings by 3.2 to 4.2 percent. Scaling these estimates
by one-fifth, we estimate that each year of exposure reduces earnings by 0.6 to 0.8 percent.
  15
     First, we assume that the impact of disruptive children is constant over the life cycle using estimates


                                                     22
present discounted value of lifetime earnings by $81,000 to $105,000.16 Similarly, using
estimates from columns 5 - 8 of Panel B in Table 5, we estimate that removing a male
peer linked to domestic violence would increase the present discounted value of classmate
earnings by $98,000 to $135,000, and removing a peer linked to unreported domestic violence
would increase the present discounted value of classmate earnings by $134,000 to $169,000.
Thus, our findings imply that having two to three peers from families linked to domestic
violence has roughly the same effect on peer future earnings as replacing an average teacher
with a teacher estimated to be in the bottom 5 percent.17 We view this as plausible; 38
percent of teachers surveyed in the 2011-12 Schools and Staffing Survey report that student
misbehavior interferes with their teaching.

Our findings also have significant implications for explaining disparities in the earnings of
children who grew up in low- and high-socioeconomic status households. To the extent that
school and neighborhood sorting causes students from low-income families (as proxied by
subsidized lunch status) to be differentially exposed to disruptive peers, that by itself may
explain some of the earnings gap observed in adulthood. For example, adults who grew up
in low-income households in our sample earn roughly 70 percent of what adults from higher-
income households earn, though they are also exposed to roughly 50 percent more disruptive
from columns 3 - 8 in Table 5. Second, we assume the absence of general equilibrium effects. Third, to
facilitate comparison, we assume that the present discounted value of earnings from children at age 12 in
our sample are the same as those in Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014) at $522,000. These estimates
follow Krueger (1999) in discounting earnings gains at a 3 percent real annual rate. Finally, since the
earnings losses estimated here represent the impact of cumulative exposure to disruptive peers throughout
elementary school, we assume that each of these effects comes from five years of exposure. To the extent
that students continue to have significant exposure to disruptive peers from their elementary school years,
this may overstate the per-year impact of those peers.
   16
      These figures are based on estimates presented in Columns 5 through 8 of Panel A in Table 5. For
example, a coefficient of -0.89 shown in Column 8 of Table 5 suggests that one year of exposure to a disruptive
peer in a class of 25 reduces earnings by 0.7 percent (1/25 *-0.89/5). Assuming present discounted value
of earnings of $522,000 as in Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014), the estimate implies that a disruptive
student reduces the lifetime earnings of each of his 24 peers by $3,654, or $87,696 across all students for that
year.
   17
      We note that it would take roughly four boys from families linked to domestic violence to cause effects
similar to that of replacing an average teacher with one who is actually in the bottom 5 percent. As noted
in Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014), because they can identify the bottom 5 percent of teachers with
error, the improvement in present discounted value of earnings from replacing an estimated 5 percent teacher
($250,000) is significantly lower than the impact of replacing an actual bottom 5 percent teacher ($407,000).


                                                      23
peers of the type identified in this paper. Combined with the estimates shown in Table 5,
back-of-the-envelope calculations indicate that the differential exposure to disruptive peers
during elementary school explains around 5 or 6 percent of the rich-poor earnings gap in
adulthood.18 We view this as a meaningful part of the earnings gap, particularly since we
have only one particular measure of disruptive peers.




6     Conclusion

In this paper, we document the long-run impact of disruptive peers during elementary school
on subsequent standardized exam achievement, college enrollment and completion, and earn-
ings. To distinguish peer effects from confounding factors, we include school-by-grade fixed
effects to exploit the idiosyncratic year-to-year variation in disruptive peers within schools.
We proxy for disruptive peers using three different measures of peers from families linked to
domestic violence, who have been shown in previous work to negatively affect the contem-
poraneous achievement and behavior of their classmates.

Results indicate that the impact of these disruptive peers persist for years afterward and
into adulthood. Estimates indicate that adding one student exposed to domestic violence to
a class of 25 reduces high school test scores by 0.02 standard deviations and reduces earnings
at age 24 to 28 by 3 to 4 percent. More targeted proxies for disruptive peers yield somewhat
larger effects. These estimates reflect the impact of exposure to a disruptive peer throughout
elementary school, which suggests that the per-year impact of exposure is roughly one-fifth
the magnitude of these effects. These findings correspond to the same change in earnings as
a roughly one-half reduction standard deviation in teacher quality (Chetty, Friedman and
Rockoff, 2014), and imply that one year of exposure to a disruptive student reduces the
  18
     Source: Authors’ calculations. This range comes from the estimates using log earnings and level earnings
excluding zeros for the peer domestic violence measure of disruptive peers. By comparison, exposure to peer
male domestic violence explains 6 to 8 percent of the gap, while exposure to unreported peer domestic
violence explains roughly 4 percent.



                                                     24
present discounted value of classmates’ combined total future earnings by around $100,000.
We also show that due to sorting into schools, differential exposure to disruptive children
explains roughly 5 or 6 percent of the earnings gap between those who grew up in lower-
income versus higher-income families. Given that we only have one particular proxy for
disruptive peers, we view this as a lower bound of the impact of disruptive elementary
school peers on income inequality.

These findings illustrate the importance of peer composition in determining long-run edu-
cational attainment and labor market outcomes. This is significant, because while a large
existing literature has shown that peers impact contemporaneous learning, it was unclear
whether the effects persisted for years afterward. In addition, by documenting the long-term
impacts of disruptive peers, our results demonstrate the importance of potential policies that
could attenuate the impact of disruptive peers. While the effect of such hypothetical policies
is beyond the scope of this paper, our findings suggest that the social benefits of a reason-
ably effective policy are likely to be substantial. Thus, just as recent findings by Chetty,
Friedman and Rockoff (2014) highlight the importance of addressing teacher quality as a
way of improving long-run productivity and earnings, results here emphasize the importance
of overcoming disruptive peers as a way of improving long-term outcomes.




                                             25
References
Almlund, Mathilde, Angela Lee Duckworth, James Heckman, and Tim Kautz.
 2011. “Personality Psychology and Economics.” Handbook of the Economics of Education,
 4: 1.

Anelli, Massimo, and Giovanni Peri. 2015. “Peers’ Composition Effects in the Short
 and in the Long Run: College Major, College Performance and Income.”

Baldry, Anna C. 2003. “Bullying in Schools and Exposure to Domestic Violence.” Child
 Abuse & Neglect, 27(7): 713–732.

Belfield, Clive R, and Thomas Bailey. 2011. “The Benefits of Attending Community
 College: A Review of the Evidence.” Community College Review, 39(1): 46–68.

Bifulco, Robert, Jason M Fletcher, and Stephen L Ross. 2011. “The Effect of
  Classmate Characteristics on Post-Secondary Outcomes: Evidence from the Add Health.”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 25–53.

Bifulco, Robert, Jason M Fletcher, Sun Jung Oh, and Stephen L Ross. 2014.
  “Do High School Peers Have Persistent Effects on College Attainment and Other Life
  Outcomes?” Labour Economics, 29: 83–90.

Black, David S, Steve Sussman, and Jennifer B Unger. 2010. “A Further Look at the
  Intergenerational Transmission of Violence: witnessing Interparental Violence in Emerging
  Adulthood.” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 25(6): 1022–1042.

Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes. 2013. “Under Pres-
  sure? The Effect of Peers on Outcomes of Young Adults.” Journal of Labor Economics,
  31(1): 119–153.

Carlson, Bonnie E. 2000. “Children Exposed to Intimate Partner Violence Research Find-
 ings and Implications for Intervention.” Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 1(4): 321–342.

Carrell, Scott E, and James E West. 2010. “Does Professor Quality Matter? Evi-
 dence from Random Assignment of Students to Professors.” Journal of Political Economy,
 118(3).

Carrell, Scott E., and Mark Hoekstra. 2012. “Family Business or Social Problem? The
 Cost of Unreported Domestic Violence.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
 31(4): 861–875.




                                            26
Carrell, Scott E, and Mark L Hoekstra. 2010. “Externalities in the Classroom: How
 Children Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids.” American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1): 211–228.

Carrell, Scott E, Frederick V Malmstrom, and James E West. 2008. “Peer Effects
 in Academic Cheating.” Journal of Human Resources, 43(1): 173–207.

Carrell, Scott E, Richard L Fullerton, and James E West. 2009. “Does Your Cohort
 Matter? Measuring Peer Effects in College Achievement.” Journal of Labor Economics,
 27(3): 439–464.

Chetty, Raj, JN Friedman, N Hilger, E Saez, D Whitmore Schanzenbach, and D.
 Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence
 From Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1593–1660.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts
 of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates.” American Economic
 Review, 104(9): 2593–2632.

Currie, Cheryl L. 2006. “Animal Cruelty by Children Exposed to Domestic Violence.”
 Child Abuse & Neglect, 30(4): 425–435.

Dynarski, Susan, Joshua Hyman, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2013. “xper-
 imental Evidence on the Effect of Childhood Investments on Postsecondary Attainment
 and Degree Completion.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 32(4): 692–717.

Edleson, Jeffrey L. 1999. “Children’s Witnessing of Adult Domestic Violence.” Journal of
 Interpersonal Violence, 14(8): 839–870.

Evans, Sarah E, Corrie Davies, and David DiLillo. 2008. “Exposure to Domestic
 Violence: A Meta-analysis of Child and Adolescent Outcomes.” Aggression and Violent
 Behavior, 13(2): 131–140.

Fantuzzo, John, Robert Boruch, Abdullahi Beriama, Marc Atkins, and Susan
  Marcus. 1997. “Domestic Violence and Children: Prevalence and Risk in Five Major US
  Cities.” Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(1): 116–
  122.

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. “Longer-Term Effects of
 Head Start.” American Economic Review, 999–1012.




                                          27
Gould, Eric D, Victor Lavy, and M Daniele Paserman. 2009. “Does Immigration
 Affect the Long-Term Educational Outcomes of Natives? Quasi-Experimental Evidence*.”
 The Economic Journal, 119(540): 1243–1269.

Hanushek, Eric A, John F Kain, Jacob M Markman, and Steven G Rivkin.
 2003. “Does Peer Ability Affect Student Achievement?” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
 18(5): 527–544.

Heckman, James, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the
 Mechanisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Out-
 comes.” The American Economic Review, 103(6): 2052–2086.

Holt, Stephanie, Helen Buckley, and Sadhbh Whelan. 2008. “The Impact of Exposure
 to Domestic Violence on Children and Young People: A Review of the Literature.” Child
 Abuse & Neglect, 32(8): 797–810.

Hoxby, Caroline. 2000a. “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
 Variation.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000b. “The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New
 Evidence from Population Variation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1239–1285.

Hoxby, Caroline M, and Gretchen Weingarth. 2006. “Taking Race Out of the Equa-
 tion: School Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects.”

Kaci, Judy Hails. 1994. “Aftermath of Seeking Domestic Violence Protective Orders: The
 Victim’s Perspective.” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 10(3): 204–219.

Koenen, Karestan C, Terrie E Moffitt, Avshalom Caspi, Alan Taylor, and Shaun
 Purcell. 2003. “Domestic violence is Associated with Environmental Suppression of IQ
 in Young Children.” Development and Psychopathology, 15(02): 297–311.

Kremer, Michael, and Dan Levy. 2008. “Peer Effects and Alcohol Use Among College
 Students.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(3): 189–189.

Krueger, Alan B. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 497–532.

Krueger, Alan B, and Diane M Whitmore. 2001. “The Effect of Attending a Small
 Class in the Early Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evi-
 dence from Project STAR.” The Economic Journal, 111(468): 1–28.




                                          28
Lavy, Victor, and Analia Schlosser. 2011. “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer
  Effects at School.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1–33.

Lazear, Edward P. 2001. “Educational Production.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  777–803.

Lefgren, Lars. 2004. “Educational Peer Effects and the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal
  of Urban Economics, 56(2): 169–191.

Ludwig, Jens, and Douglas L Miller. 2007. “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life
 Chances? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 159–208.

Manski, Charles F. 1993. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
 Problem.” The Review of Economic Studies, 60(3): 531–542.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. “Peer Effects With Random Assignment: Results For Dartmouth
  Roommates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 681–704.

Stevenson, Megan. 2015. “Breaking Bad: Mechanisms of Social Influence and the Path
  to Criminality in Juvenile Jails.” Mimeo.

Vigdor, Jacob, and Thomas Nechyba. 2006. “Peer Effects in North Carolina Public
 Schools.” Citeseer.

Wolfe, David A, Claire V Crooks, Vivien Lee, Alexandra McIntyre-Smith, and
 Peter G Jaffe. 2003. “The Effects of Children’s Exposure to Domestic Violence: A Meta-
 Analysis and Critique.” Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 6(3): 171–187.




                                          29
Figure 1: Relationship Between Disruptive Peers and Real or Predicted Log Quarterly Earnings
         8.5




                                                                                                            8.5
         8.4




                                                                                                            8.4
              8.3




                                                                                                                 8.3
   Log Earnings




                                                                                                      Log Earnings
       8.2




                                                                                                          8.2
 8.1




                                                                                                    8.1
         8




                                                                                                            8
         7.9




                                                                                                            7.9
                    −100       −50              0           50                     100                                 −100         −50             0           50          100
                              Percent Deviation From Mean Peer Measure                                                             Percent Deviation From Mean Peer Measure

                             Real Log Earnings                      Predicted Log Earnings                                        Real Log Earnings           Predicted Log Earnings



                           (a) Fraction Peers w/ DV                                                                           (b) Fraction Male Peers w/ DV
                                                         8.5
                                                         8.4  8.3
                                                   Log Earnings
                                                 8.1   8.2
                                                         8
                                                         7.9




                                                                    −100          −50             0           50                     100
                                                                                Percent Deviation From Mean Peer Measure

                                                                               Real Log Earnings                       Predicted Log Earnings



                                                                    (c) Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV

Notes: Data are from the Florida Department of Education (FDOE) and the Alachua County Courthouse. We restrict the
sample to individuals that are at least 24 years old by 2013 (last year of our earnings data). We create the predicted log
earnings outcome by first running a regression that includes controls for own family violence, grade-year and school-grade fixed
effects for grades third to fifth, as well as additional individual and cohort level controls. Individual controls include own
domestic violence, gender, race, median family income, and subsidized lunch status. Cohort controls include average gender,
race, subsidized lunch, and size of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year. The regression is weighted by the inverse of thenumber of
times a student is observed in the sample. Second, we predict log earnings using the estimated coefficients. Lastly, we collapse
the data to 20 groups defined according to the percent change in residual exposure to disruptive peers (relative to the average
peer exposure for that school and grade) after controlling for school-grade and grade-year fixed effects.




                                                                                               30
                Table 1: Descriptive Statistics – By Grade

                                                                    Mean     Std. Dev.
Panel A: Demographic Characteristics
Black                                                               0.379      (0.485)
Male                                                                0.494      (0.500)
Free/reduced lunch                                                  0.533      (0.499)
Own domestic violence                                               0.046      (0.210)
Fraction peers with domestic violence                               0.020      (0.033)
Fraction peers with yet-to-be reported domestic violence            0.020      (0.019)
Fraction peers with already reported domestic violence              0.026      (0.023)
Fraction male peers with domestic violence                          0.023      (0.022)
Fraction female peers with domestic violence                        0.023      (0.021)
Panel B: Educational Attainment
College Enrollment                                                  0.745      (0.436)
Any Degree                                                          0.280      (0.449)
Bacc. Degree                                                        0.207      (0.405)
Panel C: Labor Force Outcomes - Quarterly Earnings Ages 24-28
Positive                                                            0.678      (0.467)
Average (Include Zeros) ($2013)                                     1,449      (2,471)
Average (Exclude Zeros) ($2013)                                     4,960      (4,809)
Observations                                                       41,489
Notes: Data are from the Alachua County School District, the Florida Department of
Education (FDOE), the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), and the Alachua County
Courthouse. Sample sizes for the outcomes in Panels B and C are smaller that the full
sample, as we restrict the sample to individuals that by the end of 2012 or 2013 (last year
of our education or earnings data) are old enough to be observed with the outcome of
interest (age 18, 20, 22 and 24 for enrollment, any degree, college degree, and quarterly
earnings respectively).




                                           31
    Table 2: Effects of Disruptive Peers on Exogenous Student Characteristics

                                                                                             Income
                                          Male     White      Black     Free Lunch     Median     Missing
A: Exposure to Peers with DV
Fraction Peers w/ DV                     0.031      -0.107    -0.079       0.003        -0.076     0.017
                                        (0.126)    (0.127)   (0.142)      (0.108)      (0.064)    (0.024)

B: Exposure to Male or Female Peers with DV
Fraction Boy Peers w/ DV           0.007   -0.176             -0.049        0.155       -0.037      0.035
                                  (0.174) (0.164)            (0.188)      (0.149)      (0.084)    (0.041)
Fraction Girl Peers w/ DV          0.055   -0.034             -0.112       -0.156       -0.116     -0.002
                                  (0.199) (0.193)            (0.228)      (0.152)      (0.096)    (0.035)

C: Exposure to Peers with Unreported or Reported DV
Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV 0.132        0.004            -0.272       -0.148       0.033      0.066
                                   (0.187) (0.208)           (0.235)      (0.200)      (0.099)    (0.048)
Fraction Peers w/ Reported DV       0.008   -0.244            0.142         0.093      -0.186∗∗    -0.031
                                   (0.171) (0.173)           (0.196)      (0.164)      (0.085)    (0.037)
Mean Y                                    0.50       0.56      0.37         0.54        10.66       0.01
Observations                             41201      41201     41201        41201        40817      41201
Grade-Year FEs (Grades 3-5)               Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
School-Grade FEs (Grades 3-5)             Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Notes: Data are from the Alachua County School District, the Florida Department of Education (FDOE),
and the Alachua County Courthouse. Each column reports results from a separate regression. All regressions
include controls for own family violence, as well as cohort controls and grade-year and school-grade fixed
effects for grades third to fifth. Cohort controls include average gender, race, subsidized lunch, and size
of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year. All regressions are weighted by the inverse of the number of times a
student is observed in the sample. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the school-cohort
level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                    32
                 Table 3: Effects of Disruptive Peers on Test Scores

                                            Grades 3 to 5           Grades 6 to 8     Grades 9 and 10
                                             (1)           (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)
A: Exposure to Peers with DV
Fraction Peers w/ DV                       -0.48∗∗        -0.45∗∗    -0.24    -0.23   -0.57∗∗    -0.50∗∗∗
                                           (0.23)         (0.20)    (0.21)   (0.18)   (0.22)      (0.18)

B: Exposure to Male and Female Peers with DV
Fraction Male Peers w/ DV         -0.81∗∗∗ -0.72∗∗∗                  -0.40    -0.28   -0.84∗∗∗   -0.67∗∗∗
                                   (0.31)   (0.28)                  (0.32)   (0.27)    (0.31)     (0.25)
Fraction Female Peers w/ DV         -0.14    -0.18                   -0.07    -0.18     -0.30      -0.33
                                   (0.31)   (0.26)                  (0.34)   (0.29)    (0.32)     (0.26)

C: Exposure to Peers with Unreported or Reported DV
Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV -0.93∗∗∗ -1.10∗∗∗                    -0.37   -0.54∗   -0.76∗∗    -0.90∗∗∗
                                    (0.36)   (0.30)                 (0.33)   (0.29)   (0.36)      (0.28)
Fraction Peers w/ Reported DV        -0.03    0.14                   0.03     0.25     -0.41       -0.15
                                    (0.33)   (0.28)                 (0.29)   (0.24)   (0.31)      (0.23)
Observations                        39833    39833                  38656    38656     37019      37019
Grade-Year FEs (Grades 3-5)           Yes     Yes                     Yes     Yes       Yes         Yes
School-Grade FEs (Grades 3-5)         Yes     Yes                     Yes     Yes       Yes         Yes
Additional Controls                           Yes                             Yes                   Yes
Notes: Data are from the Alachua County School District, the Florida Department of Education
(FDOE), and the Alachua County Courthouse. Each column reports results from a separate regression.
All regressions include controls for own family violence, as well as grade-year and school-grade fixed
effects for grades third to fifth. Regressions in the even numbered columns include additional individual
and cohort level controls. Individual controls include own domestic violence, gender, race, median
family income, and subsidized lunch status. Cohort controls include average gender, race, subsidized
lunch, and size of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year. All regressions are weighted by the inverse of
the number of times a student is observed in the sample. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are
clustered at the school-cohort level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                     33
Table 4: Effects of Disruptive Peers on College Enrollment and Degree Attainment

                                               Enrollment           Any Degree         4-Year Degree
                                              (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
   A: Exposure to Peers with DV
   Fraction Peers w/ DV                      -0.15      -0.15      -0.19      -0.17    -0.17∗    -0.14
                                            (0.11)     (0.10)     (0.13)     (0.13)    (0.10)   (0.10)

   B: Exposure to Male and Female Peers with DV
   Fraction Male Peers w/ DV         -0.29∗∗ -0.28∗              -0.51∗∗∗   -0.47∗∗∗    -0.19    -0.07
                                     (0.15) (0.15)                (0.17)     (0.17)    (0.14)   (0.13)
   Fraction Female Peers w/ DV        0.01    -0.01                0.15       0.15      -0.15    -0.21
                                     (0.15) (0.15)                (0.18)     (0.18)    (0.16)   (0.15)

   C: Exposure to Peers with Unreported or Reported DV
   Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV -0.38∗∗ -0.41∗∗∗              -0.62∗∗∗   -0.66∗∗∗    -0.22    -0.20
                                      (0.16) (0.15)               (0.20)     (0.19)    (0.15)   (0.14)
   Fraction Peers w/ Reported DV       0.02     0.04              0.34∗      0.40∗∗     0.01     0.07
                                      (0.15) (0.14)               (0.18)     (0.18)    (0.16)   (0.15)
   Mean Y                              0.73     0.73               0.28       0.28      0.21     0.21
   Observations                       39570    39570              36235      36235     26255    26255
   Grade-Year FEs (Grades 3-5)          Yes     Yes                Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes
   School-Grade FEs (Grades 3-5)        Yes     Yes                Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes
   Additional Controls                          Yes                           Yes                 Yes
  Notes: Data are from the Florida Department of Education (FDOE), the National Student Clear-
  inghouse (NSC), and the Alachua County Courthouse. Each column reports results from a separate
  regression. We restrict the sample to individuals that by the end of 2012 (last year of our education
  data) are old enough to have completed the various degrees (18, 20 and 22 for enrollment, any degree
  and college degree, respectively). All regressions include controls for own family violence, as well as
  grade-year and school-grade fixed effects for grades third to fifth. Regressions in the even numbered
  columns include additional individual and cohort level controls. Individual controls include own do-
  mestic violence, gender, race, median family income, and subsidized lunch status. Cohort controls
  include average gender, race, subsidized lunch, and size of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year. All
  regressions are weighted by the inverse of the number of times a student is observed in the sample.
  Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the school-cohort level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
  *** p<0.01.




                                                     34
                             Table 5: Effects of Disruptive Peers on Labor Force Outcomes - Students Aged 24-28

                                               Positive Earnings     Mean Earnings (Include Zeros)        Mean Earnings (Exclude Zeros)          Log (Earnings)
                                                (1)        (2)           (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)               (7)       (8)
      A: Exposure to Peers with DV
      Fraction Peers w/ DV                      0.03       0.07      -1707.97∗∗         -1533.21∗         -4174.51∗∗∗        -4063.20∗∗         -1.05∗∗∗   -0.89∗∗∗
                                               (0.14)     (0.14)      (781.26)           (853.95)          (1589.29)         (1845.40)           (0.32)     (0.32)

      B: Exposure to Male or Female Peers with DV
      Fraction Male Peers w/ DV         -0.35∗   -0.44∗∗             -2868.09∗∗        -3111.45∗∗         -6529.19∗∗∗        -6767.32∗∗         -1.06∗∗    -0.98∗∗
                                        (0.19)   (0.18)              (1285.98)         (1334.24)           (2419.20)         (2717.30)          (0.46)     (0.43)
      Fraction Female Peers w/ DV       0.47∗∗   0.65∗∗∗               -366.30           276.32             -1359.93           -849.85          -1.03∗∗     -0.78
                                        (0.19)   (0.18)               (895.89)          (889.60)           (2031.27)         (2022.24)          (0.46)     (0.48)

      C: Exposure to Peers with Unreported or Reported DV




35
      Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV -0.13        -0.16  -3060.98∗∗                   -3415.73∗∗         -7725.00∗∗         -8485.45∗∗         -1.42∗∗∗   -1.34∗∗∗
                                         (0.20)   (0.19)  (1414.73)                    (1562.87)          (3239.38)          (3767.53)           (0.42)     (0.42)
      Fraction Peers w/ Reported DV       0.14      0.23    -658.18                      61.02              111.41            1147.64             -0.80      -0.58
                                         (0.20)   (0.19)  (1230.39)                    (1172.75)          (2557.70)          (2450.11)           (0.55)     (0.53)
      Mean Y                              0.67      0.67   1577.73                      1577.73            5018.17            5018.17             8.20        8.20
      Observations                       21221    21221      21221                       21221              14378              14378             14378      14378
      Grade-Year FEs (Grades 3-5)         Yes       Yes       Yes                         Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes        Yes
      School-Grade FEs (Grades 3-5)       Yes       Yes       Yes                         Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes        Yes
      Additional Controls                           Yes                                   Yes                                   Yes                           Yes
     Notes: Data are from the Florida Department of Education (FDOE) and the Alachua County Courthouse. Each column reports results from a separate regression.
     We restrict the sample to individuals that are at least 24 years old by 2013 (last year of our earnings data). All regressions include controls for own family
     violence, as well as grade-year and school-grade fixed effects for grades third to fifth. Regressions in the even numbered columns include additional individual
     and cohort level controls. Individual controls include own domestic violence, gender, race, median family income, and subsidized lunch status. Cohort controls
     include average gender, race, subsidized lunch, and size of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year. All regressions are weighted by the inverse of the number of times
     a student is observed in the sample. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the school-cohort level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
         Table 6: Heterogeneity in the Long Term Effects of Disruptive Peers

                                               Gender                Income                      Race
                                           Male      Female      Low        High      White       Non-White
A: Test Scores in Grades 9-10
Fraction Peers w/ DV                       -0.37    -0.62∗∗∗      -0.26    -0.86∗∗∗    -0.43∗       -0.51∗∗
                                          (0.28)     (0.22)      (0.23)     (0.28)     (0.25)       (0.23)
Fraction Male Peers w/ DV                 -0.74∗∗    -0.60∗∗      -0.32    -1.25∗∗∗     -0.43       -0.64∗∗
                                          (0.37)     (0.30)      (0.29)     (0.42)     (0.38)       (0.33)
Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV            -0.60    -1.18∗∗∗      -0.40    -1.62∗∗∗     -0.64       -0.74∗
                                          (0.42)     (0.36)      (0.35)     (0.42)     (0.41)       (0.38)

B: Attainment of Any Degree
Fraction Peers w/ DV                       -0.18      -0.15       -0.05      -0.23      -0.04       -0.20∗
                                          (0.14)     (0.17)      (0.10)     (0.23)     (0.20)       (0.11)
Fraction Male Peers w/ DV                -0.57∗∗∗    -0.40∗       -0.15    -0.69∗∗      -0.33       -0.42∗∗
                                          (0.20)     (0.22)      (0.13)    (0.31)      (0.25)       (0.17)
Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV          -0.74∗∗∗    -0.58∗∗     -0.27∗    -0.74∗∗    -0.69∗∗       -0.38∗
                                          (0.21)     (0.27)      (0.15)    (0.31)     (0.27)        (0.19)

C: Likelihood of Positive Earnings
Fraction Peers w/ DV                       0.13       0.01       0.41∗∗    -0.49∗∗      0.05         0.06
                                          (0.22)     (0.20)      (0.18)    (0.23)      (0.21)       (0.19)
Fraction Male Peers w/ DV                 -0.50∗      -0.39       -0.12    -1.00∗∗∗   -0.65∗∗        -0.31
                                          (0.27)     (0.26)      (0.22)     (0.38)    (0.28)        (0.25)
Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV            0.01       -0.30       0.30     -0.84∗∗      0.08         -0.36
                                          (0.30)     (0.27)      (0.26)    (0.33)      (0.29)       (0.29)

D: Mean Earnings (Including Zeros)
Fraction Peers w/ DV                -510            -2738∗∗∗      -617      -2849     -3343∗∗        -72
                                   (1554)             (843)      (607)     (2120)     (1472)        (731)
Fraction Male Peers w/ DV                 -3894∗     -2482∗∗    -1784∗∗    -7239∗     -5912∗∗       -1093
                                          (2345)     (1141)      (806)     (3962)     (2395)        (943)
Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV            -3834    -2892∗∗∗      -755     -8291∗     -5841∗∗        -759
                                          (2842)     (1066)      (829)     (4388)     (2733)        (1164)

E: Log (Earnings)
Fraction Peers w/ DV                       -0.43    -1.33∗∗∗    -1.20∗∗∗     -0.31    -1.36∗∗∗       -0.55
                                          (0.46)     (0.45)      (0.40)     (0.54)     (0.48)       (0.38)
Fraction Male Peers w/ DV                  -1.13      -0.81     -1.22∗∗      -0.44      -1.04       -1.19∗∗
                                          (0.73)     (0.56)     (0.48)      (0.88)     (0.69)       (0.49)
Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV            -0.83    -1.75∗∗∗     -0.97∗    -1.87∗∗    -2.32∗∗∗       -0.61
                                          (0.67)     (0.62)      (0.50)    (0.77)      (0.66)       (0.58)
Notes: Data are from the Florida Department of Education (FDOE) and the Alachua County Courthouse.
Each column and raw reports results from a separate regression. Sample sizes vary by outcome analyzed, as
we restrict the sample to individuals that by the end of 2012 or 2013 (last year of our education or earnings
data) are old enough to be observed with the outcome of interest (age 18, 20, 22 and 24 for enrollment, any
degree, college degree, and quarterly earnings respectively). All regressions include controls for own family
violence, individual and cohort level controls, as well as grade-year and school-grade fixed effects for grades
third to fifth. Individual controls include own domestic violence, gender, race, median family income, and
subsidized lunch status. Cohort controls include average gender, race, subsidized lunch, and size of cohort
by school-by-grade-by-year. All regressions are weighted by the inverse of the number of times a student is
observed in the sample. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the school-cohort level. *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.



                                                     36
A                                      Appendix

                                            Figure A.1: Quantile Effects of Disruptive Peers on Test Scores – Grades 9, 10
                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                              Coefficent on Fraction Boy Peers w/ DV
  Coefficent on Fraction Peers w/ DV




                                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                                .5




                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                            −.5
       −.5




                                                                                                                                                                 −1
                    −1




                                                                                                                                                                                  −1.5
                                       10      20   30   40     50                                               60        70        80        90                                                           10        20        30        40     50       60   70   80   90
                                                              Quantile                                                                                                                                                                         Quantile


                                              (a) Fraction Peers w/ DV                                                                                                                                           (b) Fraction Male Peers w/ DV
                                                                                                             1
                                                                 Coefficent on Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV
                                                                              −1         −2   0




                                                                                                                      10        20        30        40     50                                          60        70        80        90
                                                                                                                                                         Quantile


                                                                                                                      (c) Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV

Notes: Data are from the Florida Department of Education (FDOE) and the Alachua County Courthouse. Each scatter point
represents the estimated coefficients (and 95% confidence intervals) obtained from quantile regressions. All regressions include
controls for own family violence, grade-year and school-grade fixed effects for grades third to fifth, as well as additional individual
and cohort level controls. Individual controls include own domestic violence, gender, race, median family income, and subsidized
lunch status. Cohort controls include average gender, race, subsidized lunch, and size of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year.
All regressions are weighted by the inverse of the number of times a student is observed in the sample. Standard errors are
clustered at the school-cohort level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                                                         37
                            Figure A.2: Quantile Effects of Disruptive Peers on Log Quarterly Earnings - Ages 24-28




                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                   0




                                                                                                                                                             Coefficent on Fraction Boy Peers w/ DV
 Coefficent on Fraction Peers w/ DV
                          −1




                                                                                                                                                                                        0
               −2




                                                                                                                                                                       −2
   −3              −4




                                                                                                                                                                                 −4
                                      10    20   30   40     50                                                 60        70        80        90                                                           10        20        30        40     50       60   70   80   90
                                                           Quantile                                                                                                                                                                           Quantile


                                           (a) Fraction Peers w/ DV                                                                                                                                             (b) Fraction Male Peers w/ DV
                                                                                                            2
                                                              Coefficent on Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV
                                                                       −4           −2 −6        0




                                                                                                                     10        20        30        40     50                                          60        70        80        90
                                                                                                                                                        Quantile


                                                                                                                     (c) Fraction Peers w/ Unreported DV

Notes: Data are from the Florida Department of Education (FDOE) and the Alachua County Courthouse. We restrict the
sample to individuals that are at least 24 years old by 2013 (last year of our earnings data). Each scatter point represents
the estimated coefficients (and 95% confidence intervals) obtained from quantile regressions. All regressions include controls
for own family violence, grade-year and school-grade fixed effects for grades third to fifth, as well as additional individual and
cohort level controls. Individual controls include own domestic violence, gender, race, median family income, and subsidized
lunch status. Cohort controls include average gender, race, subsidized lunch, and size of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year.
All regressions are weighted by the inverse of the number of times a student is observed in the sample. Standard errors are
clustered at the school-cohort level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                                                        38
              Table A.1: Effects of Disruptive Peers on Test Scores for Each Grade

                                                            Average Score in Grade:
                                     3rd      4th     5th          6th     7th        8th      9th        10th
        Fraction Peers w/ DV        -0.25    -0.39∗ -0.79∗∗∗      -0.04   -0.41∗     -0.24   -0.50∗∗∗   -0.58∗∗∗
                                   (0.27)    (0.22) (0.23)       (0.24)   (0.23)    (0.19)    (0.19)     (0.19)
        Observations               30242     34049 29858         28773    32863     36354     35635      34325
       Data are from the Alachua County School District, the Florida Department of Education (FDOE), and
       the Alachua County Courthouse. Each column reports results from a separate regression. All regressions
       include controls for own family violence, individual controls, cohort controls and grade-year and school-
       grade fixed effects for grades third to fifth. Individual controls include own domestic violence, gender,
       race, median family income, and subsidized lunch status. Cohort controls include average gender, race,
       subsidized lunch, and size of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year. All regressions are weighted by the inverse
       of the number of times a student is observed in the sample. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are
       clustered at the school-cohort level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




              Table A.2: Effects of Disruptive Peers on Suspensions – Grades 9–12

                                                       All Students                          White Students
                                               Total Days           Number            Total Days            Number
 A: Exposure to Peers with DV
 Proportion Peers w/ DV                     4.66∗∗∗   4.65∗∗∗     0.55     0.46     4.11∗∗    4.07∗∗    0.99∗∗∗    0.99∗∗∗
                                            (1.21)    (1.24)     (0.34)   (0.33)    (1.81)    (1.76)    (0.36)     (0.34)

 B: Exposure to Male and Female Peers with DV
 Proportion Male Peers w/ DV           2.81   3.07∗              0.81∗   0.66       0.32      0.92      0.81∗      0.87∗
                                      (1.72) (1.72)              (0.46) (0.44)     (2.11)    (2.07)     (0.46)     (0.45)
 Proportion Female Peers w/ DV       6.64∗∗∗ 6.32∗∗∗              0.26   0.26      7.80∗∗∗   7.06∗∗∗    1.17∗∗     1.11∗∗
                                      (1.92) (1.89)              (0.45) (0.45)     (2.88)    (2.71)     (0.51)     (0.49)

 C: Exposure to Peers with Unreported or Reported DV
 Proportion Peers w/ Unreported DV 7.27∗∗∗ 7.41∗∗∗                0.60     0.59      3.39      3.77     0.87∗      0.97∗∗
                                       (1.94) (1.97)             (0.51)   (0.49)    (2.67)    (2.63)    (0.51)     (0.49)
 Proportion Peers w/ Reported DV        2.16    1.96              0.43     0.29      2.69      2.41      0.61       0.58
                                       (1.83) (1.84)             (0.46)   (0.44)    (2.58)    (2.56)    (0.52)     (0.50)
 Mean Y                                1.618    1.618            0.485    0.485     0.928     0.928     0.279      0.279
 Observations                          38193 38193               38193    38193     20626     20626     20626      20626
 Grade-Year FEs (Grades 3-5)            Yes      Yes              Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
 School-Grade FEs (Grades 3-5)          Yes      Yes              Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
 Additional Controls                             Yes                       Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Data are from the Alachua County School District, the Florida Department of Education (FDOE), and the Alachua
County Courthouse. Each column reports results from a separate regression. All regressions include controls for own
family violence, individual controls, cohort controls and grade-year and school-grade fixed effects for grades third to
fifth. Individual controls include own domestic violence, gender, race, median family income, and subsidized lunch
status. Cohort controls include average gender, race, subsidized lunch, and size of cohort by school-by-grade-by-year.
All regressions are weighted by the inverse of the number of times a student is observed in the sample. Standard errors,
shown in parentheses, are clustered at the school-cohort level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                           39
