                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             NET NEUTRALITY, PRICING INSTRUMENTS AND INCENTIVES

                                           Joshua S. Gans
                                           Michael L. Katz

                                        Working Paper 22040
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22040


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2016




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22040.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Joshua S. Gans and Michael L. Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Net Neutrality, Pricing Instruments and Incentives
Joshua S. Gans and Michael L. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 22040
February 2016
JEL No. D4,D42,D43,L1,L12,L13

                                          ABSTRACT

We correct and extend the results of Gans (2015) regarding the effects of net neutrality regulation
on equilibrium outcomes in settings where a content provider sells its services to consumers for a
fee. We examine both pricing and investment effects. We extend the earlier paper’s result that
weak forms of net neutrality are ineffective and also show that even a strong form of net
neutrality may be ineffective. In addition, we demonstrate that, when strong net neutrality does
affect the equilibrium outcome, it may harm efficiency by distorting both ISP and content
provider investment and service-quality choices.


Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com

Michael L. Katz
UC, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
545 Student Services #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
katz@haas.berkeley.edu
                                                                                                  2


1      Introduction
        In 2015, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) adopted new Net
Neutrality rules that would apply to both fixed and wireless Internet Service Providers (ISPs). 1
These rules are examples of what Gans (2015) described as weak net neutrality: the rules
prohibit ISPs from discriminating on the basis of content in setting their charges to content
providers for exchanging traffic with the ISPs’ end users (consumers). Gans (2015) found that,
when content providers charge for their services and an ISP can discriminate on the basis of
content in setting its charges to consumers, weak net neutrality will have no impact on any
agent’s payoffs. He argued that stronger net neutrality rules are required if the policy is to have
an impact. Specifically, he examined strong net neutrality: rules that prohibit content-based
discrimination in pricing to both content providers and consumers.
        In this paper, we identify an error in Gans (2015)’s conclusion regarding the non-
neutrality of strong net neutrality. This insight gives rise to several further considerations and a
more nuanced result on strong net neutrality. The paper proceeds as follows. After describing the
model in Section 2, we demonstrate in Section 3 that, when the ISP can choose its access and
termination rates subject only to non-discrimination requirements, it has sufficient instruments to
extract the entire social surplus.
        Section 4 then considers two situations in which the ISP can no longer extract all of the
social surplus: (a) when there is a regulatory cap on the IPS’s access charges, and (b) when
consumers have heterogeneous preferences with respect to content providers. We first show that,
when net neutrality takes the form of binding limit on the fees the ISP chargers to content
providers, this policy meaningfully affects the equilibrium outcome but can result in
inefficiencies, including the excessive provision of quality by content providers. We then
consider the impact of consumer heterogeneity on these results (Gans, 2015, had only a single,
representative consumer). We demonstrate that strong net neutrality can harm total surplus by
inducing the ISP to exclude low-value content providers from the market. This result is a variant
of the standard trade-off inherent with heterogeneous consumers and an inability to engage in
price discrimination: the ISP compares setting a high price, which excludes low-value
transactions, with setting a low price that results in greater sales. We also examine the effects of

1
 Federal Communications Commission, In the Matter of Protecting and Promoting the Open Internet,
Report and Order on Remand, Declaratory Ruling, and Order, rel. March 12, 2015.
                                                                                                               3


net neutrality on investment incentives. 2 Gans (2015) found that strong net neutrality can
enhance content providers’ incentives to invest in quality, but will have no effect on ISP
investment. We demonstrate that the conclusion with respect to content providers’ investment
incentives extends to the case of consumers with heterogeneous preferences with respect to
quality, but the conclusion with respect to the ISP’s investment incentives does not—there are
circumstances under which strong net neutrality regulation reduces the ISP’s investment
incentives.
        Section 5 presents a brief concluding remarks.


2       Model Set-Up
        We utilize the simple set-up of Gans (2015). There is a single ISP, two content providers
(CP1 and CP2), and a unit mass of a single type of consumers (until Section 4, where we relax
that assumption). In terms of notation, we assume the following:
    •    v i is the value a consumer derives consuming content from provider i.

    •    ri is the revenue content provider i derives from other sources (e.g., advertising).

    •   t i is the transmission price charged by the ISP to a consumer who purchases content
        from provider i.

    •   ai is the access price the ISP charges provider i for having its content delivered to the
        consumer.

    •    pi is the price provider i charges a consumer for content.

We consider two different sets of assumptions with regard to the timing of price setting. Gans
(2015) assumed that the ISP sets {ai , ti }i∈1,2 prior to either content provider’s setting its price, pi.

In addition to considering such sequential pricing, we also examine setting in which
{ai , ti , pi }i∈1,2 are all set simultaneously.

        Following Gans (2015), we define the following policies:


2
  There has been considerable debate regarding the effects of net neutrality regulation on ISP and CP investment
incentives; for a review see Greenstein et.al. (2016). They note that an important factor in determining how net
neutrality impacts on investment incentives has to do with the alleviation and pricing of congestion on networks.
Depending on the model of queuing and on the business model of ISPs, net neutrality regulation can both detract
and promote investment in infrastructure to alleviate congestion.
                                                                                                  4


Strong net neutrality: The ISP cannot discriminate in its pricing to either CPs or consumers.
That is, the ISP must set        and            .
Weak content provider net neutrality: The ISP cannot discriminate in its price to CPs; that is,
         .
Weak consumer net neutrality: The ISP cannot discriminate in its price to consumers; that is,
       .
No regulation: The ISP can charge content-contingent prices to consumers             and to content
providers       .
As mentioned in the Introduction, the FCC’s recently imposed rules are properly characterized as
weak content provider net neutrality.
       We make the following assumptions about demands and costs. Because of limited
attention, a consumer selects content from at most one provider. The values a consumer derives
from content consumption satisfy v1 > v2 , and the sums of consumer value and other content

provider revenue (e.g., fees from advertisers) satisfy v1 + r1 > v2 + r2 . We normalize the marginal
cost of content provision to zero. The ISP incurs a marginal cost of c to deliver content to a
consumer, regardless of which content provider is chosen.


3      Sufficient Instruments
       Gans (2015) showed that the ISP can use discriminatory pricing based on the identity of
the content provider to extract the entire surplus available in the market. Proposition 3 of Gans
(2015) proposed that only strong net neutrality—which prevents all forms of price discrimination
based on the identity of the content provider—changes the equilibrium set of choices and payoffs
and allows a content provider to enjoy positive surplus. However, the proof of the proposition
contained an error—one that is instructive in evaluating source of the ISP’s hold-up power. Here,
we will demonstrate that the hold-up power arises because of the number of pricing instruments
at the ISP’s disposal relative to the number of consumer types (specifically, in the baseline model
there is only one consumer type).
                                                                                                                     5


3.1      Strong Net Neutrality can be Neutral

           Under strong net neutrality, the ISP has only two prices that it can set, t and a; that is,
both the ISP’s transmission price and access price are independent of content chosen. Assuming
that the ISP sets its prices before the content providers set theirs, the following proposition holds:

Proposition 1: Under strong net neutrality, every consumer chooses the socially optimal content
provider (i.e., CP1) but earns zero surplus, as do CP1 and CP2. The ISP earns profits v1 + r1 − c.

           Proof: Suppose that the ISP sets t = v1 and a = r1 . The highest price that CP1 can
           charge and still makes sales is p1 = 0 . CP2 cannot make sales at any positive
           price and cannot earn non-negative profits at any price consumers would be
           willing to pay. The ISP earns profits of v1 + r1 − c , which clearly is the upper
           bound on its profits given consumer and content-provider rationality. QED

The equilibrium surplus to each agent under Proposition 1 is the same as that which arises in the
absence of regulation or under either form of weak net neutrality. 3
           Proposition 1 demonstrates that, under strong net neutrality, the ISP maximizes its profit
by identifying CP1 as the efficient choice for consumers and choosing prices that extract all of
the surplus when a consumer chooses CP1. Because the ISP’s prices are independent of the
content provider’s identity and CP2 offers less potential total surplus, CP2 is excluded from the
market; even if CP2 set a price equal to 0, a consumer would earn negative surplus given the
ISP’s prices. The error in Gans (2015) lay in an implicit assumption that both content providers
must be active in equilibrium, so that a consumer would never suffer negative surplus from
choosing either content provider. 4
           This error helps to identify a potentially important difference between strong and weak
net neutrality. Although the equilibrium payoffs are the same under all three forms of net
neutrality in this simple model, there is a sense in which the ISP has a set of more robust

3
    See Gans (2015).
4
    This error also effects Proposition 5 of Gans (2015). That proposition should now read:
           If          then absent net neutrality or under either weak content provider net neutrality or strong net
           neutrality, the consumer selects the socially optimal content (CP1) while CP1 chooses a fast lane. Neither
           the consumer nor the content providers earn any surplus while the ISP earns                  .
The corrected proposition demonstrates that, regardless of the regulatory regime, the fast lane does not alter the
surplus appropriated by CP1, although it does change the surplus that the ISP receives. It follows that CP1 does not
have incentives to invest in ways that exploit the possibility of generating greater consumer benefits through use of a
fast lane.
                                                                                                       6


strategies available under weak net neutrality. Specifically, under weak net neutrality, the ISP
could also rely on a pricing strategy that allowed both content providers to be active in
equilibrium: the ISP can set either t i or ai in a discriminatory fashion to satisfy ti + ai = vi + ri
for both i. Under weak net neutrality, the ISP need only make content-provider-specific pricing
decisions without choosing to exclude any content provider. Consumers then choose the efficient
content provider in equilibrium. Because the ISP’s strategy under strong net neutrality hinges on
all consumers’ choosing the same content provider, it would appear unlikely that this result will
fully extend to setting which consumers have heterogeneous content preferences. We confirm
this intuition in Section 4.2 below.


3.2   Invariance to Pricing Timing

       It is useful briefly to explore whether the neutrality of strong net neutrality is sensitive to
changes in assumptions regarding the timing of pricing decisions. To see that it is not, suppose,
instead that each pi is set prior to the ISP’s setting its prices. We will now demonstrate that:

Proposition 2: If the content providers set their prices, { p1 , p2 } , prior to the ISP’s setting its
prices, then under any regulatory regime there exist equilibria in which consumers choose the
socially optimal content provider (i.e., CP1) but earn zero surplus as do CP1 and CP2. The ISP
earns profits of v1 + r1 − c .

      Proof: Consider the following strategies. The content providers choose prices such that
      v1 − p1 > v2 − p2 and ISP sets =
                                     t v j − p j and =
                                                     a p j + rj for any CP prices such that
      v j − p j ≥ vk − pk for j ≠ k . Observe that the ISP’s strategy states how it will set its prices
      contingent on the prices set by the CPs. Given the CPs’ prices, CP2 makes no sales. At any
      price at which CP2 would make positive sales, its profit per consumer would be
       p2 + r2 − a = p2 + r2 − p1 − r1 < v2 + r2 − v1 − r1 < 0 . Hence, CP2 cannot benefit from deviating
      from the candidate equilibrium. Given the ISP’s strategy, CP1 also cannot deviate to earn
      positive profits. The ISP fully extracts the maximum surplus that can be realized given the
      cost and demand conditions. It follows that, given CP and consumer rationality, there is no
      profitable deviation for the ISP. QED
                                                                                                                       7


Intuitively, the ISP has sufficient tools (i.e., it can separately charge both content providers and
consumers) to engage in a perfect price squeeze even though CP1 can commit to the price of its
complementary product before the ISP. 5


4        Insufficient Instruments
         The focus of the net neutrality has been on the prices charged by ISPs to content
providers for access to consumers. We have shown, thus far, that regulating the ISP’s ability to
price discriminate between content providers has limited potential to ensure that rents flow to
content providers to reward them for their investments. This arises because the ISP has sufficient
instruments to extract rents even if the structure of pricing is regulated. In this section, we
consider two situations in which the ISP no longer has sufficient instruments to extract all of the
surplus: (a) when there is a regulatory cap on the ISP’s access charges, and (b) when consumers
have heterogeneous preferences with respect to content providers.


4.1    Capped Access Charges

         Some proponents of net neutrality have advocated directly regulating access charges or
even banning them all together. We now turn to consider this form of regulation which is a more
restrictive form of weak content provider net neutrality. Specifically, suppose that the access
charges, ai , are regulated to be equal to one another and less than or equal to a , where a is set

by a regulator. In addition, suppose that the ISP can freely set its charges to consumers, t i .
Compared with weak content provider net neutrality, this regulation removes an instrument from
the ISP’s control. As we will now demonstrate, the effects of such a policy depend, in part, on
whether negative prices are possible and whether quality can be used to dissipate content
provider profits.
         Return to the sequential pricing assumption that the ISP sets its prices before the CPs set
theirs. If the ISP sets t i = v1 + r1 − a , then the maximum price CP1 can set is p1= a − r1 , and CP2


5
  Proposition 2 identifies a specific family of equilibria but there are also others. For instance, there exists a family
of equilibria in which CP1 drops out in stage one and the ISP extracts surplus generated by consumption of only
CP2’s services. The existence of this family of equililbria is a consequence of the timing, which makes CP1
indifferent between staying in and opting out at the first stage. We suspect that an equilibrium refinement (such as
trembling hand perfection) may select the equilibrium in the proposition but it is beyond the scope of the paper to
examine this technical extension.
                                                                                                        8


cannot profitably attract any sales. Thus, the content providers earn 0 while the ISP earns the
same amount as it would if there were no regulation. Observe that, under this regulatory regime,
the ISP could also choose to set a different price to consumers depending on the identity of the
content provider (i.e., set t i = v i + ri − a ), which would allow it to extract all of the surplus while
having both content providers active in the case where consumers have heterogeneous
preferences.
        Note that, even if—in addition capping the access price charged to content providers—
the regulator also imposed consumer net neutrality (i.e., t1= t2= t ), then the ISP would (if
negative prices were possible) still be able to engage in the type of price squeeze examined in
Section 3.1 above. Thus, the outcomes would be equivalent to strong net neutrality. If, on the
other hand, negative prices were not possible, then some of the rents from advertising would be
captured by CP1 as per the above discussion.
        Setting ti = vi + ri − a relies on it’s being possible for content providers to charge negative

prices when ri > a . If negative content prices are infeasible, then content providers can make

positive sales only if ti ≤ vi . Thus, in equilibrium, the ISP will earn v1 + min{a , r1} − c , while CP1

earns r1 − a . This finding reinforces the point made Gans (2015) regarding the role of payments
between content providers and consumers in undermining network neutrality. Specifically, with
regulation of this kind, for sufficiently low a , the impact of regulation is to bias content
providers towards models that emphasize advertising revenues rather than direct pricing to
consumers.
        When negative content prices are infeasible but each content can provider to choose the
(costly) quality of its service, increased expenditures on quality can play a role similar to that of
negative content prices—a content provider can lower its quality-adjusted price by raising its
quality. To explore this possibility, we introduce additional notation:
            •    vi (ei ) is the value the consumer derives consuming content from content provider

                i when the provider expends ei per customer on quality.

            •    ei* is content provider i’s efficient quality expenditure.

We assume that: vi (⋅) is an increasing, concave function; v1 (e) > v2 (e) and v1 (e) + r1 > v2 (e) + r2

for all e > 0 ; and v1 (e1* ) − e1* > 0 . We now establish the following result:
                                                                                                                9


Proposition 3: Imposing a = 0 leads to socially excessive investment in content if r1 > e1* and
efficient investment otherwise. Neither consumers nor content providers earn any surplus, while
the ISP earns profits equal to v1(max{r1, e1* }) − c .

        Proof: Suppose r1 > e1* and the ISP sets t = v1 (r1 ) and a = 0 . The only way that CP1 can
        make positive sales without suffering a loss is to set e1 = r1 and p1 = 0 . CP2 cannot
        profitably make sales at any price or quality combination. The ISP would extract all of
        the surplus, v1 (r1 ) − c . Inducing CPI to set a lower quality would reduce the ISP’s profits,
        and the ISP cannot induce CP1 to choose a higher quality without lowering a , which
        would be unprofitable for the ISP given that r1 > e1* .

        Next, suppose r1 ≤ e1* and the ISP sets =t v1 (e1* ) − e1* + r1 and a = 0 . Conditional on its
        service quality, e1 , the highest price CP1 can charge and still make positive sales is
         pˆ1 (e=
               1) v1 (e1 ) =
                           − t v1 (e1 ) − r1 − (v1 (e1* ) − e1* ) . CP1’s profits as a function of e1 are equal to
                          r1 v1 (e1 ) − e1 − (v1 (e1* ) − e1* ) . CP1’s profits are maximized by setting e1 = e1*
         pˆ1 (e1 ) − e1 + =
        and earning 0 profits. CP2 cannot profitably make sales at any price. The ISP extracts all
        of the maximum possible social surplus, v1 (e1* ) − e1* + r1 − c , which clearly is the most it
        could possibly earn given the rationality of other parties. QED

When r1 > e1* , social surplus is dissipated by inefficient rent extraction. Intuitively, the
equilibrium outcome can entail excessive content quality because there is little linkage between
the marginal benefit of increased quality to consumers and the marginal value to the ISP, which
forces the content provider’s choice. By contrast, suppose that the ISP were required to set ti = c

and ai = 0 . Then it is readily shown that the content providers would compete on quality and

price, and the equilibrium expenditure levels and prices would be e1 = e1* , e2 = e2* ,

p1 = v(e1* ) − v(e2* ) + e2* , and p2 = e2* .


4.2   Consumer Heterogeneity

        In an important sense, the original model is too simple. Because of the lack of consumer
heterogeneity, the ISP needs very few pricing tools to fully extract content provider profits and
consumer surplus. This section examines a model with consumer heterogeneity and shows that
such heterogeneity creates the possibility that strong net neutrality affects the equilibrium
outcome, but may do so in ways that harm welfare.
                                                                                                                     10


               To explore the effects of consumer heterogeneity, (temporarily) return to the assumption
that the CPs’ quality levels are fixed and suppose there are two types of consumers: (i) a unit
mass with values v1 = vH and v2 = 0 ; and (ii) a λ mass with values v1 = 0 and v2 = vL , where

0 < vL < vH . Thus, one set of consumers prefers CP1, while the other set prefers CP2, all else

equal. λ parameterizes the degree of heterogeneity, with our baseline case corresponding to λ =
0.
               Absent net neutrality regulation, the ISP fully squeezes the two content providers by
setting t1 = vH , t2 = vL , and ai = ri . In each case, this squeeze will cause content providers to set
pi = 0. Consumers will make the optimal choices between the content providers, and both
providers will have positive sales in equilibrium.
               Similarly, under both forms of weak net neutrality, the ISP sets discriminatory prices
such that consumers choose their preferred content providers but each content provider earns
zero profits. The maximum price that can be charged by a content provider is p=
                                                                              i vi − ti , which

yields profits of vi + ri − (ti + ai ) per consumer. Under weak content provider net neutrality, the

ISP will set t1 + a = vH + r1 and t2 + a = vL + r2 , while, under weak consumer net neutrality, the

ISP will set t + a1 = vH + r1 and t + a2 = vL + r2 . Regardless, the ISP earns profits of

vH + r1 − c + λ (vL + r2 − c) , which is what the ISP would earn in the absence of regulation.
               With strong net neutrality regulation, the ISP is left with only two pricing instruments:
the uniform t and a. In this case, the ISP will sometimes choose to squeeze CP1 at the expense of
excluding CP2 from the market. In other cases, the ISP will allow CP2 to make positive sales but
will squeeze it to extract all of its profits. In these latter cases, CP1 enjoys strictly positive
profits. Observe that consumers earn no surplus in either case, as CP1 sets p=
                                                                             1 vH − t and CP2

sets p=
      2 vL − t in any equilibrium in which it makes positive sales. Summarizing these findings,

Proposition 4: Under no regulation or either form of weak net neutrality, consumers make the
optimal choices between the content providers, both providers have positive sales, and the ISP
extracts all of the surplus, vH + r1 − c + λ (vL + r2 − c) . Under strong net neutrality: (i) if
vH + r1 − ( vL + r2 )
      vL + r2           > λ , then only CP1 and type-1 consumers are active, and the ISP extracts all of the
                                         vH + r1 − ( vL + r2 )
surplus, vH − r1 − c ; (ii) if              vL + r2 − c          < λ , then both content providers and all consumers are
                                                                                                            11


active, and CP1 earns profits of vH + r1 − (vL + r2 ) while the ISP earns (1 + λ )(vL + r2 − c) ; and if
vH + r1 − ( vL + r2 )
      vL + r2           = λ , then equilibria of the types identified in (i) and (ii) both exist.

This result is a variant of the standard trade-off inherent with heterogeneous consumers and an
inability to engage in price discrimination: the ISP compares setting a high price, which excludes
low-value transactions (i.e., setting t + a = vH + r1 and earning vH + r1 − c ) with setting a low

price, which results in greater sales (i.e., setting t + a = vL + r2 and earning (1 + λ )(vL + r2 − c) ).

               When the proportion of low-value consumers is small (i.e., λ is small), Proposition 4
demonstrates our earlier claim in the discussion of Proposition 1 above that strong net neutrality
is a potentially blunt instrument in that it forces the ISP to foreclose on one content provider and
its customers completely in order to supply the ‘high end’ of the market. 6 Thus, niche content
providers become under-served under strong net neutrality—something that does not arise in the
absence of regulation or under either form of weak net neutrality. In this case, strong net
neutrality reduces total surplus—the ISP’s profits fall, while consumer surplus and content
provider profits remain equal to zero.
               Proposition 4 also demonstrates that, when there are sufficiently many low-value
consumers relative to high-value ones (i.e., when λ is sufficiently high), strong net neutrality
results in CP1’s being able to capture some surplus along the lines initially claimed in Gans
(2015). Of course, CP2 never captures any surplus despite being preferred by a large proportion
of consumers. Thus, the hold-up problem is not eliminated by strong net neutrality, but the
ability of the ISP to extract rents from the content providers is diminished.
               We next consider dynamic effects. Gans (2015) found that strong net neutrality can
enhance content providers’ incentives to invest in quality, but will have no effect on ISP
investment. We will now demonstrate that only the conclusion with respect to content provider
investment incentives extends to the case of consumers with heterogeneous preferences.
               We assume that investments are long lived relative to the rate at which the ISP can
change it prices. Thus, we model investment by adding a new stage to the beginning of the game:
content providers simultaneously make investments, with ki denoting the investment made by
content provider i. The game then proceeds as above: the ISP sets its prices; the content

6
  Hermalin and Katz (2007) analyze a model with a continuum of types and derive a similar result in which
imposing net neutrality leads to the exclusion of the low end of the market.
                                                                                                                                                          12


providers then set their prices; and, lastly, consumers make purchase decisions. By Proposition 4,
neither content provider earns positive quasi-profits (i.e., profits gross of investment
expenditures) in the absence of regulation or under either form of weak net neutrality. Hence, in
these circumstances, the content providers have no incentives to investment regardless of the
regulatory regime. Even under strong net neutrality, CP2 cannot earns positive quasi-profits, and
                                             vH (0) + r1 − ( vL (0) + r2 )
k2 = 0 . By contrast, if                            vL (0) + r2              < λ , then there is a range of investment levels such that

CP1 earns vH (k1 ) + r1 − (vL (0) + r2 ) under strong net neutrality. Over this range, the increase in
CP1’s revenues from an increase in its investment level is equal to its marginal contribution to
                                                                                                      vH ( k1* ) + r1 − ( vL (0) + r2 )
total surplus. Thus, strong net neutrality can partially or—if                                                  vL (0) + r2               < λ , where k1* the

socially optimal investment level—even fully restore CP1’s investment incentives if its
customers constitute a sufficiently small proportion of all consumers (i.e., λ is sufficiently
large). 7
                Now consider net neutrality’s effects on investment by the ISP. If one models the ISP’s
investment as an all-or-nothing entry or exit decision, then net neutrality reduces ISP investment
incentives whenever it lowers the ISP’s overall profits. However, a model in which the ISP has
already entered and is considering incremental investments is also worth examining.
                Let K denote the ISP’s investment in network quality, and let vL ( K ) and vH ( K ) denote

the dependence of the values of vL and vH on that investment (for convenience, the notation

suppresses the influence of content-provider investment). We assume that both vL (⋅) and vH (⋅)

are increasing, concave functions, with vH ( K ) > vL ( K ) for all K. Note that the ISP’s investment
is not targeted at either group of consumers, although a given change in the common investment
level may affect the two types of consumers differently.
                By Proposition 4, the ISP appropriates the entire social surplus when there is no
regulation, under either form of weak net neutrality, or under strong net neutrality when
vH ( K ) + r1 − ( vL ( K ) + r2 )
        vL ( K ) + r2               > λ . Hence, in all of these circumstances, the ISP has socially optimal investment

7
  This model, like many in the literature, takes a static view of ISP’s incentives with respect to the hold up of content
providers. In reality, especially a monopoly ISP would not want to appropriate all of the surplus from content
providers when doing so eliminated their incentives to invest in content. Instead, the ISP would like to commit to
leaving some surplus with content providers to induce investment that would increase the amount of total surplus,
much of which would be appropriated by the ISP. Modeling this type of commitment would require an extension to
repeated games which is beyond the scope of the present paper.
                                                                                                                                                             13


incentives regardless of the regulatory regime. Observe, however, that this does not mean that
investment is unaffected by regulation. In particular, when strong net neutrality is imposed and
vH ( K ) + r1 − ( vL ( K ) + r2 )
        vL ( K ) + r2               > λ , the ISP’s investment is efficient conditional on its output decisions, but is

less than the investment that would have occurred absent network neutrality. Absent network
neutrality, the ISP’s marginal incentive to invest is vH′ ( K ) + λ vL′ ( K ) − 1 , which is also the social
                                                                                                                   vH ( K ) + r1 − ( vL ( K ) + r2 )
marginal value. By contrast, when strong net neutrality is imposed and                                                     vL ( K ) + r2               > λ , the

ISP does not derive any benefits from increasing vL (type-2 consumers and CP2 are inefficiently

excluded from the market) and the ISP’s marginal investment incentive is only vH′ ( K ) − 1 .
                                                                         vH ( K ) + r1 − ( vL ( K ) + r2 )
                When strong net neutrality is imposed and                        vL ( K ) + r2               < λ , both types of consumer

are present in the market and consumers that value CP2 service at vL ( K ) are the marginal
consumers who drive the ISP’s pricing. Spence (1975) demonstrated that a monopolist’s
incentive to invest in product quality is distorted when the marginal customer values incremental
quality differently than does the average consumer. Hence, in this case, the Spence distortion
arises when vH′ ( K ) ≠ vL′ , and strong net neutrality may strengthen or weaken investment
incentives depending on whether CP1’s or CP2’s customers are more sensitive to network
quality. By contrast, in the absence of strong net neutrality, the ISP can screen consumers and
effectively charge different prices to different consumer types, eliminating the Spence distortion.
                In summary, we have shown:

Proposition 5: In the absence of regulation or under either form of weak net neutrality, the ISP
has socially optimal investment incentives. Under strong net neutrality:(i) if vH ( K )v+Lr1(−K()v+L r(2K ) + r2 ) > λ ,
then the ISP has socially optimal investment incentives conditional on its sales; and (ii) if
 vH ( K ) + r1 − ( vL ( K ) + r2 )
         vL ( K ) + r2             < λ , then the ISP’s incentives are socially insufficient (excessive) if vL′ ( K ) is less
(greater) than ∆1 ≥ C1 .


5              Conclusion
                Using a deliberately simple model, Gans (2015) identified powerful neutrality results
(i.e., that net neutrality regulations are often ineffective in terms of influencing market
outcomes). In this paper we have corrected and extended this insight. The extensions illustrate
the power the pricing-neutrality principle of Gans and King (2003). However, we have also
                                                                                               14


shown that other effects of net neutrality quickly arise as one generalizes the model, making it
very difficult to reach general theoretical conclusions about the effects of net neutrality. In
particular, in addition to the Gans and King (2003) neutrality principle, there is another general
force at work here: limiting the mechanisms through which a monopolist (here, the ISP) can
extract rents will weakly lower the monopolist’s profits and may also lower equilibrium total
surplus as the monopolist is driven to use more inefficient means of rent extraction.
                                                                                              15


6      References
Choi, J.P., & Kim, B.C. (2010). Net neutrality and investment incentives. RAND Journal of
       Economics, 41, 446–471.

Gans, J.S. (2015) Weak versus strong net neutrality. Journal of Regulatory Economics, 47, 183-
       200.

Gans, J.S., King, S.P. (2003). The neutrality of interchange fees in payment systems. Topics in
       Economic Analysis and Policy, 3 (1), Article 1.

Greenstein, S., M. Peitz and T. Valletti (2016), Net Neutrality: A fast lane to understanding the
       trade-offs. Working Paper No.21950, NBER.

Hermalin, B.E., & Katz, M.L. (2007). The economics of product-line restrictions with an
       application to the network neutrality debate. Information Economics and Policy, 19, 215–
       248.

Spence, A.M. (1975) Monopoly, quality, and regulation. Bell Journal of Economics, 2, 417-429.
