                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       EFFECTS OF WELFARE REFORM ON WOMEN'S VOTING PARTICIPATION

                                          Dhaval M. Dave
                                           Hope Corman
                                          Nancy Reichman

                                        Working Paper 22052
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22052


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016




The authors are grateful to Dhiman Das for excellent research assistance and Joe Sabia and Dean Lillard
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Dhaval M. Dave, Hope Corman, and Nancy Reichman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Welfare Reform on Women's Voting Participation
Dhaval M. Dave, Hope Corman, and Nancy Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 22052
March 2016
JEL No. D72,H53,I38,J21

                                          ABSTRACT

Voting is an important form of civic participation in democratic societies but a fundamental right
that many citizens do not exercise. This study investigates the effects of welfare reform in the
U.S. in the 1990s on voting of low income women. Using the November Current Population
Surveys with the added Voting and Registration Supplement for the years 1990 through 2004 and
exploiting changes in welfare policy across states and over time, we estimate the causal effects of
welfare reform on women’s voting registration and voting participation during the period during
which welfare reform unfolded. We find robust evidence that welfare reform increased the
likelihood of voting by about 4 percentage points, which translates to about a 10% increase
relative to the baseline mean. The effects were largely confined to Presidential elections, were
stronger in Democratic than Republican states, were stronger in states with stronger work
incentive policies, and appeared to operate through employment, education, and income.


Dhaval M. Dave                                   Nancy Reichman
Bentley University                               Rutgers University
Department of Economics                          Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                       Department of Pediatrics
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                           Child Health Institute of New Jersey
and NBER                                         89 French St., Room 1348
ddave@bentley.edu                                New Brunswick, NJ 08903
                                                 reichmne@rutgers.edu
Hope Corman
Department of Economics
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
corman@rider.edu
   I.       Introduction

         The broad goal of the landmark welfare reform legislation in the U.S. in the 1990s was to

reduce dependence on government benefits by promoting work, encouraging marriage, and

reducing non-marital childbearing. The legislation represented a convergence of dissatisfaction

with the welfare system on both sides of the political spectrum, with welfare participation

becoming viewed by many as a cause of dependence rather than a consequence of disadvantage.

The key strategy for reducing dependence was to promote employment by imposing work

requirements as a condition for receiving benefits as well as time limits on receipt of cash

assistance. The basic argument was that labor force participation would break a “culture of

poverty” by increasing self-sufficiency and reconnecting members of an increasingly

marginalized underclass to the mainstream ideals of a strong work ethic and civic responsibility

(Katz 2001).

         In terms of increasing employment of low-skilled women and decreasing welfare

caseloads, welfare reform has been deemed a great success. Temporary Assistance to Needy

Families (TANF) caseloads declined by 50% between 1997 and 2001 alone, and over half of

TANF cases are now “child only,” meaning that adults in the household are not eligible (Loprest

2012). Employment rates of low-skilled mothers rose dramatically since the early 1990s, and

there is strong consensus that welfare reform played a major role (Schoeni & Blank 2000; Ziliak

2006).

         A handful of studies have found that welfare reform reduced undesirable behaviors that

have often been ascribed to “welfare as we knew it,” providing some support for the

mainstreaming argument. Kaestner & Tarlov (2006) found that welfare reform reduced women’s

binge drinking. Corman et al. (2013) found that welfare reform led to declines in illicit drug use



                                                                                                     2
among women at risk for relying on welfare, with some evidence indicating that the effects

operate, at least in part, through work incentive policies. Corman, Dave, and Reichman (2014)

found that welfare reform led to reductions in women’s property crime. This emerging literature

supports the widely-embraced argument that welfare reform discourages anti-social behavior and

suggests that disenfranchised women have been brought from the margins to the mainstream.

However, as far as we know, the only studies that have directly tested the widely-held

assumption that welfare reform encourages mainstream behavior (other than work, which is

required) have focused on marriage or non-marital fertility and have generally revealed weak or

ambiguous effects (e.g., Blank 2002, Grogger & Karoly 2005, Gennetian & Knox 2003). To

directly test the “culture of poverty” argument that making welfare much less of an option

encourages personal and civic responsibility, it is necessary to go beyond marital status by

considering direct measures of mainstream behavior.

       In this paper, we investigate the effects of welfare reform on voting, which is an

important form of civic participation in democratic societies but a fundamental right that many

citizens do not exercise. Exploiting changes in welfare policy across states and over time, and

comparing relevant population subgroups within an econometric difference-in-differences

framework, we use the November Current Population Surveys with the added Voting and

Registration Supplement to estimate the causal effects of welfare reform on women’s voting

registration and voting participation from 1990 to 2004, the period during which welfare reform

unfolded. We explore the extent to which effects appear to have operated through employment as

well as the extent to which effects varied by state political orientations and welfare strictness.

The findings provide important information that promises to inform culture of poverty debates

and provide a more complete picture of the effects of a major policy shift in the U.S. that is still



                                                                                                       3
very much in effect today. The findings also make an important contribution to the multi-

disciplinary literature on the determinants of voting by providing a strong test of the effects of

work incentives (and, by inference, employment) on voting behavior, as well as to the political

science literature on how citizens’ experiences with government programs affect their political

participation.

   II.      Background

Welfare reform in the U.S.

         The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of

1996, often referred to as welfare reform, ended entitlement to welfare benefits under Aid to

Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and replaced the AFDC program with Temporary

Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) block grants to states. Features of the legislation were

time limits on cash assistance, work requirements as a condition for receiving benefits, stricter

sanctions for non-compliance with work requirements and other program rules, stronger child

support enforcement, and family caps that limited benefits for additional children. The broad

goals of PRWORA were to reduce dependence on government benefits by promoting work,

encouraging marriage, and reducing non-marital childbearing.

         Although welfare reform is often dated to the landmark 1996 PRWORA legislation,

reforms actually started taking place in the early 1990s when the Clinton Administration greatly

expanded the use and scope of “welfare waivers.” Many policies and features of state waivers

were later incorporated into PRWORA. However, PRWORA departed from its waiver

precursors by imposing a “work first” approach that was designed to not only reduce welfare

dependence, but also to reconnect members of an increasingly marginalized underclass to the

mainstream ideals of a strong work ethic and civic responsibility (Katz 2001). PRWORA granted



                                                                                                     4
considerable discretion to states in establishing welfare eligibility and program rules. As a result,

there is substantial state policy variation within the broad national regime of time-limited cash

assistance for which work is required.

Employment, welfare, and voting

       Glaeser, Laibson & Sacerdote (2002) examined individual investments in activities that

create “social capital,” defined broadly as connections within social networks such as community

organizations and religious institutions. Individuals choose to engage in such behaviors if the

benefits outweigh the costs. By increasing employment, welfare reform may increase civic

participation (including, perhaps, voting) by shifting women from the individualistic job of

homemaker to more socially interactive occupations and increasing their participation in unions,

but it could also decrease civic participation through an increase in the opportunity cost of time.

Welfare reform may also increase civic participation as a result of the new normative climate of

increased personal and civic responsibility. In terms of voting in particular, Feddersen (2004)

offered theoretical reasons why individuals vote even though doing so imposes a cost and is

unlikely to affect the outcome, one of which involves belonging to a social network that has a

stake in the election’s outcome.

       Consistent with much empirical literature, Farber (2009) found, using the 2004 and 2006

November Current Population Surveys with the added Voting and Registration Supplement, that

more educated individuals are more likely to vote and that voter turnout is substantially higher

among those employed in the public sector than among those employed in the private sector or

the non-employed, suggesting that both employment and connections to government may

increase political participation. Findings by Schur (2003), using data from two nationally-

representative U.S. household surveys conducted by the Rutgers Center for Public Interest



                                                                                                      5
Polling following the November elections in 1998 and 2000, suggest that being employed

increases an individual's political activities through increased income, civic skills, political

efficacy, and recruitment at work. Although voting behavior has been studied by political

scientists, psychologists, survey researchers, and economists, and we know that employment is a

strong correlate of voting behavior, existing studies have not produced strong evidence of causal

effects of employment on voting.

       As far as we know, no studies have examined the causal effects of welfare policy on

voting or any other form of civic participation. However, a growing political science literature

suggests that citizens’ experiences with social welfare programs can affect political

participation—e.g., by providing lessons in how citizens and government relate, giving recipients

a stake in maintaining or enhancing program benefits, or by providing resources that facilitate

political action (Soss 1999; Bruch, Feree & Soss 2010). According to Soss (1999), clients

experience a lack of power when dealing with welfare agencies, which translates to

powerlessness in the face of government more generally and serves as a disincentive to vote.

Recent findings by Sugie (2015)—that partners of incarcerated men are less likely to register and

vote than similar partners of men who have not been incarcerated—are consistent with the

scenario of marginalization through feelings of powerlessness in interactions with public

institutions. This research suggests that welfare reform would increase women’s political

participation, including voting, by disconnecting them from a system that fosters feelings of

powerlessness.

       A qualitative study of community leaders found that the time constraints of complying

with TANF requirements reduce community-building activities on the part of women (Jennings

2001). This finding—that time and resource constraints detract from civic participation—stands



                                                                                                   6
in contrast to assumptions on both sides of the political spectrum that welfare reform would

encourage mainstream behaviors. It also stands in contrast with the literature on socioeconomic

characteristics and voting behavior, which suggests that employment increases voting but has not

focused on the important but specific population of women at risk for relying on welfare. On the

other hand, Andersen, Curtis & Grabb (2006) found that civic participation of American women

decreased during the 1990s while it increased in other developed countries, and speculated that

increasing time commitment to paid work alongside declining levels of public support may be

responsible. However, the links between welfare, employment, and civic participation in the U.S.

were not empirically established in that study. Moreover, voting—which the authors did not

study—is likely to impose fewer time constraints than would other forms of civic engagement.

   III.      Data

          We use data from the November Current Population Surveys (CPS) with the added

Voting and Registration Supplement for the years 1990 through 2004, which span the

implementation of welfare reform. The general CPS is a monthly nationally representative

survey of over 50,000 households that collects detailed information on labor force participation

as well as sociodemographic characteristics of each household member.

          The Voting and Registration Supplement takes place bi-annually at the end of November,

in even years when Congressional elections occur. Thus, every second supplement takes place

during a Presidential election, when voting turnout is higher (DeSilver 2014). The survey asks

household members if they are eligible to vote, whether they had registered to vote by the

election that occurred that month, and whether they had voted in that election. The Voting and

Registration Supplement was designed and conducted to produce comprehensive national data

on voter characteristics, participation, and trends (i.e., not from specialized surveys or media



                                                                                                   7
polls). McDonald (2007) cross-validated voter registration files and CPS data and found the two

sources to be consistent in terms of demographic profiles of voters. In this study, we focus on

women who are at least 21 years old and up to age 49, a group that is both eligible to vote and

likely to have minor children living in their household. Of, those, we only include only women

who are citizens and thus eligible to register to vote.

        We initially follow the standard in the welfare reform literature by using state-specific

and time-varying indicators for both AFDC waivers and TANF (Blank 2002). Twenty-nine states

enacted AFDC waivers, across various months, from 1992–1996 (see Appendix Table 1). We

use a dichotomous variable that = 1 if a statewide waiver was in place before November of that

year that substantially altered the nature of AFDC with respect to time limits, sanctions, or work

requirements. We also use a dichotomous indicator for whether, before November of that year,

the state had implemented TANF. The data on whether states had waivers and when they enacted

TANF come from U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (1999). Although the new

welfare regime is very much in effect today, our observation window coincides with, and

exploits, maximum policy and implementation change.

        We also use a single measure of any welfare reform implementation, defined as either a

major waiver to AFDC or TANF in a given state and year. This measure has also been used in

the relevant literature (e.g., Dave et al. 2011). Given that voting data are biennial and voting rates

are much higher in Presidential elections than in non-Presidential elections (DeSilver 2014), the

separate measures of AFDC waivers and TANF are based on very few different elections. 1 Most

notably, only 2 states (Michigan and New Jersey) had implemented waivers before the 1992

Presidential election and these were implemented in October 1992 when the election process was


1
 Presidential elections took place in 1992 (William J. Clinton v. George H.W. Bush), 1996 (William J. Clinton v.
Robert Dole), 2000 (George W. Bush v. Albert A. Gore, Jr.), and 2004 (George W. Bush v. John F. Kerry).

                                                                                                                   8
well underway, while 28 states had implemented waivers before the 1996 Presidential election

(see Appendix Table 1). As such, separate waiver effects would almost exclusively reflect the

1996 Presidential election (Clinton’s re-election), which had a historically low voter turnout

(U.S. Census Bureau 2012). Thus, the single measure of any welfare reform is our preferred

measure for this study. Nevertheless, we also show some estimates using the separate measures

of AFDC waivers and TANF in order to map the study to the existing literature but urge the

reader to interpret the separate effects, particularly those for AFDC waivers, with caution. Other

advantages of the single measure of any welfare reform are that it facilitates ease of discussion

and comparison across models and preserves statistical power for subsequent stratification

analyses.

    IV.      Methods

          We employ a quasi-experimental research design–akin to a pre- and post-comparison

with treatment and control groups–in conjunction with multivariate regression methods, broadly

referred to as difference-in-differences models, to estimate the effects of welfare reform on

women’s voting behavior. We conduct numerous specification checks and tests to investigate the

validity of the identification assumptions underlying our methodology, the robustness of our

results, and patterns across subgroups of mothers.

          The basic model can be expressed as follows, where Y refers to the outcome for the ith

individual residing in state s at time t:

(1) 𝑌𝑖𝑠𝑡 = 𝛼1 + 𝜋1 (𝐴𝐹𝐷𝐶𝑊𝑎𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑡 ) + 𝜋2 (𝑇𝐴𝑁𝐹𝑠𝑡 ) + 𝑋𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝛽 + 𝑍𝑠𝑡 𝛿 + 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠 𝜆 + 𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 𝜑 + 𝜀𝑖𝑠𝑡




                                                                                                     9
AFDC Waiver and TANF are dichotomous variables indicating whether a major waiver or

TANF had been implemented. 2 X represents a vector of individual characteristics (age, age-

squared, race, Hispanic origin, marital history (widowed/divorced/separated, never married),

number of children in the household, number of adults in the household, and metropolitan

statistical area (MSA) residence), and Z represents a vector of state-level characteristics (current

and 1-year lagged state unemployment rate, current and 1-year lagged state personal income per

capita, log female population, state poverty rate, state minimum wage, 1- and 2-year lagged

welfare caseloads, percentages of the state legislature that were Democrat/Republican,

Republican governor, Democratic governor, and registration/voting rates of males). 3 We do not

control for education, employment, or family income in the baseline specification since prior

work has shown that education and employment, which are associated with income, were

affected by welfare reform (e.g., Dave, Corman & Reichman 2012; Ziliak 2006) and are

potential pathways by which welfare reform may affect voting behaviors. A full set of state

(State) and year (Year) fixed effects are included to capture unobserved time-invariant state-

specific factors, as well as overall national trends. In the above specification, α1, π1, π2, β, δ, λ,

and φ represent the vector of parameters to be estimated.

         Equation 1, estimated for the target population of women at risk of welfare participation,

provides direct estimates of the impact of welfare reform policies (π1 and π2) and addresses a

major identification problem that is present in any policy analysis—disentangling the effects of

policy shifts from other factors that may also vary over time. This methodology is known as


2
  We present the general model with separate estimates for AFDC waivers and TANF, as some of our models are
specified that way. However, as indicated earlier, our preferred specifications use a single indicator of whether the
state had implemented an AFDC waiver or TANF.
3
  The legislature data are from several volumes of the Statistical Abstract of the United States, Composition of State
Legislatures by Political Party Affiliation. Data on the Governor’s party were obtained from the National
Governor’s Association. Male registration rates by state and year (from our CPS data) were included in models
predicting female registration and male voting rates were included in models of women’s voting behavior.

                                                                                                                   10
difference-in-differences (DD) and is standard in the economics literature evaluating the effects

of welfare reform and other policies. Identification in the DD framework comes from comparing

changes in women’s voting participation in states that have implemented welfare reform to

changes in states that have not yet done so, with the implicit assumption being that the latter are

a valid counterfactual for the former (that is, in the absence of welfare reform, trends in women’s

voting participation would be parallel across the “treatment” and control states). However, this

“parallel trends” assumption may not hold owing to a multitude of state-specific factors that may

be related to voting behavior.

         We address the issue of potentially confounding state-specific trends by estimating

difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD) models as represented by Equation 2 below, in

which Target represents a dichotomous indicator equal to one if the individual is in the target

group (population at risk of being on welfare) and zero if the individual is in the comparison

group (population similar to the target group but not at risk of being on welfare).

(2) Yist = α ' + (α1 − α1* )Targeti + (π 1 − π 1* )( AFDCWaiverst * Targeti ) + (π 2 − π 2* )(TANFst * Targeti ) +
π 1* ( AFDCWaiverst ) + π 2* (TANFst ) + X ist β ' + Z stδ ' + States λ' + ηist

         The choice of target and comparison groups is integral to a valid implementation of the

DDD methodology. Identifying the target group—individuals who are at risk of relying on public

assistance—is relatively straightforward; welfare recipients have traditionally come from low-

educated unmarried-parent households. The assumption necessary for the DDD effect to

represent an unbiased estimate is that in the absence of welfare reform, unobserved state-varying

factors would affect the target and comparison groups similarly. If this assumption is valid, then

π*1 and π*2 will capture the impact of the unmeasured factors that are correlated with welfare

reform. In our main analyses, we compare unmarried women ages 21–49 that have a high school

education or less and live with children (target group) to two alternative comparison groups: (1)

                                                                                                             11
unmarried women with no children in the same age and education groups, and (2) married

mothers in the same age and education groups. These comparison groups have been validated in

prior work on the effects of welfare reform on women’s education (Dave et al. 2011, 2012), drug

use (Corman et al. 2013), and crime (Corman, Dave, and Reichman 2014) and in the broader

welfare reform literature. We assess the sensitivity of our findings to the use of these two

different comparisons group, as well as to the use of a third comparison group—unmarried

mothers ages 21-49 with some post-high school education.

       After establishing baseline estimates from DDD specifications, we consider alternative

model specifications to address specific methodological challenges. First, we account for state-

level factors that may be correlated with the implementation of welfare reform and that may also

affect voting behaviors. Specifically, we consider the potential confounding effects of voting

legislation that coincided, to some extent, with the implementation of welfare reform. The

National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) of 1993 was designed to ease the process of registering

to vote and maintaining registration by requiring states to allow individuals to register when they

applied for or renewed a driver’s license and when they visited an office providing public

assistance to the poor or disabled (U.S. Justice Department, 2015). Six states already had liberal

registration practices in effect when the NVRA was passed and the other states were required to

implement the law in 1995 (with 1996 representing the first national election under this new

regime). Although the NVRA was designed to increase voter turnout, there is convincing

evidence that it was not effective in doing so (Knack, 1999, who focused on the 1996 election,

and Brown and Wedeking, 2006, who focused on elections through 2004). The lack of evidence

for the NVRA increasing voter turnout suggests that this legislation would not confound our




                                                                                                 12
estimated effects of welfare reform on voting. Nevertheless, we assess the sensitivity of our

estimates to controlling for when each state implemented the NVRA. 4

         We further control for state-specific linear trends and, more flexibly, include state*year

indicators instead of NVRA implementation (alone or together with state-specific linear trends).

The state*year indicators account for all observed and unobserved state-specific factors and thus

also address concerns about policy endogeneity—the possibility that the timing of welfare

reform implementation in states is a function of time-varying state-specific factors. We also

address the issue of potentially different underlying trends in outcomes between the target and

comparison groups by including an interaction between a linear trend and the target group.

         Next, we assess differential effects across relevant state-level margins—namely, the

dominant political party of the state legislature 5 and strictness of the state’s welfare regime. Poor

unmarried women tend to favor Democrats (Pew Research Center 2015) and may be more

invested in the political process in states with party dominance that aligns with their political

leanings. The latter analyses indirectly inform the extent to which the policy effects may be

driven by shifts in employment by considering a dose-response check—that is, whether the

observed policy effects are larger in states that had a more stringent push towards employment as

part of their welfare regimes. We supplement these models by directly assessing the role of

employment and family income in mediating the observed effects of welfare policy on voting

participation. Finally, we assess the robustness of our estimates to using the third comparison


4
  In contrast, both Knack (1999) and Brown and Wedeking (2006) found that election day registration (EDR),
another voting-related policy implemented by some states that was not required by the NVRA but was consistent
with its intent, did increase voter turnout. Only three states implemented EDR during the rollout of welfare reform—
Idaho and Wyoming in 1994 and New Hampshire in 1996 (National Council of State Legislatures 2015). Excluding
these states from our analyses does not materially affect any of the estimates presented or referred to in this paper.
5
  Data on the composition of state legislatures by party were obtained from the National Conference of State
Legislatures. We used two binary variables indicating Democratic Legislature >50% and Republican Legislature
>50% (the third possibility is that neither party holds a majority). . In Nebraska, the state legislature is non-partisan
so its representation in the national legislature is used.

                                                                                                                      13
group described earlier, and—using each of the primary comparison groups with education

redefined accordingly—the extent to which effects were stronger for women with less than a

high school education, who may have not have fared as well their more educated counterparts

under the new welfare regime. That is, this group may have experienced a decrease in total

income, with the loss of welfare benefits not being fully compensated by the increase in earnings

from work.

   V.        Results

        Table 1 shows mean percentages that registered and voted by year for the target group

and our two primary comparison groups—(1) unmarried childless women ages 21–49 with a

high school education or less, and (2) married mothers in the same age and education groups. For

(1), the average difference between the target and comparison group in the percent registered to

vote in the pre-welfare reform years (1990 and 1992) was about four percentage points, while the

average difference in the post-welfare reform years (1998 to 2004) was about three percentage

points. Thus, on average, the percent registered declined by about one percentage point. The

corresponding difference voted was about four percentage points. For (2), the average difference

between the target and comparison groups in the percent registered to vote in the pre-welfare

reform years was about 13 percentage points, and this difference did not decrease in the post-

welfare reform period. However, the corresponding difference that voted was about 2.5

percentage points. These mean differences are suggestive of modest positive effects of welfare

reform on voting behavior of women at risk for welfare reliance. However, these differences may

be confounded by other changes occurring over the period, and the multivariate DDD models in

subsequent tables address this concern.




                                                                                                 14
        Similar patterns are evident in Figures 1a&b and Figures 2a&b, for our target group

(unmarried mothers age 21–49 with at most a high school education) and the two primary

comparison groups. The time series in these figures correspond to numbers of years before and

after welfare reform was implemented in the woman’s state of residence. 6 Before welfare reform,

women in the target group were less likely to register and to vote than those in the comparison

groups. However, as welfare reform was implemented, the target group appeared to exhibit

behavior more like that of the comparison groups (particularly the first). 7 This possible

narrowing of the differences in registration and voting patterns between women most at risk of

welfare receipt and similar women who were unlikely to be impacted by welfare policy, even

without conditioning on any other factors, is suggestive that welfare reform may have played

some role in increasing the probability of voting among low-educated unmarried mothers.

However, as for the differences in means, these trends may be confounded by other changes and

the multivariate DDD models in subsequent tables address this concern.

        From our November CPS data, we also found that employment increased much more

substantially for our target group than for either of the comparison groups after the

implementation of welfare reform. Specifically, we compared the percentages of each group

that were employed before and after welfare reform was implemented in their state of residence.

In unadjusted results, the employment rate of the target group grew 7.5 percentage points relative

to comparison group 2 and grew 18.2 percentage points relative to the growth in employment in

comparison group 1 8 This difference, which was expected based on past literature, provides


6
  A value of negative 1 corresponds to the twelve month period preceding the implementation of welfare reform in
the woman’s state, and a value of 0 corresponds to the first twelve months after welfare reform implementation.
7
  Note that there could be up to a two year lag between the implementation of welfare reform and a Congressional
election, and there could be up to a four year lag between the implementation of welfare reform and a Presidential
election.
8
  Some of this difference may be due to unobserved trends and economic conditions. The conditional DDD estimate
on employment (discussed later), based on Equation 2, is 6.4 percentage points and 10.0 percentage points for

                                                                                                               15
further validation of our target and comparison groups. Also validating, more generally, is that in

Table 1, we can see that for all low-educated women in the relevant age range, both registration

and voting were higher in Presidential election years than in non-Presidential election years.

         Table 2a presents regression results from linear probability models predicting voting

behavior using our first comparison group (unmarried women with no children). Table 2b

presents corresponding estimates using the second comparison group (married mothers with at

most a high school education). In both tables, the estimates in the first two columns are for

“registered to vote” as the dependent variable; those in the next two columns are for “voting in

any even-numbered year,” those in the fifth column are for “voting in a Presidential election

year,” and those in the last column are for “voting in a non-Presidential even-numbered year”

(Congressional election). For the first two outcomes there are two sets of regressions. The first

corresponds to Equation 2, where AFDC waiver programs and TANF programs are allowed to

have separate effects. The second combines AFDC waivers and TANF into one indicator—any

welfare reform. For Models 5 and 6, we present results only for “any welfare reform,” our

preferred measure for this paper for reasons discussed earlier.

         These DDD estimates are consistent with the trends presented in Table 1 and the figures,

and indicate that welfare reform was associated with an increase in registration and voting

among low-educated unmarried mothers. Model 1 in Table 2a suggests that TANF increased

registration and voting by 3.5 and 2.7 percentage points, respectively, but that the AFDC waivers

had no effect. However, as indicated earlier, the separate estimates for AFDC waivers and

TANF, particularly the former, should be interpreted with caution because they are based on few

elections. Using the same comparison group and the single measure of any welfare reform (our


groups 2 and 1, respectively (p-value=0.000), which is also consistent with the literature of the effects of welfare
reform on employment. .

                                                                                                                       16
preferred measure for this study), we find that welfare reform increased registration and voting

by 2.9 and 1.9 percentage points, respectively, and that the effects on voting were much stronger

in Presidential election years (2.7 percentage points). These results translate to 6.0 , 7.0, and 6.4

% increases relative to the baseline means for registration, voting in any election, and voting in a

Presidential election, respectively, for the target group.

        The results are similar when using the other comparison group (Table 2b), although the

AFDC waivers as well as TANF were positively associated with registration and voting (and

statistically significant for the former). Results using the single measure of any welfare reform,

our preferred measure for this study, suggests that welfare reform increased voting registration

by about 2.8 percentage points (Model 2), voting in any election by 2.3 percentage points (Model

4), and voting in a Presidential election by 3.9 percentage points, with the last translating to

about a 9.2% increase relative to the baseline mean.

        The magnitudes in Tables 2a&b are plausible given that similar specifications using both

comparison groups find increases in employment on the order of 6–10 percentage points among

the target group of women (reported in footnote 8). If we assume that employment is the main

channel by which welfare reform affected voting behaviors, this would suggest a marginal

“treatment-on-the-treated” effect of employment on voting of .19 to .36. 9 This compares to an

average propensity to vote, conditional on employment, of 0.396, among the target group prior to

welfare reform. Given that the effects are strongest in Presidential election years, the remaining

analyses focus on voting in Presidential years and use the relevant subset of the data. However,

the pattern of results is similar when we use the full sample instead (not shown).



9
 To get these numbers, we divide the coefficients in specification (5) in Tables 2a and 2b by the growth in
employment relative to the comparison group. That is, .19 is obtained by dividing .0188 by .10 and .36 is obtained
by dividing .0233 by .064.

                                                                                                                 17
           As indicated earlier, a key concern underlying the DDD estimates in Tables 2a&b relates

to unobserved time-varying state factors that may be correlated with the timing of welfare reform

and which may also impact voting participation. A related concern is that the comparison groups

may not be perfect counterfactuals for the target group, and thus may not fully purge the effects

of all unobserved time-varying state-specific factors. We address these concerns in the models

shown in Tables 3a&b.

           Results shown in the first columns of both Table 3a and Table 3b (Model 1) are the

“baseline estimates” from Model 5 in Table 2a and Table 2b, respectively, which use the single

measure of any welfare reform. One potentially important policy confounder, as described in the

previous section, is the National Voter Registration Act, which most states implemented in 1995

though several states had implemented similar provisions earlier. Model 2 in each of these tables

controls for the implementation of the law or whether the state had implemented similar (or more

liberal) provisions in the past. While 1996 was the first national election year under the NVRA,

14 states implemented welfare reform after the 1996 election, and 13 states had provisions

similar to (or more liberal than) the NVRA prior to 1996. Thus, there is substantial variation in

welfare reform implementation even after controlling for provisions of the NVRA. The estimated

effects of any welfare reform on voting participation are unaffected when introducing this

control. Model 3 in each of these tables additionally controls for unobserved time-varying state

factors by including state-specific linear trends, and the estimates are slightly smaller than those

in Models 1 and 2. Model 4 controls for all observed and unobserved time-varying state factors

through the inclusion of a full set of state*year fixed effects instead of indicators for NVRA or

state-specific linear trends 10. The estimated effects of welfare reform decline somewhat in



10
     Note that all state/year variables drop out of the equation when state/year dummies are included.

                                                                                                         18
magnitude but remain statistically significant. As indicated earlier, saturating the model with

state*year fixed effects also addresses concerns about policy endogeneity.

       Another empirical concern related to state trends is that within a given state, there may be

differential outcome trends between the target and comparison groups. In Model 5, we control

for any such differential pre-policy trends by including an interaction between a linear trend and

the target group. When using the first comparison group (Table 3a), the estimated effect of any

welfare reform in this specification is lower than that in any other the other specifications and

marginally significant. When using the second comparison group (Table 3b), the estimated effect

becomes larger than that in any of the other specifications and suggests a 5 percentage point

increase in voting participation; this compares to an estimated 4 percentage point increase in the

baseline specification (Model 1) that does not control for the state*year indicators or differential

pre-policy trends. Given the general robustness of the estimates across all of these specifications

and to preserve degrees of freedom, we use Model 1 from these tables as the baseline for

comparison in subsequent specifications.

       The results in Tables 2a&b and 3a&b consistently suggest that welfare reform is

associated with an increase in voting participation, especially in Presidential election years.

These are mean effects realized over all states, weighted by the target population in each state.

Table 4 assesses heterogeneity in these effects across relevant state margins. Models 1 and 2

(using comparison group 1) and 5 and 6 (using comparison group 2) stratify the sample based on

whether the state’s legislature had a Republican or a Democratic majority. As expected, we find

that the increase in voting participation associated with welfare reform was driven primarily by

Democratic states; in states with a Republican majority in the legislature, welfare reform is not

associated with any significant increase in voting behaviors. Models 3 and 4 (and Models 7 and



                                                                                                    19
8) stratify the sample into strict/moderate vs. weak work incentives based on the typology

developed by Blank and Schmidt (2001) that incorporates various features of states’ TANF

programs (benefit generosity, earnings disregards, sanctions, and time limits) and categorizes

states as strong, weak, or mixed in overall work incentives. If our estimated effects of welfare

reform on voting represent causal links and operate through employment (the first-order effect of

welfare reform), we would expect the effects to be stronger in states that enacted stricter pro-

employment policies under welfare reform. Due to limited sample sizes upon stratification,

standard errors inflate and render some of the estimates imprecise. However, the effects are

clearly larger in states with stronger employment-based incentives, suggesting that the effects of

welfare reform operate, at least in part, through employment.

       Table 5 directly assesses the mediating effects of employment as well as those of

education and family income. Models 1 and 5 add employment status (an indicator for whether

the woman is currently employed) to the baseline specifications (Model 5 in Tables 2a&b,

respectively). The effects of welfare reform decline in magnitude, and, as expected, current

employment is positively associated with voting participation. Models 2 and 6 instead include

categorical indicators for weekly hours worked, with non-employment as the reference category.

Models 3 and 7 further include the natural log of family income, and the final specifications

(Models 4 and 8) add an indicator for high school completion. Comparing the estimated effects

of welfare reform in Models 4 and 8 with those from the corresponding baseline models, we find

that a large part of the effects of welfare reform on voting appears to be mediated by

employment, income, and education – factors that prior studies found or suggest were affected

by welfare reform. The estimates in Models 4 and 8 again suggest that employment and family

income increase voting participation, although conditional on employment, more working hours



                                                                                                   20
reduce voting participation, likely owing to time constraints. Higher educational attainment is

also associated with increased voting participation. The mediation analyses in Table 5, which are

consistent with the hypothesized effects, should be interpreted with caution since the mediators

are endogenous and constitute what Angrist and Pischke (2009) refer to as “bad controls.”

However, they provide a useful first look at hypothesized pathways.

         In supplementary analyses (not shown) we assess the sensitivity of our estimates to a

third comparison group, as guided by the literature (e.g., Dave et al. 2011)—unmarried mothers

age 21–49 with at least some post high school education. We find consistent evidence, regardless

of the comparison group being utilized, that welfare reform is associated with a 3–5 percentage

point increase in voting participation. We also estimate models for the least educated of the

target sample (those less than a high school education), adjusting the education cutoff for the

comparison groups accordingly. When limiting the sample to women in the lowest tail of the

education distribution, we find positive but much smaller and statistically insignificant effects of

welfare reform compared to our main models, suggesting that welfare reform exacerbated both

time and income constraints for this group.

   VI.      Conclusions

         This study found robust evidence that welfare reform in the U.S. in the 1990s increased

the likelihood of women’s voting in an election by about 2 percentage points (for any even-year

election) to 3–4 percentage points (Presidential election), which translates to about a 6 to 9%

increase relative to the baseline means. The effects were largely confined to Presidential

elections, were stronger in states that had a majority of Democratics as state legislators, were

stronger in states with stronger work incentive policies, and appeared to operate through

employment, education, and income.



                                                                                                   21
       The findings from this study inform culture of poverty debates by providing a rigorous

test of the widely-embraced argument, on both sides of the political spectrum, that welfare

reform brings women from the margins to the mainstream and encourages pro-social behavior. It

complements previous studies finding that welfare reform reduced women’s binge drinking,

illicit drug use, and property crime (Kaestner & Tarlov 2006; Corman et al. 2013; Corman,

Dave, and Reichman 2014). As far as we know, no previous population-based studies have

investigated the causal effects of welfare policy on voting, on any other form of civic

participation, or on any non-targeted mainstream behaviors more generally (targeted behaviors

being working and marriage), and no such studies of which we are aware have found undesirable

effects on non-targeted behaviors. As such, this study adds to the growing evidence that welfare

reform encourages mainstream behavior.

       The findings make important contributions to the multi-disciplinary literature on the

determinants of voting by providing a strong test of the effects of work incentives (and, by

inference, employment) and to the political science literature on how citizens’ experiences with

government programs affect their political participation. Finally, the findings provide a more

complete picture of the effects of a major policy shift in the U.S. that is still very much in effect

today and under which the next generation has been raised.




                                                                                                    22
References

Angrist, J., Pischke, J.S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion.
        Princeton University Press, 2009.
Anderson, R., Curtis, J., Grabb, E. (2006), Trends in Civic Association Activity in four
        Democracies: The Special Case of Women in the United States. American Sociological
        Review, 71(3), 376–400.
Blank, R.M. (2002). Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States. Journal of Economic
        Literature, 40(4), 1105–66.
Blank, R.M.,Schmidt, L. (2001). Work, Wages, and Welfare, in The New World of Welfare,
        Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Brown, R. D., Wedeking, J. (2006). People Who Have Their Tickets But Do Not Use Them
        “Motor Voter,” Registration, and Turnout Revisited. American Politics Research, 34(4),
        479–504.
Bruch, S. K., Ferree, M.M., Soss, J.B. (2010). From Policy to Polity: Democracy, Paternalism,
        and the Incorporation of Disadvantaged Citizens. American Sociological Review, 75(2),
        205–26.
Corman, H., Dave, D., Reichman, N.E. (2014). Effects of Welfare Reform on Women’s Crime.
        International Review of Law and Economics, 40, 1–14.
Corman, H., Dave, D., Das, D., Reichman, N.E. (2013). Effects of Welfare Reform on Illicit
        Drug Use of Adult Women. Economic Inquiry, 51(1), 653–74.
Dave, D., Corman, H., Reichman, N.E. (2012). Effects of Welfare Reform on Education
        Acquisition of Adult Women. Journal of Labor Research, 33(2), 251–82.
Dave, D., Reichman, N., Corman, H., Das, D. (2011). Effects of Welfare Reform on Vocational
        Education and Training. Economics of Education Review, 30(6), 1399–415.
DeSilver, D. (2014). Voter Turnout Always Drops Off for Midterm Elections, but Why?
        Facttank—News in the Numbers, Pew Research Center. Accessed on Feb. 7, 2016 at:
        http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/07/24/voter-turnout-always-drops-off-for-
        midterm-elections-but-why/
Farber, H. (2009). Increasing Voter Turnout: Is Democracy Day the Answer? Unpublished
        working paper. Accessed on Feb. 8, 2016 at:
        http://www.princeton.edu/ceps/workingpapers/181farber.pdf
Feddersen, T.J. (2004). Rational Choice Theory and the Paradox of Not Voting." Journal of
        Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 99–112.
Gennetian, L.A., Knox, V. (2003). Staying Single: The Effects of Welfare Reform Policies on
        Marriage and Cohabitation. New York, NY: MDRC.399
Glaeser, E.L., Laibson, D., Sacerdote, B. (2002). An Economic Approach to Social Capital.
        Economic Journal, 112(483), F437–58.
Grogger, J., Karoly, L.A. (2005). Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change. Cambridge,
        MA: Harvard University Press.
Jennings, J. (2001). Welfare Reform and Neighborhoods: Race and Civic Participation. The
        Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 577, 94–106.
Katz, M.B. (2001). The Price of Citizenship: Redefining the American Welfare State. New York,
        NY: Metropolitan Books, Henry Holt & Co.
Kaestner, R., Tarlov, E. (2006). Changes in the Welfare Caseload and the Health of Low-
        Educated Mothers. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25(3), 623–43.

                                                                                           23
Knack, S. (1999). Drivers Wanted: Motor Voter and the Election of 1996. PS: Political Science
        and Politics, 32(2), 237-243.
McDonald, M. “The True Electorate: A Cross-Validation of Voter Registration Files and
        Election Survey Demographics,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 2007, 71(4), 588–602.
Loprest, P.J. (2012). How Has the TANF Caseload Changed Over Time? Accessed on Feb. 8,
        2015 at: http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/412565-How-Has-the-TANF-Caseload-
        Changed-Over-Time.pdf
National Council of State Legislatures (2015) Same Day Voter Registration. Accessed on Feb. 8,
        2106 at: http://www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-campaigns/same-day-
        registration.aspx
Pew Research Center. (2015) “The Politics of Financial Insecurity: A Democratic Tilt, Undercut
        by Low Participation.”Accessed on Feb. 7, 2016 at: http://www.people-
        press.org/files/2015/01/1-8-15-Financial-security-release.pdf
Schur, L. (2003). Employment and the Creation of an Active Citizenry. British Journal of
        Industrial Relations, 41(4), 751–71.
Schoeni, R.F., Blank, R.M. (2000). What Has Welfare Reform Accomplished? Impacts on
        Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure." National
        Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #7627.
Soss, J. (1999). Lessons of Welfare: Policy Design, Political Learning, and Political Action.
        American Political Science Review, 93(02), 363–380.
Sugie, N. F. (2015). Chilling Effects: Diminished Political Participation among Partners of
        Formerly Incarcerated Men. Social Problems, spv017.
U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012. Section 7: Elections.
        Accessed on Feb. 7, 2016 at: http://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/12statab/election.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1999). State Implementation of Major Changes
        to Welfare Policies, 1992–1998. Washington, D.C.: Office of the Assistant Secretary for
        Planning and Evaluation. Accessed on Feb. 9. 2016 at: https://aspe.hhs.gov/basic-
        report/state-implementation-major-changes-welfare-policies-1992-1998.
U.S. Department of Justice. (2015) About the National Voter Registration Act. Accessed on Feb.
        8, 2016 at: http://www.justice.gov/crt/about-national-voter-registration-act
Ziliak, J.P. (2006). Taxes, Transfers, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers. Unpublished
        working paper, 2006. Accessed on Feb. 5, 2016 at:
        http://www.nber.org/~confer/2006/URCf06/ziliak.pdf




                                                                                            24
 Figure 1a –Registered to Vote by Years Since Welfare Reform
                    —Comparison Group 1
 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

   0
         -6    -5    -4     -3    -2    -1     0      1     2       3   4       5   6     7      8

                                             target       control

 Target Group – Unmarried mothers, age 21-49, high school education or less
 Comparison Group – Unmarried women with no children, age 21-49, high school education or less



 Figure 1b –Registered to Vote by Years Since Welfare Reform
                    —Comparison Group 2
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
  0
        -6    -5     -4    -3     -2    -1 Target
                                             0        1   Control
                                                           2      3     4       5   6     7      8

Target Group – Unmarried mothers, age 21-49, high school education or less
Comparison Group -- Married mothers, age 21-49, high school education or less




                                                                                                     25
   Figure 2a –Voted in Election by Years Since Welfare Reform
                     —Comparison Group 1
    0.5
   0.45
    0.4
   0.35
    0.3
   0.25
    0.2
   0.15
    0.1
   0.05
       0
                -6        -5        -4    -3    -2    -1      0     1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8

                                                           target       control

 Target Group – Unmarried mothers, age 21-49, high school education or less
 Comparison Group – Unmarried women with no children, age 21-49, high school education or less



  Figure 2b –Voted in Election by Years Since Welfare Reform
                    —Comparison Group 2
 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

   0
           -6        -5        -4        -3    -2    -1      0      1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8

                                                           Target       Control

Target Group – Unmarried mothers, age 21-49, high school education or less
Comparison Group -- Married mothers, age 21-49, high school education or less




                                                                                                          26
                                 Table 1
                   Means: Women 21–49, U. S. Citizens
November Current Population Surveys with Voting and Registration Supplements
                                1990–2004
                      Target & Comparison Groups

                Target              Comparison            Comparison
                                     Group 1               Group 2
              Unmarried             Unmarried              Married
                Mother              No Children            Mothers
         High School Education High School Education High School Education
                or Less               or Less               or Less

          Registered     Voted   Registered    Voted    Registered    Voted

  1990      0.490        0.260     0.526       0.325       0.622      0.405
  1992      0.559        0.416     0.602       0.493       0.680      0.597
  1994      0.483        0.226     0.521       0.275       0.614      0.384
  1996      0.572        0.350     0.594       0.408       0.663      0.501
  1998      0.533        0.228     0.532       0.264       0.650      0.360
  2000      0.586        0.385     0.580       0.405       0.692      0.550
  2002      0.550        0.238     0.542       0.266       0.648      0.371
  2004      0.627        0.463     0.624       0.483       0.713      0.588




                                                                               27
                                                               Table 2a
                                         Effects of Welfare Reform on Registration & Voting
                        Target Group: Unmarried Mothers, Ages 21–49, High School Education or Less
          Comparison Group 1: Unmarried Women with No Children, Ages 21–49, High School Education or Less
Model                                (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)             (5)               (6)
Outcome                        Registered           Registered            Voted              Voted          Voted in         Voted in
                                                                                                          Presidential          Non-
                                                                                                            Election       Presidential
                                                                                                                              Election
AFDC Waiver                       0.0125                                  0.0227
                                 (0.0221)                                (0.0138)
TANF                              -0.0162                                -0.0155
                                 (0.0177)                                (0.0161)
Waiver*Target                     -0.0026                                -0.0240
                                 (0.0163)                                (0.0145)
TANF*Target                     0.0354***                               0.0269***
                                 (0.0101)                                (0.0091)
Any Welfare Reform                                    -0.0081                               -0.0048        -0.0487**           0.0368
                                                      (0.0144)                             (0.0116)         (0.0191)          (0.0249)
Welfare Reform*Target                                0.0293***                             0.0188**         0.0274**           0.0100
                                                      (0.0080)                             (0.0080)         (0.0112)          (0.0111)
Observations                       32234               32234              32790              32790            15669            17121
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. State-clustered standard errors are reported in parentheses. All models control for
state and year fixed effects and include the following covariates: age, age-squared, race (black, other race), Hispanic, marital history
(widowed/divorced/separated, never married), number of children <18, number of household members 18+, MSA residence, current
and 1-year lagged state unemployment rate, current and 1-year lagged state personal income per capita, log female population, state
poverty rate, state minimum wage, 1- and 2-year lagged welfare caseloads, % state legislature Democrat/Republican, Republican
governor, Democrat governor, and registration/voting rates of males. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *p ≤ .10; **p
≤ .05; ***p ≤ .01.




                                                                                                                                      28
                                                        Table 2b
                                   Effects of Welfare Reform on Registration & Voting
                      Target Group: Unmarried Mothers, Ages 21–49, High School Education or Less
                    Comparison Group 2: Married Mothers, Ages 21–49, High School Education or Less
Model                          (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)                           (6)
Outcome                    Registered        Registered       Voted            Voted       Voted in                      Voted in
                                                                                         Presidential                      Non-
                                                                                           Election                     Presidential
                                                                                                                         Election

AFDC Waiver                    -0.0123                              -0.0179
                              (0.0118)                             (0.0118)
TANF                            0.0011                               0.0001
                              (0.0149)                             (0.0142)
Waiver*Target                 0.0421**                               0.0255
                              (0.0159)                             (0.0155)
TANF*Target                   0.0238**                             0.0228**
                              (0.0097)                             (0.0092)
Any Welfare Reform                                 -0.0056                             -0.0134           -0.0457***         0.0263*
                                                   (0.0110)                            (0.0101)            (0.0148)         (0.0153)
Welfare Reform*Target                             0.0272***                           0.0233***           0.0390***          0.0154
                                                   (0.0096)                            (0.0087)            (0.0133)         (0.0104)
Observations                     54470              54470             55048             55048               25796             29252
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. State-clustered standard errors are reported in parentheses. All models control for
state and year fixed effects and include the following covariates: age, age-squared, race (black, other race), Hispanic, marital history
(widowed/divorced/separated, never married), number of children <18, number of household members 18+, MSA residence, current
and 1-year lagged state unemployment rate, current and 1-year lagged state personal income per capita, log female population, state
poverty rate, state minimum wage, 1- and 2-year lagged welfare caseloads, % state legislature Democrat/Republican, Republican
governor, Democrat governor, and registration/voting rates of males. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *p ≤ .10; **p
≤ .05; ***p ≤ .01.




                                                                                                                                       29
                                     Table 3a
            Effects of Welfare Reform on Voting (Presidential Elections)
                        Accounting for Differential Trends
   Target Group: Unmarried Mothers, Ages 21–49, High School Education or Less
 Comparison Group 1: Unmarried Women with No Children, Ages 21–49, High School
                                 Education or Less

  Model                               (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)

  Any Welfare Reform             -0.0487**        -0.0532**        -0.0526**      -0.3110*** -0.3099***
                                  (0.0191)         (0.0199)         (0.0226)        (0.0086)   (0.0087)
  Welfare Reform*Target          0.0274**         0.0272**         0.0264**        0.0227**    0.0197*
                                  (0.0112)         (0.0112)         (0.0114)        (0.0109)   (0.0112)
  Motor Voter Law                     No              Yes             Yes              No               No
  State Linear Trend                  No              No              Yes              No               No
  State * Year Indicators             No              No              No               Yes              Yes
  Target *                            No              No              No               No               Yes
  Linear Pre-policy Trend
  Observations                      15669           15669            15669           20682            20682
Notes: See Table 2a. Model 1 is identical to Model 5 in Table 2a. Models 2 through 5 add covariates to that model,
as indicated.




                                      Table 3b
             Effects of Welfare Reform on Voting (Presidential Elections)
                         Accounting for Differential Trends
    Target Group: Unmarried Mothers, Ages 21–49, High School Education or Less
  Comparison Group 2: Married Mothers, Ages 21–49, High School Education or Less

  Model                               (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)

  Any Welfare Reform             -0.0457*** -0.0489*** -0.0516*** -0.3604*** -0.3686***
                                   (0.0148)   (0.0143)   (0.0150)   (0.0048)   (0.0058)
  Welfare Reform*Target          0.0390*** 0.0390*** 0.0387***     0.0248**  0.0507***
                                   (0.0133)   (0.0132)   (0.0130)   (0.0112)   (0.0158)
  Motor Voter Law                     No              Yes             Yes              No               No
  State Linear Trend                  No              No              Yes              No               No
  State * Year Indicators             No              No              No               Yes              Yes
  Target *                            No              No              No               No               Yes
  Linear Pre-policy Trend
  Observations                      25796            25796           25796            35482           35482
Notes : See Table 2b. Model 1 is identical to Model 5 in Table 2b. Models 2 through 5 add covariates to that model,
as indicated.




                                                                                                                 30
                                                          Table 4
                                Effects of Welfare Reform on Voting (Presidential Elections)
                                    Heterogeneous Effects Along Relevant State Margins

                                        Comparison Group 1                                      Comparison Group 2
Model                        (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)
Sample                     State         State       Work            Work         State           State       Work           Work
                         Legislature   Legislature Incentives      Incentives   Legislature    Legislature  Incentives     Incentives
                         Republican    Democratic    Strong          Weak       Republican     Democratic     Strong         Weak

Any Welfare Reform        -0.0573*      -0.0618*     -0.0500**       0.0867        -0.0147     -0.0888***     -0.0556***    0.0979**
                          (0.0312)      (0.0308)      (0.0216)      (0.0507)      (0.0176)       (0.0215)      (0.0156)     (0.0339)
Welfare Reform*Target      0.0151       0.0337**     0.0326***      -0.0192        0.0053       0.0469***     0.0509***      -0.0512
                          (0.0177)      (0.0152)      (0.0105)      (0.0546)      (0.0351)       (0.0155)      (0.0133)     (0.0422)
Observations                5669          9144         13852          1817          9448          14926          22591        3205
Notes: See Tables 2a&b. Model specification for all models in this table is the same as for Model 5 in Tables 2a&2b. Models 1 and 5
include state/year observations in which the percentage of state legislators that were Republican was greater than 50%. Models 2 and
6 include state/year observations in which the percentage of state legislators that were Democratic was greater than 50%. For
Nebraska, we use the corresponding percentages of national legislators from that sstate, since no Nebraska state legislators have
official party affiliation (that is, they are all nonpartisan).




                                                                                                                                  31
                                                            Table 5
                                   Effects of Welfare Reform on Voting (Presidential Elections)
                                    Mediating Effects of Employment, Income, and Education
                                               Comparison Group 1                                        Comparison Group 2
Model                              (1)           (2)         (3)              (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)               (8)

Any Welfare Reform             -0.0471**      -0.0462**     -0.0492***    -0.0488***    -0.0437***     -0.0438***      -0.0357**     -0.0367**
                                (0.0187)       (0.0187)      (0.0183)      (0.0181)      (0.0146)       (0.0146)        (0.0157)      (0.0155)
Welfare Reform*Target            0.0156         0.0153       0.0197*         0.0168      0.0331**       0.0327**       0.0225*         0.0182
                                (0.0113)       (0.0112)      (0.0116)       (0.0117)      (0.0132)      (0.0132)       (0.0127)       (0.0126)
Employed                       0.1378***                                                 0.0852***
                                (0.0110)                                                  (0.0077)
Weekly Hours < 10                              0.0522*       0.0581*         0.0479                    0.1044***      0.0952***      0.0847***
                                               (0.0282)      (0.0304)       (0.0303)                    (0.0218)       (0.0223)       (0.0229)
Weekly Hours 10 – 20                          0.0854***     0.0701***      0.0603***                   0.1004***      0.0767***      0.0631***
                                               (0.0188)      (0.0191)       (0.0192)                    (0.0113)       (0.0114)       (0.0113)
Weekly Hours 20 – 30                          0.1082***     0.0747***      0.0563***                   0.0780***      0.0519***      0.0386***
                                               (0.0156)      (0.0154)       (0.0156)                    (0.0114)       (0.0105)       (0.0103)
Weekly Hours 30 – 40                          0.1514***     0.0996***      0.0778***                   0.0906***      0.0453***      0.0299***
                                               (0.0110)      (0.0112)       (0.0114)                    (0.0085)       (0.0081)       (0.0083)

Weekly Hours > 40                             0.1393***     0.0783***      0.0566***                   0.0752***       0.0266**        0.0123
                                               (0.0179)      (0.0169)       (0.0172)                    (0.0127)       (0.0117)       (0.0119)

Ln Family Income                                            0.0750***         0.0624***                                 0.1018***      0.0830***
                                                             (0.0054)          (0.0052)                                  (0.0054)       (0.0052)
High School Graduate                                                          0.1290***                                                0.1568***
                                                                               (0.0118)                                                 (0.0100)
Observations                   15669           15669           15669            15669        25796          25796          23740          23740
Notes: See Tables 2a&b. Model specification for all models in this table is the same as for Model 5 in Tables 2a&2b, with the addition of
mediators indicated.




                                                                                                                                               32
                                                               Appendix Table 1
                                               Implementation Dates of Welfare Reform by State, U.S.
                10/92 to 2/97   9/96 to 1/98       10/92 to 1/98                             10/92 to 2/97   9/96 to 1/98      10/92 to 1/98
               AFDC Waiver         TANF        Any Welfare Reform                            AFDC Waiver       TANF         Any Welfare Reform
Alabama                             Nov-96             Nov-96               Montana             Feb-96         Feb-97            Feb-96
Alaska                              Jul-97             Jul-97               Nebraska            Oct-95         Dec-96            Oct-95
Arizona            Nov-95           Oct-96             Nov-95               Nevada                             Dec-96            Dec-96
Arkansas            Jul-94          Jul-97             Jul-94               New Hampshire                      Oct-96            Oct-96
California         Dec-92           Jan-98             Dec-92               New Jersey          Oct-92         Jul-97            Oct-92
Colorado                            Jul-97             Jul-97               New Mexico                         Jul-97            Jul-97
Connecticut        Jan-96           Oct-96             Jan-96               New York                           Nov-97            Nov-97
DC                                  Mar-97             Mar-97               North Carolina       Jul-96        Jan-97            Jul-96
Delaware           Oct-95           Mar-97             Oct-95               North Dakota                       Jul-97            Jul-97
Florida                                                Oct-96               Ohio                 Jul-96        Oct-96            Jul-96
Georgia            Jan-94           Jan-97             Jan-94               Oklahoma                           Oct-96            Oct-96
Hawaii             Feb-97           Jul-97             Feb-97               Oregon              Feb-93         Oct-96            Feb-93
Idaho                               Jul-97             Jul-97               Pennsylvania                       Mar-97            Mar-97
Illinois           Nov-93           Jul-97             Nov-93               Rhode Island                       May-97            May-97
Indiana            May-95           Oct-96            May-95                South Carolina                     Oct-96            Oct-96
Iowa               Oct-93           Jan-97             Oct-93               South Dakota        Jun-94         Dec-96            Jun-94
Kansas                              Oct-96             Oct-96               Tennessee           Sep-96         Oct-96            Sep-96
Kentucky                            Oct-96             Oct-96               Texas               Jun-96         Nov-96            Jun-96
Louisiana                           Jan-97             Jan-97               Utah                Jan-93         Oct-96            Jan-93
Maine                               Nov-96             Nov-96               Vermont             Jul-94         Sep-96            Jul-94
Maryland           Mar-96           Dec-96             Mar-96               Virginia            Jul-95         Feb-97            Jul-95
Massachusetts      Nov-95           Sep-96             Nov-95               Washington          Jan-96         Jan-97            Jan-96
Michigan           Oct-92           Sep-96             Oct-92               West Virginia                      Jan-97            Jan-97
Minnesota                           Jul-97             Jul-97               Wisconsin           Jan-96         Sep-97            Jan-96
Mississippi        Oct-95           Jul-97             Oct-95               Wyoming                            Jan-97            Jan-97
Missouri           Jun-95           Dec-96             Jun-95
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1999).


                                                                                                                                               33
