                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            TEACHER APPLICANT HIRING AND TEACHER PERFORMANCE:
                     EVIDENCE FROM DC PUBLIC SCHOOLS

                                          Brian Jacob
                                       Jonah E. Rockoff
                                         Eric S. Taylor
                                        Benjamin Lindy
                                         Rachel Rosen

                                      Working Paper 22054
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22054


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016




We first thank the District of Columbia Public Schools, in particular Michael Gaskins, Anna
Gregory, Brooke Miller, Jason Kamras, and Scott Thompson. Generous financial support was
provided by the Smith Richardson Foundation. We received helpful comments and suggestions
from seminar participants at Brown, Chicago, Clemson, Cornell, Delaware, Johns Hopkins,
Kentucky, LSU, New York Fed, NYU, Paris School of Economics, Princeton, Stanford, UC
Santa Barbara, APPAM, and AEFP. The authors of this publication were consultants to the
District of Columbia Public Schools. The terms of this relationship and this publication have been
reviewed and found to be in accordance with the DCPS policy on objectivity in research by the
Office of Talent and Culture and by the Office of Instructional Practice District of Columbia
Public Schools. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Brian Jacob, Jonah E. Rockoff, Eric S. Taylor, Benjamin Lindy, and Rachel Rosen.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Teacher Applicant Hiring and Teacher Performance: Evidence from DC Public Schools
Brian Jacob, Jonah E. Rockoff, Eric S. Taylor, Benjamin Lindy, and Rachel Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 22054
March 2016
JEL No. I2,J2,M51

                                           ABSTRACT

Selecting more effective teachers among job applicants during the hiring process could be a
highly cost-effective means of improving educational quality, but there is little research that links
information gathered during the hiring process to subsequent teacher performance. We study the
relationship among applicant characteristics, hiring outcomes, and teacher performance in the
Washington DC Public Schools (DCPS). We take advantage of detailed data on a multi-stage
application process, which includes written assessments, a personal interview, and sample
lessons, as well as the annual evaluations of all DCPS teachers, based on multiple criteria. We
identify a number of background characteristics (e.g., undergraduate GPA) as well as screening
measures (e.g., applicant performance on a mock teaching lesson) that strongly predict teacher
effectiveness. Interestingly, we find that these measures are only weakly, if at all, associated with
the likelihood of being hired, suggesting considerable scope for improving teacher quality
through the hiring process.



Brian Jacob                                             Benjamin Lindy
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy                  1110 Main St.
University of Michigan                                  Cincinnati, OH 45202
735 South State Street                                  benjamin.lindy@gmail.com
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                                Rachel Rosen
bajacob@umich.edu                                       MDRC
                                                        16 E. 34th St., 19th Floor
Jonah E. Rockoff                                        New York, NY 10016
Columbia University                                     rachel.rosen@mdrc.org
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway #603
New York, NY 10027-6903
and NBER
jonah.rockoff@columbia.edu

Eric S. Taylor
Harvard Graduate School of Education
Gutman Library 469
6 Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138
eric_taylor@gse.harvard.edu
 “The best means of improving a school system is to improve its teachers. One of the most
effective means of improving the teacher corps is by wise selection.”
                                 Ervin Eugene Lewis, Superintendent of Schools, Flint, Michigan, 1925



The idea that teacher selection is important for improving education is not new, but it finds much

support in recent research documenting variation in teachers’ impacts on student short- and long-

run outcomes (Chetty et al. 2014a, 2014b, Jackson 2013, 2014). While some have pointed out

the benefits of removing teachers who perform poorly on the job (Gordon et al. 2006, Hanushek

2011, Goldhaber and Theobald, 2013, Adnot et al. 2016), improving selection among existing

applicants may be even more cost effective because it avoids substantial costs: exposing students

to ineffective teachers (Staiger and Rockoff, 2010) and compensating teachers for increased risk

of job separation (Rothstein, 2015). 1

         Nevertheless, establishing rigorous methods to select individuals likely to become

successful teachers has proven difficult. Limited progress has not been due to a lack of attention

by academics, but rather to the use of small samples, the focus on a small set of teacher

characteristics found in administrative data, and the lack of high quality performance measures

on teachers. 2 One conclusion from this work is that selection using basic credentials such as

certification and completion of graduate education is likely to yield few benefits. Economists,

though latecomers to the issue of teacher quality, have consistently found that these credentials

have little or no power to explain variation in performance across teachers (Rockoff 2004,

Rivkin et al. 2005, Kane et al. 2008, Harris and Sass 2011).

1
  In addition, collection of performance data on teachers (e.g. standardized student testing, classroom observation,
portfolios of student work) requires significant public resources and often entails difficult labor negotiations (e.g.,
Baker and Santora 2013) while schools and school districts have wide freedom to require applicants to submit
information as part of the hiring process.
2
  Morsh and Wilder (1954) provide an extensive review of hundreds of studies conducted over the first half of the
20th century, beginning with Meriam (1906).


                                                            2
         In this paper, we use uncommonly detailed data on teacher job applications, employment,

and performance in the Washington, DC Public Schools (hereafter DCPS) to gain insights into

how various measures might be used to improve teacher selection at the hiring stage. Our data

and setting present several advantages for addressing this issue. First, DCPS implements a

centralized multi-stage application process that provides us with a large sample of applicants for

whom we have a range of characteristics, including scores on written assessments, personal

interviews, and teaching auditions. Second, passing each stage of the application process was

based on meeting a particular score threshold, which helps us overcome issues of selection into

teaching into DCPS. 3 Third, DCPS conducts annual evaluations of all of its teachers under its

“IMPACT” system, under which a wide variety of performance data is collected. 4 This allows us

to evaluate teacher performance in all grades and subjects, rather than limiting our sample to

teachers whose students take annual standardized tests.

         We find that several background characteristics (e.g., undergraduate GPA) as well as

screening measures (e.g., applicant interview scores) strongly predict teacher effectiveness.

These results are quite robust to various methods to control for selection into the teaching work

force in DCPS. Indeed, these measures are only weakly, if at all, associated with the likelihood

of receiving a job offer or being hired. 5 Our results suggests that there exists considerable scope

for improving teacher quality through the selection process. We find that teachers whose

applications are in the top quartile of predicted effectiveness have on-the-job performance that is

3
  As we explain in further detail below, applicants who passed through the entire application process have a
discontinuously higher probability of receiving a job offer and working in DCPS, but there is still considerable
variation in applicant scores, conditional on passing. This allows us to estimate the relationship of these application
scores to both hiring and teacher performance, while accounting for selection into the sample using the passing
threshold.
4
  Dee and Wyckoff (2013) describe IMPACT’s incentives in greater detail and demonstrate that the program
affected teacher turnover and measured performance on various IMPACT components.
5
  We also find that few background characteristics, and none of the application screening measures, are significantly
associated with the probability of retention within DCPS.


                                                           3
roughly 0.65 standard deviations higher on average than those whose applications are in the

bottom quartile. To underscore the large magnitude of this finding, we compare it to the on-the-

job improvement exhibited by DCPS teachers over their initial years on the job, as this is the

point in teachers’ careers when performance has been consistently shown to improve rapidly

(e.g., Rice 2013, Ost 2014, Papay and Kraft 2015). Among the new teachers in our sample who

remain in DCPS for three years, their average 3-year growth in performance is only 0.30

standard deviations, less than half of the difference in performance between top- and bottom-

quartile applicants entering DCPS.

       This paper contributes to the body of recent work on the importance of personnel policies

within the economics of education as well as the wider literature in labor and personnel

economics on employee selection. As noted in a review by Oyer and Schaeffer (2011), while

economists have accomplished much to understand the importance of employee incentives, “the

literature has been less successful at explaining how firms can find the right employees in the

first place.” Recent work has examined the role of personal referrals (Schmutte 2015, Burks et al.

2015), placement agencies (Stanton and Thomas 2013) and, most similar to our setting, objective

testing technologies (Hoffman et al. 2015) in the hiring process. With greater access to detailed

information within firms and institutions on hiring and performance, a great deal may be learned

about the economics of employee selection.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of current knowledge

regarding teacher hiring practices and earlier research that informs our study. In Section 3 we

describe teacher application, hiring, and evaluation processes in DCPS. We present empirical

findings on selection into DCPS, job performance, and attrition in Section 4, and discuss the

major conclusions from our findings in Section 5.



                                                4
2. What Do We Know About Teacher Selection?

        We devote this section to providing an overview of existing work on the issue of teacher

selection, as much of it comes from fields other than economics. Economists have paid far

greater attention to the labor supply of teachers than to labor demand. Many studies examine

determinants of attrition and mobility between schools among employed teachers, mainly

focusing on the impacts of compensation and student/school characteristics (e.g., Dolton and van

der Klaauw, 1995, 1999; Hanushek et al. 2004; Scafidi et al. 2007; Clotfelter et al. 2008; Jackson

2009; Boyd et al. 2011). 6 An assumption (sometimes implicit) in much of this work is that

employment outcomes stem from teachers’ choices, not those of school or district administration.

Below, we restrict our attention to papers focusing more narrowly on the questions of teacher

labor demand and employee selection. Other work in economics presents evidence on how

teacher characteristics relate to high-stakes evaluations by principals (Jacob and Walsh 2011),

and how retention decisions by school principals respond to lowering the cost of dismissal (Jacob

2013) or the provision of new teacher performance data (Rockoff et al. 2012). These papers are

related to our study, but deal with on-the-job personnel assessment, rather than hiring.



2.1 Economics Literature

        There is a small literature in economics on the demand for teaching applicant

characteristics and the effectiveness of teacher selection processes. Ballou (1996) finds that high

achieving college graduates with teaching credentials are not more likely to receive a job offer,


6
 There are also studies focusing on how teacher effort, measured by absence, responds to incentives such as
employment protection (Jacob 2013), paid absence policies (Jacobson 1989) or school accountability (Ahn 2013).


                                                       5
despite being no less likely to apply for teaching jobs or accept offers given to them. He

concludes that “public school officials undervalue cognitive skills and subject matter knowledge

when screening new applicants and that hiring decisions are suboptimal as a result.” Recent work

finds some supporting evidence for this conclusion. Hinrichs (2014) sent resumes with randomly

generated characteristics to a representative sample of schools nationwide and measured total

rates of response as well as responses with invitations for an interview. This has the distinct

advantage of isolating labor demand, but is limited to basic resume credentials and to initial

interest, rather than ultimate hiring decisions. He finds that applicants from more selective

colleges were slightly more likely to receive a response, but those with higher undergraduate

GPA were not. A large effect was found for an applicant’s geographic location, with applicants

from within the same state having much higher response rates.

       Boyd et al. (2011) study the labor market for teachers transferring within the same school

district, using data from New York City to discern whether transfer applicants with certain

characteristics are more likely to be hired. While the use of applications data allows them to

measure and control for some components of labor supply, they cannot observe declined job

offers, so this aspect of labor supply could potentially affect their conclusions. Nevertheless,

they find that, conditional on application, transfer applicants are more likely to be hired if they

possess higher certification exam scores, attended more competitive colleges, had more years of

experience, or if their previous students had higher achievement growth. This last result suggests

that school principals are able to identify more effective teachers among transfer applicants.

       Studying dismissals of probationary teachers in the Chicago Public Schools, Jacob (2011)

finds that principals are more likely to release individuals with more absences and lower value-

added scores, and less likely to release individuals with stronger educational qualifications



                                                  6
measured by things such as the competitiveness of their undergraduate college and whether they

had ever failed a teacher certification exam.

         In contrast, earlier work by Kane and Staiger (2005) presents evidence from a natural

experiment suggesting that schools are not effective at choosing the most effective applicants

among new hires. Taking advantage of a state incentive for reduced class sizes, Los Angeles

dramatically increased hiring of new elementary teachers in 1997, from around 1,300 per year to

over 3,300. 7 Despite the hiring spike (and a clear increase in new hires that did not possess

proper credentials), estimates of performance were no worse for teachers hired in 1997 than for

cohorts hired in preceding years.

         Some recent research has produced promising results regarding how indices of teacher

characteristics predict teaching performance, although these have included measures collected in

low-stakes research surveys (Rockoff et al. 2011) or administrative data unavailable to schools

and school districts (Boyd et al. 2008). 8 Moreover, these studies focus on the characteristics of

teachers who are already hired rather than data on the characteristics of a pool of teacher

applicants, preventing them from addressing issues of selection bias.

         In a study which is most closely related to our work, Goldhaber et al. (2014) examine

data from Spokane, Washington, where teacher applications are scored subjectively based on

education, qualifications and certifications, experience, letters of recommendation, and narrative




7
  Hiring remained high for additional years, and Los Angeles did not increase teacher salaries.
8
  Some suggestive evidence also comes from two alternative certification programs in New York City. Rockoff and
Speroni (2011) find that math teachers hired through the Teaching Fellows program were slightly more effective in
their first year of teaching if they had a high rating during program selection. Dobbie (2011) finds that an index of
eight criteria used to select applicants into the Teach for America (TFA) program are positively related to
effectiveness among teachers during their first years of teaching.


                                                          7
statements. 9 They find that teachers with higher rated applications have significantly higher

impacts on student achievement (i.e., value-added) and higher retention rates, and they conclude

that selection due to non-random hiring has little impact on their results. 10




2.2 Hiring Preferences and Processes in Teaching

         Outside of economics, there is a significant literature on teacher hiring. These studies

focus mostly on either (a) the characteristics that principals look for in job applicants and (b) the

processes used by schools to recruit, screen, and select teachers. Here we give a general sense of

these literatures and their findings; for more detailed reviews see Pounder (1989), Rutledge et al.

(2008), or Mason and Schroeder (2010).

         Studies of the values principals place on teacher applicant characteristics are based on

qualitative interviews and surveys, typically with small samples drawn from either one district or

a limited geographic area (e.g., Place and Kowalski 1993, Abernathy et al. 2001, Harris et al.

2007, Cannata and Engel 2011). These analyses generally indicate that principals place greater

weight on personal traits (e.g., “honesty”, “good character”, “ability to work with peers”,

“respect” or “compassion” for students) that may be more difficult to assess than credentials like

academic achievement or years of prior teaching experience.

         No nationally representative study on methods used for teacher hiring exists. However, a

number of studies, spanning many years and various geographic areas, provide a fairly consistent

picture. The two methods employed in these studies are either to ask school district
9
  Applications are scored first by central human resources staff and, if the score meets a cutoff, are scored again by
school-level personnel; those with high scores in the second stage are brought in for a formal interview by the school
principal and/or staff.
10
   They assess the scope of selection bias using instrumental variables methods. Applicant scores are strongly related
to hiring probability in their setting, but are sometimes not calculated correctly by district staff who must add up
scores on multiple criteria by hand. These arithmetic errors serve as instruments to address the selection problem.


                                                          8
administrators about their hiring practices or to survey teachers about their experiences being

hired for their most recent job (Liu and Kardos 2002, Liu and Moore-Johnson 2007).

         Applicants almost always submit written applications with information including a

resume and proof of certification, as well as transcripts and recommendation letters. From there,

a subset of applicants is invited for in-person interview. These surveys also indicate that teachers

are usually interviewed more than once as they progress toward being hired.

         Submission of writing samples, a portfolio of work, or delivering a sample lesson are all

far less common than the in-person interview. None of the early studies we reviewed mentioned

any written evaluations other than a cover letter and they all report that a small fraction (typically

less than 15 percent) of districts observed applicants teaching a lesson prior to hire. 11 More

recently, Strauss (1998) reports that roughly 25% of districts surveyed in Pennsylvania solicit

writing samples and roughly one third request teacher exam scores (e.g., National Teacher

Examination or Praxis Series). Balter and Duncombe (2005), surveying New York State school

districts, report that 60% require a writing sample, 30% require a teaching portfolio, and two

thirds require certification exam scores. 12 These surveys also report between 40 and 50 percent

of districts using a sample classroom presentation, which may indicate a trend toward greater

use. However, surveys of teachers (Liu and Kardos 2002, Liu and Moore-Johnson 2007) across

several states typically find only about 15% giving a sample lesson prior to being hired. 13 One




11
   See Neely (1957), Diekrager (1969), Nalley (1971), Hansen (1976), and Luthy (1982).
12
   In addition to letters of recommendation, Pennsylvania districts reported placing high weight on college major and
grade point average (but low weight on test scores, essays, or institution attended) when deciding whom to
interview. In New York, recommendations and college major are also given high weight in screening prior to the
interview, but low weights are given to grade point average, institution attended, and scores on certification exams
(or other screening tests).
13
   The fraction of teachers who taught a sample lesson was 6.5 percent in California, 14 percent in Florida, 14.6
percent in Michigan, 19.6 percent in Massachusetts, and 23 percent in New Jersey.


                                                         9
caveat to this conclusion is that student teachers and teachers’ aides who are hired to teach full-

time, will likely have been observed while teaching, albeit outside of the formal hiring process. 14




2.3 Validity of Interviews and Job-Task Observations in Employee Selection

         A large literature in applied (or “industrial”) psychology examines the power of

interviews to extract reliable and accurate information about the future success of potential

employees. Much of the early research in this field exposed low reliability and validity (see

Schmitt 1976), but more recent work demonstrates that structured interviews (i.e., pre-selected

questions with rubrics for coding answers) can predict outcome variables such as evaluations of

employee performance by supervisors (see Arvey and Campion 1982, Hunter and Hunter 1984,

Motowidlo et al. 1990, McDaniel et al. 1994).

         A small set of studies focus on interviews for teachers specifically. However, this

research typically examines how teacher characteristics (e.g., gender, age) and interview

structure (e.g., a single interviewer vs. a panel) affect hiring decisions, and many of these studies

use actors instead of actual teachers (e.g., Bolton 1969, Young and Pounder 1986, Young 2005).

Few studies test whether interview decisions predict future success in teaching, but there is some

evidence, albeit in small samples, of a positive relationship between teachers’ interview ratings

and supervisor ratings of job performance (Mickler and Solomon 1986) and student achievement

gains (Webster 1988).

         We know of no study that focuses on the predictive validity of sample lessons done as

part of a hiring process. 15 However, the power of job simulations to predict productivity is a

14
  Liu and Moore-Johnson (2007) report that 20 percent of teachers worked in their current schools in some capacity
before they were hired, and Strauss (1998) finds that about one third of school districts try to fill full-time teaching
positions with current substitutes or part-time teachers.


                                                          10
well-researched issue in the field of industrial psychology (see Wernimont and Campbell 1968,

Hunter and Hunter 1984), and there is a large literature on the relationship between student

achievement and observed teacher behaviors—typically measured with trained observers using

low-inference coding systems or “rubrics.” This research has consistently found positive

relationships between observed teacher behavior and student learning outcomes. 16 Nevertheless,

while research indicates that effective teachers can be identified through observation, this

evidence comes from full-time teachers in normal classroom settings and may not accurately

reflect the evaluation of sample lessons presented during the hiring process.



3. Application, Hiring, and Performance Evaluation in DCPS

         Traditionally, the hiring process for teachers in DCPS was largely decentralized, with

school principals making independent decisions on whom to hire with few restrictions aside from

licensing and certification. Principals could hire teachers from a variety of sources, including

student teachers in their schools, through relationships with local teacher preparation programs,

or through central office applications. In 2009, DCPS created TeachDC, a multi-stage,

centralized application process which is the focus of our analysis and which we describe in

greater detail in Section 3.1. TeachDC aims to streamline hiring by screening out less desirable

applicants and giving principals a list of “recommended” candidates who successfully completed

the process. We examine hiring and performance for TeachDC applicants from 2011 to 2013.




15
   Some indirect evidence is presented by Wede (1996), who analyzed data on subjective performance evaluations of
teachers from a school district that incorporated a sample lesson as part of its hiring process. Several years later,
average evaluations of those hired during this period were not statistically different than those hired in prior years.
16
   Recent work includes Holtzapple (2003), Schacter and Thum (2004), Milanowski (2004), Kimball et al. (2004),
Gallagher (2004), Kane et al. (2011), and Kane et al. (2012). Brophy and Good (1984) review earlier research.


                                                          11
        Information on “recommended” TeachDC applicants is made available to principals via

an online database. Recommended applicants are listed in alphabetical order, with links to their

resumes, and can be filtered by subject area to help principals find candidates. Principals can

also navigate through the online database to find out further information on how the applicants

scored in the Teach DC process. While we know that DCPS principals are provided with

information on the online database during a regularly occurring and mandatory meeting of

school administrators, the district does not track whether principals used the database, nor

whether they proceeded beyond the list of candidates to view applicants’ scores in any of the

hiring stages. As we show below, evidence suggests principals used the list of recommended

candidates, but did not rely on the detailed application scores to select applicants. 17

        While completion of TeachDC can help applicants find a job, being on the recommended

list is not required in order to be hired by a DCPS principal. TeachDC recommended candidates

are quite likely to be hired (see Table 2, discussed below), but they comprise only about one

quarter of new teachers hired from 2011 to 2013. An additional quarter of new hires applied to

TeachDC but did not complete the process, either because they failed one of the selection stages

or stopped voluntarily. Roughly half of news hires during these years did not apply through the

TeachDC process. 18

        While we do not examine applicants outside of TeachDC, for comparison purposes we

present summary statistics (see Table 1) on all teachers in DCPS, breaking them up by whether

17
   In personal correspondence, DCPS officials indicated their belief that few principals accessed information beyond
examining teachers in the recommended pool for the subject in which they were interested in hiring.
18
   This other half of new hires is divided between two groups. First, about 10 percent of new hires applied through
other rigorous selection processes like Teach For America and the DC Teaching Fellows, which focus on individuals
who lack teaching certification but have outstanding prior achievements and demonstrated leadership in other
professions or activities. Over the period 2011-2013, DCTF and TFA brought in, respectively, roughly 100 and 60
new DCPS teachers. These teachers participate in training programs in the summer prior to starting their teaching
jobs and take courses to obtain teaching certification during their first few years of employment. Second, the
remaining approximately 40 percent of new hires applied directly to local school principals.


                                                        12
the teacher is a new DCPS hire who applied to TeachDC from 2011-2013 (our primary analytic

sample), a new hire who did not apply to TeachDC, or a veteran teacher (hired before 2011).

Relative to veteran teachers, new hires are younger, more likely to teach in middle schools, and

have lower performance evaluation scores. This is true regardless of whether they applied to

TeachDC. There are few noticeable differences between new hires who applied to TeachDC and

those which did not, although TeachDC applicants appear to have somewhat better performance

evaluations in their first year (e.g., -0.4 vs. -0.6 standard deviations on our normalized measure,

the details of which are provided in section 3.2).



3.1 The TeachDC Application Process

        We focus on the TeachDC selection process as it occurred from 2011-2013. Each year,

from roughly February through July, candidates submit applications to Teach DC. The online

application system first collects background information such as applicants’ education history,

employment experience, and eligibility for licensure. Applicants who don’t already hold a DC

license and whose credentials make them ineligible to obtain one prior to the start of the school

year are not allowed to proceed further, and we do not analyze these ineligible applications. 19

        Following collection of this preliminary information, district officials review applications

in several stages; we discuss these stages in detail below, as they changed somewhat from year to

year. In 2011, there were four stages of evaluation; two written evaluations (general essays and

subject-specific assessments), an interview, and a teaching audition. In 2012 and 2013, the

general essay was dropped, and applicants were assessed on the remaining three stages. Also, in


19
  To be licensed in DC, teachers must have a bachelor’s degree, complete a teacher preparation program (traditional
or alternative), and pass both the PRAXIS I and relevant PRAXIS II exams (or substitute exams). Teachers licensed
in another state are also generally eligible for a DC license.


                                                        13
2011 many of the teaching auditions were done live in DCPS classrooms, but, due to logistical

difficulties, audition videos were used for the remaining 2011 cases and in all of 2012 and 2013.

         At the end of each stage, applicants who pass a specified performance threshold are

allowed to proceed. Applicants who pass all stages (and a background check) are included in the

recommended pool seen online by principals. On average, for those who made it through the

process, it took roughly six weeks from the initial application to the pass/fail determination at the

final stage.

         Table 2 shows the number of applicants evaluated in each recruiting year and each stage,

as well as whether or not they passed the stage and the fraction of applicants hired in each

possible stage outcome. There were roughly 2,500 applicants per year, of which roughly 13

percent were hired into DCPS. Roughly 60-70% of applicants completed the subject-specific

written assessment and 30-40% of applicants completed the interview. However, the number of

applicants completing the audition rose significantly after 2011; as we explain in more detail

below, Teach DC changed from live auditions in 2011 to video submissions in 2012 and 2013.

         As mentioned above, applicants did not have to make it into the Teach DC recommended

pool in order to be hired into DCPS. 20 In Table 2, we see that in both 2011 and 2012, the

percentage of applicants hired among those not even evaluated in the initial stage was only

slightly below average. However, among applicants who are evaluated in each stage, those who

failed the evaluation are less likely to be hired than those who passed. Among those applicants

who passed the final audition stage and made it into the recommended pool, the fraction hired


20
  Table 1 shows that 28% of the 80 candidates who failed the audition stage in 2011 were nonetheless hired by the
district. The analogous figures in 2012 and 2013 are notably lower. Based on conversations with DCPS officials, we
believe that some of these candidates were actually moved ahead to the recommended pool to increase the choices
available to principals. In analyses we do not present (but which are available upon request), we confirm that all of
our results are robust to excluding these 80 applicants or to treating them as recommended.


                                                         14
was 48 percent, 40 percent, and 52 percent in years 2011, 2012, and 2013, respectively. Thus, it

seems clear that applicants who make it into the TeachDC recommended pool are far more likely

to be hired, supporting the notion that principals use this list as a source for job candidates.

         To give a better sense of how the TeachDC process worked in practice, we briefly

summarize the key aspects of each stage during the three years on which we focus. In 2011,

applicants first submitted online essays of 200-400 words which were scored by one of several

district office reviewers for content and writing quality. 21 In addition to the essays used for

selection at this stage, applicants were asked additional questions that were not used in the

selection process and were not provided to principals that hired new teachers. Importantly,

applicants were not told explicitly that these items were different than the essays or any other

information that they submitted, so these data are likely indicative of responses that DCPS would

receive if they were to be used in the selection process. 22

         Applicants answered 50 multiple-choice questions from the Haberman Star Teacher Pre-

Screener (Haberman, 1993), a commercial teacher applicant screening instrument. Used by a

number of large urban school districts throughout the U.S., the Haberman Pre-Screener is

intended to provide school officials with guidance on how effective a particular candidate is

likely to be in an urban classroom. Prior research has indicated a positive relationship between

Haberman scores and teacher performance in the classroom (Rockoff et al. 2011). 23


21
   One essay was on instructional strategies for low-performing students, and the other on the use of student
achievement data. These essays were scored by on a 4 point scale (in 0.1 point increments), and a composite score
was calculated using weights of 40% for the content of each essay and 20% for overall writing quality. As a general
rule, applicants proceeded if they achieved a composite score of 2.0 or higher. In addition, DCPS officials selected a
random 20% subset of applicants with scores below 2.0 to pass, although applicants with the minimum possible
score (1.0 on both essays) were not eligible to be selected.
22
   Prior to this entire section, applicants were informed that some of the questions were part of a pilot program, but
were not told which items were part of the pilot and which were not.
23
   This assessment was developed by interviewing teachers thought to be highly effective and designing questions to
capture their attitudes and beliefs. The Haberman Foundation also produces an interview protocol and scoring rubric


                                                         15
         In addition, applicants answered multiple-choice questions to measure the “Big Five”

personality traits (Costa and McCrae, 1992) and Grit, defined as “the tendency to sustain interest

in and effort toward very long-term goals”(Duckworth and Quinn, 2009). 24 While our intention

was to examine measures of the Big Five and Grit, a factor analysis (see Appendix Table A1)

reveals that applicants’ answers are inconsistent with the instruments’ designs. The only trait

from these surveys that aligns well with a cohesive set of personality questions is Extroversion.

All questions other than Extroversion line up along two factors corresponding to whether the

question was normally scored (e.g., measuring conscientiousness, the item “Is a reliable worker”)

or reverse scored (e.g., measuring conscientiousness, the item “Tends to be disorganized”). We

believe that this was due to the fact that the questions were asked as part of a job application

rather than a low-stakes survey, and candidates may have “faked” their responses to appear more

attractive to DCPS officials. 25 Hence, in the analysis below, we include three personality

measures (Extroversion, “Positive Spin”, and “Negative Spin”), and the Haberman test score in

regressions of DCPS hiring and teacher performance.




which is intended to assist district officials in identifying individuals likely to be effective urban school teachers,
although this protocol was not used in DCPS during the period of our study. The average score (out of 50) for 2011
TeachDC applicants was 34.2, with a standard deviation of 4.7, and similar to the average score of 31.9 (standard
deviation 4.8) found by Rockoff et al. (2011) for a sample of recently hired NYC math teachers.
24
   Personality traits were measured using a shortened version of the Big Five Inventory (John, Donahue, and Kentle
1991) in which applicants express their degree of agreement with how a phrase (e.g., “I am talkative”) describes
them. The 16 items focused mostly on Extroversion (5 questions) and Conscientiousness (5 questions), two traits
linked to job performance in earlier studies (Barrick and Mount, 1991; Rockoff et al., 2011), with less emphasis on
Agreeableness (2 questions), Neuroticism (2 questions), or Openness to New Experience (2 questions). Grit was
measured using a similar instrument developed by Duckworth and Quinn (2009) with eight items, such as “is not
discouraged by setbacks” and “has difficulty maintaining focus on projects that take more than a few months.” The
definition of Grit is provided at: https://sites.sas.upenn.edu/duckworth , accessed on March 17, 2014.
25
   A comparison with responses of roughly 400 recently hired New York City math teachers on a low-stakes survey
of the Big Five (Rockoff et al. 2008, Table 2) supports this notion. NYC teachers reported levels (on a 5 point scale)
of 4.11, 4.04, and 3.85 for, respectively, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Openness to New Experiences.
Each had a standard deviation of about 0.5. In stark contrast, the 2011 TeachDC applicants’ average reported
Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Openness to New Experiences were 4.63, 4.67, and 4.66. For other evidence
on self-report bias in this context, see Mueller-Hanson et al. (2003) and Donovan et al. (2014).


                                                          16
        Applicants in all three years took a subject-specific written assessment to assess their

pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) and knowledge of instructional practices. Applicants

selected a subject area (e.g., art, math, Biology) and level (i.e., elementary, middle, or high

school) to which they were applying, and then were asked to complete a subject- and level-

specific task. Most applicants were asked to read a case-study in which a student demonstrates

misunderstanding of the subject matter and to write a 300-400 word essay explaining the nature

of the student’s misconceptions and describing instructional strategies for resolving them. In

2011 and 2012, applicants for math teaching positions were required to complete the Knowledge

of Mathematics for Teaching (KMT) test, a multiple choice test intended to measure

understanding and skills distinctly valuable to teaching math (Hill et al. 2004). 26 Essay content

and writing quality were scored by DCPS personnel and these scores (plus the KMT test score,

when applicable) were averaged to determine whether the applicant passed to the next stage. The

passing threshold varied somewhat across years and was altered within the year for certain

subject areas in order to obtain enough qualified applicants.

        Applicants who passed the subject-specific essay stage were invited for a 30 minute

interview and to submit a 10 minute demonstration lesson. Interviews were conducted by the

same DCPS personnel who scored the subject-specific essays, as well as several “Teacher

Selection Ambassadors” (TSAs). TSAs were highly rated DCPS teachers who received training

from DCPS staff in order to assist with the TeachDC selection process. 27


26
   Elementary school applicants wrote an essay assessing content knowledge in English language arts in addition to
taking the KMT test. Applicants for middle school math positions in these two years completed the KMT but did
not have to complete an additional essay. In 2013, DCPS did not administer the KMT assessment, instead relying on
essays alone to evaluate each candidate’s content knowledge.
27
   Interviews could be done in person or over the phone, and applicants were asked to respond to a series of
structured questions covering five areas: track record of success, response to challenges, contribution to work
environment, ownership of high expectations, and continuous learning. For example, under “response to
challenges,” interviewees were asked, “tell me about the most significant behavior challenge that you’ve


                                                       17
         The demonstration or “mini” lesson could be done in person or submitted by video.

Applicants were allowed to choose the topic and had the option to provide lesson materials.

DCPS officials scored applicant performance according to selected dimensions of the Teaching

and Learning Framework (TLF), the same rubric used to measure classroom performance under

the DCPS IMPACT teacher evaluation system, which we describe in more detail below. 28

Applicant performance on the mini-lesson and interview were combined to yield a final score,

and applicants scoring above a specified threshold, which varied somewhat across years, were

invited to proceed to the final stage. In 2013, DCPS did not require the mini-lesson and

applicants were evaluated on the basis of the interview alone.

         The final stage in the TeachDC process consisted of a teaching audition in which the

applicant taught a complete lesson of approximately 30 minutes. All auditions in 2011 were

conducted in DCPS classrooms but were videotaped for evaluation. In 2012, applicants were

permitted to submit a videotaped teaching lesson in lieu of the “live” audition, while in 2013

auditions were based completely on video submissions. In each year, DCPS staff and TSAs

evaluated the auditions using the same DCPS classroom observation protocol (i.e., the TLF

rubric mentioned above), with each audition rated by one TSA. 29


encountered with a student (or group),” with follow-up questions like “what did you do first to address the
challenge,” “what was the result,” and “what ultimately happened.” Applicants’ responses were scored on a 4-point
scale using a detailed rubric.
28
   Applicants receive a score of 1-4 in five areas: lead well-organized objective-driven lessons, explain content
clearly, engage students in learning at all levels, check for student understanding, and maximize instructional time.
The scoring rubric is quite detailed and the current version can be found at: http://dcps.dc.gov/page/impact-
overview. To provide an example of how scores are anchored, some of the language describing a “4” in “maximize
instructional time” includes “routines, procedures, and transitions are orderly, efficient, and systematic with minimal
prompting from the teacher.” By contrast, a score of “1” is described by “routines or procedures are not evident or
generally ineffective; the teacher heavily directs activities and transitions.”
29
   Applicants received scores from 1-4 on several different elements, with all element scores combined to yield a
final score. In 2013, approximately 15% of interviews and 30% of the auditions were checked by a DCPS staff
member as part of a “random audit” to assess the reliability of TSA ratings. The correlation between the average
scores initially assigned and those after review was 0.87 for interviews, although 45% had at least one component
score changed and 17% had the final recommendation overturned. Only 20% of reviewed auditions had any


                                                          18
3.2 Performance Evaluation (DCPS IMPACT)

         Each DCPS teacher’s performance evaluation for the previous school year is summarized

in a single “IMPACT” score, which determines personnel decisions ranging from termination to

significant salary increases. An IMPACT score is composed of several performance measures,

which vary depending on the grade(s) and subject(s) to which the teacher is assigned. Our data

include final IMPACT scores and all component scores (described below) for all district teachers

in the school years 2011-12 through 2013-14.

         The first component of the IMPACT score is based on measures of student learning. For

teachers of math or reading in grades 4 through 10, this component includes an “individual

value-added score” (IVA) based on the DC Comprehensive Assessment System (DC-CAS)

standardized tests. 30 These teachers, known as “Group 1”, represent about 15 percent of DCPS

teachers. All teachers are evaluated with a “Teacher Assessed Student Achievement” score

(TAS). At the start of the school year each teacher sets student learning goals based on non-DC-

CAS assessments which are scored by the teacher, as well as weights if multiple assessments are

used. The principal must approve the assessments, weights, and learning goals. At the end of the

year, the principal validates the assessment scores and evaluates accomplishment of the learning

goals using a rubric. 31 Additionally, in 2011-12 (and earlier years), 5 percent of all teachers’ final

IMPACT score is a measure of school value-added on DC-CAS tests.




component score changed, leading to roughly 10% of reviewed auditions having the final recommendation
overturned.
30
   In the 2011-12 school year, the first in our data, “individual value-added” was only measured for grades 4 through
8.
31
   In the 2011-12 school year (and before) IVA was the only student learning component for Group 1 teachers even
though these teachers do have TAS scores.


                                                         19
         The second component of all teachers’ evaluation is a classroom observation score. Each

teacher is typically observed five times during the year, three times by a school principal and

twice by a “master educator” (i.e., an experienced teacher who conducts observations full-time at

many schools). Teachers’ performance during classroom observations is scored using the

district’s own Teaching and Learning Framework (TLF) rubric. 32 Observers assign scores in

several areas of practice that are averaged within observations, and then these composites are

averaged across observations. 33

         The remaining two evaluation components are assessed by the school principal and

assistant principals. Principals rate each teacher’s “commitment to the school community” (CSC)

using a rubric that covers partnerships with parents, collaboration with colleagues, and support

for school-wide initiatives and high expectations. Last, the school principal can deduct points

from a teacher’s final IMPACT score on the basis of poor attendance, tardiness, disrespect of

others, or failure to follow policies and procedures. This last component is known as “core

professionalism” (CP).

         Teachers’ final IMPACT scores are a weighted average of the various component scores;

Appendix Table A2 summarizes the weights, which changed between the school years 2011-12

and 2012-13. The final IMPACT score determines the teacher’s impact rating category, based

on pre-specified ranges. There are five possible ratings: ineffective, minimally effective,

developing, effective, and highly effective. However, in 2011-12 there were only four categories;

the “developing” category was introduced in 2012-13.

32
   The TLF rubric is modified somewhat for teachers in kindergarten and younger classrooms, and teachers who
work with special education or English language learner students in non-traditional settings. During the period of
our data, a separate rubric was used for teachers working with students with autism.
33
   Examples of areas of practice include “explains content clearly”, “engages students at all learning levels”,
“provides students multiple ways to move toward mastery”, “checks for student understanding”, “maximizes
instructional time and builds a supportive”, and “learning-focused classroom.”


                                                         20
         Teachers in the “ineffective” category are immediately dismissed. Teachers are also

dismissed if they fall in the “minimally effective” category for two consecutive years. At the

other end of the distribution, teachers scoring in the “highly effective” category receive a one-

time bonus of as much as $25,000. If a teacher is rated highly effective for two consecutive

years, she receives a substantial permanent increase in salary; Dee and Wyckoff (2013) estimate

this could be worth as much as a 29 percent increase in the present value of a teacher’s total

earnings over a 15 year horizon.



3.3 Data and Descriptive Statistics

         We use data on over 7,000 individuals who applied through Teach DC in the years 2011-

2013 and who were eligible for a teaching license in DC. 34 We analyze subsequent hiring and

performance data from the school years 2011-12 through 2013-14. 35 Thus, we have three

cohorts of candidates and new hires, and can observe retention and performance for the 2011

applicants for up to three years.

         Two limitations in our data are worth noting. The first is that we only have information

on job offers for two years. Contrasting the outcomes “offer” and “hire” is useful for

disentangling labor supply from labor demand. Among all the TeachDC applicants who received



34
   We drop 198 applicants who participated in a Fast Track application option in 2011. Our results are not sensitive
to including these applicants.
35
   We focus on applicants who applied for teaching jobs, and among those applicants identify new hires who are
working as a DCPS teacher (as opposed to working as a counselor or administrator or any other role). We define a
DCPS teacher as someone who (i) held a teaching position, as recorded in district human resources data and
identified by union status, (ii) at some point during the school year. This definition includes individuals who were
hired, worked in the fall, but left midyear. It also includes individuals hired midyear. Part-year teachers sometimes
do not have job performance data (IMPACT scores), but we nevertheless count them as new hires. Additionally,
some DCPS employees who are not officially holding a teaching position do have teaching responsibilities, and are
scored in the IMPACT teacher performance evaluation program. In addition to the definition above, we count
anyone with IMPACT teaching scores as a DCPS teacher. There are only two such teachers among our applicants,
and the results are not sensitive to excluding them.


                                                         21
a formal job offer in 2012, for example, approximately four out of five accepted that offer (82.4

percent). The acceptance rate was slightly higher, 89.3 percent, for applicants who reached the

recommended pool. However, based on correspondence with DCPS officials, we believe some

applicants received informal offers from the school principal before the principal recorded the

offer formally in the district data systems. Some informal offers were likely never recorded in the

data systems because they were turned down by the candidate, and thus these acceptance rates

are an upper bound.

         A second shortcoming is that we cannot observe teacher hiring or performance in DC

charter schools. Although they enroll close to half of local students, charter schools are

governed by a separate authority, the DC Public Charter School Board. We are also unable to

observe if applicants take a job in another school district, such as a Virginia or Maryland district.

         Table 3 presents summary statistics for applicants’ SAT scores, undergraduate GPA and

college selectivity (using a categorical ranking developed from Barron’s Profiles of American

Colleges (2009)), teaching experience, and other background measures. 36 The first set of

columns of Table 3 is based on all applicants, while the second is based on those who are hired.

         One third of all applicants have no prior full-time teaching experience, while another

third have between one and five years and the remaining third have more than five years.

Among those hired, there are noticeably fewer rookie teachers (28 percent). Average self-

reported undergraduate GPA (3.40) and composite SAT/ACT scores (1149) are nearly identical

regardless of hiring outcome, while college selectivity is slightly higher among hired applicants




36
  Note that we do not have data on the applicant’s race or gender; the district is not permitted to require that
applicants provide this information.


                                                          22
(2.9 vs. 2.8 on a scale from 1-5). 37 A small minority of applicants attended undergraduate or

graduate school in Washington DC (12 percent), but they are overrepresented among those hired

(17 percent). About half of applicants report having received a master’s degree, in education or

any field, or a higher degree.

         Our analysis of application measures focuses on three composites drawn from the stages

that were common for all cohorts of applicants: (i) a pedagogical content knowledge (PCK)

score, (ii) an interview score, and (iii) an audition score. Each of the three is a rescaled composite

of the scores collected by DCPS, generated by taking averages or using factor analysis to

combine measures when appropriate. 38 All three measures are standardized to have mean zero

and standard deviation of one within each year of application.

         Table 4 shows the pairwise correlations among applicants’ background characteristics

and application performance scores. Academic achievement measures such as undergraduate

GPA, SAT/ACT score, and college selectivity all have modest positive correlations, as one

would expect. Academic achievement is slightly negatively correlated with years of teaching

experience, and has small positive correlations with application scores, particularly the subject –

specific written assessment.




37
   The SAT scores reported by our sample are somewhat higher that the national average, which would have been
just above 1000 for cohorts who, like most of our sample, graduated high school in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
38
   To obtain the PCK score we first standardize (mean zero, standard deviation one within years) the subject-specific
essay scores on content and writing quality, as well as the KMT score. Our “PCK score” is the average of all
standardized scores available for a teacher. For 2011 and 2012 applicants, our “interview score” is the average of
two component scores, each standardized: (a) the mean of the applicant’s TLF scores for the mini-lesson, and (b) the
mean of the applicant’s behavioral interview questions scores. For 2013 applicants, we do not have separate scores
for the mini-lesson and interview questions, but we have scores on several components (e.g., “instructional
expertise,” “communication skills”) as well as several binary judgments (i.e., “outstanding,” “no reservations,”
“reservations”) which we combine using factor analysis to create the 2013 interview score. For each of the three
years, a factor analysis on the components of the audition score yields just one factor, and we use the factor analysis
weights in each year to construct our audition score. We get virtually identical results if we use a simple unweighted
average of the component scores within the audition measure.


                                                         23
         Interestingly, while the correlations among application scores themselves are positive,

they are all fairly low in magnitude, with the highest correlation between the interview and

audition scores (0.22). These correlations suggest the potential for each stage in the application

process to be capturing distinct information about teaching applicants, rather than repeatedly

measuring the same characteristics and skills. Of course, low correlations also may indicate a

considerable amount of noise in each score.

         The bottom section of Table 4 shows pairwise correlations for the additional measures

collected for the 2011 application cohort. In general, these measures are not at all highly

correlated with any of the other application performance measures. There is a modest correlation

between extraversion and interview and audition scores (0.14 and 0.13, respectively) and the

Haberman score has small positive correlations of roughly 0.2 with the academic achievement

measures and the subject-specific (PCK) written assessment.



4. Predicting Hiring with Application Characteristics

         To examine the relationship between applicant characteristics and the likelihood of being

hired, we estimate a series of linear probability models of the form:

                                           (1.1)    Hi = βXi + δPi + εi

where Hit is an indicator for hire into DCPS as a teacher, Xi is a vector of teacher characteristics,

and Pi is an indicator for passing to the end of the Teach DC process in order to be placed in the

recommended pool. We interact Pi with the year of application allowing δ to differ by year. 39



39
  In 2011 it appears that the recommended pool was extended to applicants passing the interview stage. In addition
to the indicator for passing the final audition stage, we include an indicator for passing the interview for applicants
in the 2011 cohort. Thus, the vector Pi includes four mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who reach the
recommended pool in 2013, (ii) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2012, (iii) applicants who pass the


                                                          24
The coefficients of interest are contained in the vector β —to what extent do applicant

characteristics predict hire into DCPS, controlling for whether the applicant was listed in the

recommended pool of candidates (which strongly predicts hiring). We present results with and

without the set of indicators Pi in order to examine whether the relationship between hire and a

given characteristics is driven by a mechanical relationship with placement on the TeachDC list

of recommended candidates.

         Because the availability of teaching positions and the supply of candidates may vary

widely by subject area and over time, we present results that include fixed effects for the subject

area and grade level for which the applicant applied, interacted with the application year. Not all

candidates have complete data for all characteristics, and we set missing values to zero and

include a set of missing variable indicator flags into the regression. We base our statistical

inferences off of heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. We have also estimated all of the

analyses using Logit models, and obtain virtually identical results.

         Before presenting these results, it is important to note that DCPS principals have

reasonably strong incentives to hire effective teachers. Since the school year 2012-13, principal

performance in DCPS has been evaluated under the IMPACT system, parallel to the evaluation

for teachers. Multiple criteria, including student test scores and rubric-based evaluations by

supervisors, generate an overall performance score for each principal, and low scoring principals

are dismissed while high scoring principals can receive substantial bonus payments.

         Table 5 presents the results on teacher hiring. We begin by discussing the background

characteristics, each of which is first entered separately (Columns 1 and 2) and then


audition in 2011, and (iv) applicants who pass the interview but not the audition in 2011. The left out category is all
other applicants.



                                                          25
simultaneously (Columns 3 and 4). The specifications in Columns 2 and 4 include controls

reaching the recommended pool. Several robust patterns emerge. Applicants with no prior

teaching experience are less likely to be hired by DCPS schools than individuals with prior

experience. Depending on the comparison group and specification, rookie applicants have

roughly a 3-5 percentage point lower probability of being hired in DCPS. In considering the role

of experience in hiring, it is important to note that schools do not bear the financial burden of

paying higher salaries to teachers with more experience.

       For the most part, teachers with better academic credentials appear to be no more or less

likely to be hired into DCPS. Without controls for reaching the TeachDC recommended pool,

the coefficients on undergraduate GPA and SAT/ACT score are both close to zero and

statistically insignificant, while the coefficient on college selectivity is positive but small (about

1 percentage point for each point on the Barron’s scale). However, when we control for reaching

the recommended pool, the coefficient on college selectivity goes to zero, and those for

undergraduate GPA and SAT/ACT score become negative and significant, though small in

magnitude (about 1-1.5 percentage points). The pattern is similar for the coefficients on having a

master’s degree, but they are never statistically significant.

       These results are consistent with two interpretations. First, school principals may not put

positive weight on these basic academic achievement measures when making hiring decisions,

i.e., a demand side story. The notion that principals do not place positive weight on academic

credentials is consistent with prior studies (Ballou 1996, Hinrichs 2014). Second, it may be that

principals do place positive weight on these characteristics, but that applicants with better

academic backgrounds are less likely to accept job offers from DCPS schools. We cannot

definitively separate supply and demand explanations given the limitations in our data on offers.



                                                  26
We do, however, observe many offers that were declined (one-third of offers in 2012 and 2013

did not result in a hire) permitting a partial empirical test. In Appendix Table A3 we present

results like Table 5 separately for the outcome “hired” and the outcome “offered”, restricted to

2012 and 2013 applicants. The pattern of point estimates is similar regardless of whether one

uses offer or hire as the dependent variable. The similarity suggests the results in Table 5 are a

demand side story, not applicants’ choices about supply.

       We now shift focus to the application scores—PCK, interview, and audition—reported in

Table 5. Not surprisingly, each of the three application scores is positively associated with the

likelihood of being hired when we do not control for reaching the recommended pool (Columns

1 and 3), with coefficients rising monotonically as we move to the later stages of the TeachDC

selection process. A one standard deviation increase in applicant score is associated with

increases in the likelihood of being hired of 6.0, 10.8, and 15.8 percentage points for the PCK,

interview, and audition, respectively.

       These effects are quite large, given the baseline hiring rate of roughly 13 percent, but is

likely be driven by the effect of arriving into the recommended candidate pool. Indeed, when we

include fixed effects for reaching the recommended pool (Columns 2 and 4), the coefficient on

the PCK written test goes essentially to zero, while those on the interview and audition drop by

about 70 percent. This suggests that principals did not rely heavily on the information collected

in the application process beyond the recommendation and that the factors that the principals did

rely on were not highly correlated with these scores (conditional on the other factors). In

Appendix Table A3 we show that the coefficients on the three application scores are quite

similar when the outcome is offer instead of hire, a pattern consistent with a school principal

demand interpretation of the results rather than applicant supply decisions.



                                                 27
        In Appendix Table A4, we present hiring regressions separately for four groups of

subjects: Elementary and Early Childhood, Middle and High School “Core” (i.e. English, math,

science, and social studies), Special Education, and Other Subjects. 40 It is perhaps notable that

prior experience appears unimportant for hiring in Other Subjects, but generally we find little

evidence that any particular group of subjects is driving the results seen in Table 5.

        For the 2011 cohort, we can also ask whether hiring is related to our measures of

applicant personality and the Haberman teacher screener score. For interpretation, it is important

to note that these measures were not made available to principals, because DCPS officials were

uncertain about their usefulness, but this fact was not told to applicants in order for the data

collection to reflect normal conditions. Extraversion and the Haberman Index are both positively

associated with the likelihood of being hired (see Table 6), although the Haberman coefficient

becomes small and insignificant once we condition on being in the TeachDC recommended pool.



5. Predicting Performance and Attrition with Application Characteristics

        We now restrict our attention to TeachDC applicants that were hired by DCPS, for whom

we can observe performance and attrition. Our primary measure of job performance combines

the IMPACT components using weights determined by a factor analysis of the sub-scores:

classroom observation, individual value-added (if available), the teacher-assessed student

achievement (if available), commitment to school community, and core professionalism. This




40
  Other subjects include Health and Physical Education, Music, Art, Drama, Foreign Languages, English as a
Second Language, Dual Language, and Career and Technical Education.


                                                      28
consistently yields just one significant “performance factor,” which we standardize (mean zero,

standard deviation one) within school years. 41

        To examine the relationship between applicant characteristics and teacher performance,

we estimate a series of regressions of the form:

                                     (1.2) Eit = βXi + δPi + ΣsαsDsit +εit

where Eit is the performance evaluation of teacher i in school year t. Dsit is a series of binary

indicators for subject-year. The other variables are the same as described in equation (1.1). For

variables with missing values, we set missing to zero and include a missing variable indicator

flag into the regression. We observe each newly hired teacher between one and three times, so

our sample is an unbalanced panel; accordingly, we include indicator variables for a teacher’s

second and third year in DCPS and we report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors that are

clustered by teacher. 42

        Two points are worth noting before we discuss the results. First, we do not take a strong

stand on whether application measures have a causal impact on teacher performance. For

example, if individuals with unobservable traits positively associated with performance (e.g., a

strong work ethic) sort into selective colleges, then we might find a positive coefficient on

college selectivity even if the college education itself has no causal effect on performance. Given

the primary purpose of teacher selection, we do not view this as a limitation. Second, we are

concerned about the possibility that selection into our sample of hired teachers could bias the

estimates in equation (1.2) in a way that would confound the inferences we would like to make.


41
   Using a standardized version of the official IMPACT score generated by DCPS yields similar results. We prefer
the performance factor because the data indicate very similar weights on each component across years, while there
were considerable changes across years in weights used by IMPACT (e.g., the TAS component score is completely
omitted from the calculation of IMPACT for Group 1 teachers in 2011).
42
   We have estimated models that cluster by school and by teacher and school, and obtain virtual identical results.


                                                        29
For example, Table 5 indicated a positive relationship between prior experience and likelihood of

being hired. In this case, we are most concerned that this would lead to a negative bias in the

relationship between experience and effectiveness in equation (1.2). In other words, when we

estimate the relationship between prior experience and performance using the sample of teachers

who were hired, we are concerned that inexperienced teachers who were nonetheless hired may

have some unobservable characteristic that is positively associated with performance in the

classroom. Given the large number of covariates included in our main specifications, it is

difficult to sign selection bias definitively but, as we discuss below in section 5.2, we use several

strategies to address potential selection bias.



5.1 Main results for teaching performance

        The relationships between applicants’ characteristics and scores and their teaching

performance (shown in Table 7) are strikingly different than those discussed earlier for the

outcome of being hired in DCPS (Table 5). In regressions where background characteristics are

examined separately (Column 1), applicants reporting no prior teaching experience were less

likely to be hired, but they do not perform significantly worse than those reporting 1-10 years of

experience, and they have higher performance evaluations than (the small number of) TeachDC

applicants who report more than 10 years of prior experience. Applicants who had tertiary

education in Washington DC were also more likely to be hired, but do not have significantly

higher performance evaluations. Meanwhile, applicants’ academic achievement measures

(undergraduate GPA, SAT/ACT scores, college selectivity), which did not predict hiring

outcomes, are all significantly positively related to performance, with substantial effect sizes of




                                                  30
0.15 to 0.25 standard deviations. In contrast with prior studies, we do find that teachers with a

graduate degree have higher performance scores, at least among newly hired teachers.

       We find that the three application scores (PCK written assessment, interview, and

audition) are all positive predictors of teacher performance, with effect sizes of roughly 0.3 for

PCK and interview and an effect size of 0.17 for the audition when each score is entered in a

separate regression (Table 7, Column 1). When all three scores are included simultaneously, the

coefficient on the audition becomes smaller (0.12) but it still statistically significant (Column 4).



5.2 Accounting for selection based on hiring

       To address potential selection bias due to hiring, we first include fixed effects for being in

the recommended pool (Table 7 Column 2). The estimated coefficient on our key background

and application score measures are quite robust; the PCK and interview effects decline by less

than five percent, while the audition coefficient falls by just over 20 percent. Recall that, in

Table 5, the inclusion of these controls eliminated or substantially reduced the relationship

between key application measures and the likelihood of being hired. Thus, the considerable

variation in characteristics among candidates within the recommended and non-recommended

pools, and the fact that principals did not appear to consider this variation in selecting teachers,

ironically provides us with more convincing estimates in Table 7.

       As a further test, we add school fixed effects to the performance regressions, so that

identification is based purely on comparisons of applicants hired into the same DCPS school.

This allows us a further test of the importance of selection bias, as it may be the case that

teachers with better application scores (or academic background characteristics) are hired by

schools where teachers tend to receive higher evaluation scores. Recall that each school’s



                                                 31
principal and assistant principals are responsible for determining much of the evaluation score, as

described earlier. These results (see Columns 3 and 6 in Table 7) are not noticeably different

than those which use both within- and between-school variation for identification.

         Finally, we assess the sensitivity of our results to more formal, parametric selection

corrections, all of which are variants of the Heckman model. As Heckman and Navarro-Lozano

(2004) explain, inclusion of the inverse mills ratio or a more general control function based on

the predicted probability of being in the sample will control for selection bias, but only under a

potentially restrictive set of functional form assumptions. In order to relax these assumptions,

one needs an instrument – i.e., a variable that is associated with the likelihood of being in the

sample but does not directly influence the primary outcome. To create an instrument, we takes

advantage of the sharp cutoffs for passing through each stage of the TeachDC process in the

same way that a regression discontinuity analysis leverages discontinuities in the likelihood of

treatment associated with cutoffs in an assignment variable. Appendix Figures 1-3 show the

relationship between an applicant’s stage score and the likelihood of passing to the next stage in

the application process for stages 2-4 respectively. Consistent with the selection process

established by DCPS, we see a sharp jump in the likelihood that a candidate will move to the

next stage exactly at the point their score passes the threshold. 43

         Table 8 presents the results using these additional selection corrections. The dependent

variable is our standardized job performance factor from IMPACT evaluation component scores.

43
   The fact that this jump is not exactly one is due to several factors. First and foremost, in 2011, as a purposeful
step in the application redesign process, DCPS randomly selected a small number of applicants who failed stage 1
and passed them to stage 2 in order to study the validity of the stage 1 passing score threshold. This was also done
for stage 2 and stage 3. (These applicants were still subject to the same rigorous screening in later stages of the
TeachDC process, and in individual school’s own selection processes. School principals, who made final hiring
decisions, had access to all stage scores. No applicants were randomly selected for the recommended pool or for
hire.) More generally however, we see some applicants near the thresholds who pass (fail) despite their failing
(passing) scores. We attribute these to misapplication of the threshold or errors in score entry, and therefore use a
“fuzzy” regression discontinuity approach.


                                                          32
Columns 1 and 2 simply redisplay the estimates from Table 7 Columns 4 and 5 for convenient

comparison. Columns 3 and 4 are estimated just as Column 1 is, except that we add a quadratic

function of the predicted probability of hire. We estimate the predicted probability of hire using

the specification reported in Table 5 Column 3, but with additional instruments as regressors.

       For the estimates in Column 3, we use an extremely sparse set of instruments in the hire

equation – namely, four indicator variables: (i) Applicants in any year who scored above the

stage 4 cut-score designated by DCPS as the threshold for the recommended pool; (ii) Applicants

in 2011 who scored above the stage 3 cut-score; we assume these applicants were also placed in

the recommended pool as discussed in the text; (iii) Applicants in 2011 who scored below the

stage 2 cut-score but were nevertheless randomly selected to move on to stage 3; (iv) Applicants

in 2011 who applied in the first weeks of the recruitment season, all of whom were allowed to

move on to stage 3 regardless of their scores in stage 2 or 1. For the most part, the results in

Column 3 are nearly identical to those in Column 2. One exception is the audition score, where

the estimate using the control function is about 30 percent lower than the specification that

merely controls for recommended-pool by year fixed effects. The point estimates on the

interview and PCK measures drop somewhat as well, but both remain statistically significant and

substantively important.

       For the estimates in Column 4, we include a much more comprehensive set of

instruments that are intended to replicate the RD intuition illustrated in Appendix Figures 1-3.

Specifically, the added instruments include five indicator variables: (i)-(iii) Applicants in any

year who scored above the cut-score in stage 2, 3, and 4 respectively. And again for 2011 (iv)

applicants randomly selected to advance or (v) early applicants automatically advanced. We also

allow the slope on each stage score to be different above and below the stage cut-score, and



                                                 33
include fixed effects for the highest stage an applicant was invited to complete. All these added

coefficients are allowed to vary by year. The results are virtually identical to those in Column 3.

       In the previous discussion of hiring we offered evidence consistent with a demand side

explanation—school principals’ choices—rather than a supply explanation. To continue that line

of analysis here we repeat our analysis using the outcome “offer” instead of “hire” in the first

stage. Our goal is a test of whether supply-side selection explains the relationships between

application data and on-the-job performance. The results, using data from 2012 and 2013, are

provided in Appendix Table A5. In short, the pattern of results is again quite similar to the

pattern in Table 8, consistent with a demand side story.

       Together these specification tests suggest that selection bias is not an important factor in

our context. In all remaining specifications we follow the approach taken in Columns 5 and 6 of

Table 7 and include recommended pool by year fixed effects.



5.3 Heterogeneity and Sensitivity

       We explore heterogeneity in our performance predictions across types of schools using

two sample splits: (1) elementary vs. middle and high schools and (2) below and above median

student poverty. We find some evidence that prior experience and applicants’ audition scores are

stronger predictors of performance in middle and high schools and in higher poverty schools

(Appendix Table A6), but broadly speaking our estimates are fairly stable.

       We also examine the component parts of our overall performance measure to check if our

results vary significantly across the particular components of the IMPACT evaluation (see

Appendix Table A7). In general, we find consistent effects across all of the non-IVA component

measures—we examine teachers with IVA separately in order to isolate differences in outcomes



                                                34
from differences in sample. We see that prior teaching experience appears to predict TLF

observation scores, but not the other performance measures.

       When we turn to teachers with IVA estimates, our sample size falls by roughly 80

percent. These results are therefore far less precise and should be taken with a great deal of

caution. Nevertheless, some interesting patterns emerge. First, the application scores are not

significant predictors of IVA (see Appendix Table A8). While we cannot rule out meaningful

effects, the evidence on the long-term effects of high value-added teachers is strong, whereas we

know little about the ultimate effects of teachers do better on the other performance measures

such as TLF observation scores. Correlations for DCPS teachers between value-added and each

of the other components of IMPACT are modest, about 0.15 to 0.30, but all positive and

significant. Thus, one interpretation is that the value-added measures are sufficiently noisy that

we cannot detect small positive effects in our small sample, but an equally plausible

interpretation is that the application measures are not good predictors of teachers’ impacts on

high stakes standardized tests. We hope to address this issue in the future by incorporating data

for more cohorts of applicants and years of performance.

       Second, prior teaching experience, a graduate degree, and college selectivity significantly

predict IVA scores (see Appendix Table A8). These measures are also predictive of classroom

observation scores for this sample. However, since we have not assessed the robustness of these

findings to correct inference for multiple hypotheses, we regard them as suggestive and in need

of further investigation.

       Finally we examine the additional measures available for the 2011 cohort: self-reported

personality traits and the Haberman test score. The most interesting result to emerge is that

coefficient on the Haberman score is large, positive, and significantly associated with teacher



                                                35
performance (Table 9). Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in an applicant’s score on

the Haberman Index is associated with a 0.27 standard deviation increase in measured

effectiveness, even after controlling for reaching the recommended pool.



5.4 Results for attrition

         Hiring an effective teacher will be more beneficial when this individual stays employed

in the school or district for a significant period of time. We therefore examine attrition from

DCPS and from an individual school as additional outcomes of interest. Because we can only

observe one year of attrition for the 2013 cohort, we focus on attrition after the first year and

pool the three cohorts together. As above, we separately analyze background characteristics and

application scores.

         We find that self-reported prior experience and academic credentials are not significant

predictors of attrition in our basic specification (Columns 1 and 3 of Table 10), while having

attended undergraduate or graduate school in Washington DC is strongly negatively related to

attrition. 44 Because teachers who perform poorly under the IMPACT evaluation system are

forced to leave DCPS, we also estimate specifications that include indicators for the teacher’s

IMPACT performance level (Columns 2 and 4) so as to rule out any mechanical effects driven

by correlations with performance. This change in specification slightly attenuates the effect of

attending school in DC, but also raises the coefficients on academic achievement and leads them

to become statistically significant in some cases. Teachers with higher application scores, in



44
   Given these results on attrition, we check the sensitivity of our performance regression results to omitting controls
for teachers’ second and third year in DCPS, since IMPACT evaluations do improve with experience. The
coefficient for applicants from the DC area increases very slightly, by about 0.01 standard deviations, and remains
statistically insignificant.


                                                          36
contrast, are never found to be more likely to leave after the first year. Indeed, the coefficients

on PCK, interview, and audition are almost all negative.



6. Discussion and Conclusions

         We study the relationship among applicant characteristics, hiring outcomes, and teacher

performance in Washington DC Public Schools (DCPS). We find that several background

characteristics (e.g., undergraduate GPA) as well as screening measures (e.g., applicant

performance on a mock teaching lesson) strongly predict teacher effectiveness. Interestingly, we

find that these measures are only weakly, if at all, associated with the likelihood of being hired.

         Our results suggests that there exists considerable scope for improving teacher quality

through the selection process. To summarize that scope graphically we plot the distributions of

predicted first-year performance separately for applicants hired and not hired in Figure 1. We

estimate predicted first-year performance for each applicant based on all background

characteristics and application scores, applying coefficients estimated with a specification

identical to Table 7 Column 4 but limiting the sample to new hires in their first year at DCPS. 45

In this estimation we use a leave-one-out procedure so that the outcome for an individual teacher

does not influence his or her own predicted score. 46 As Figure 1 shows, applicants who are hired

by DCPS do have higher average predicted performance. Still, there is substantial overlap in the

distributions; there are many applicants who are not hired but whose predicted performance

exceeds the average of those hired.

45
   As in Table 7 Column 4 the specification includes subject-taught by year fixed effects. We do not include any
between subject or year variation in our predicted performance measure. Practically, we do not include the fixed
effects coefficients in the prediction.
46
   Specifically, to obtain the predicted value for teacher i, we estimate our model using all observations except for
those from teacher i. Using the coefficients from this regression and teacher i’s Xs, we calculate the predicted value
for teacher i.


                                                          37
       To compliment Figure 1, we summarize how the combined application measures predict

the probability of being hired in Figure 2. Figure 2 plots the actual proportion hired separately

for the 20 vingtiles of predicted first-year performance (as constructed in Figure 1). The

probability of being hired is roughly 10 percent for applicants in the bottom third of the predicted

performance distribution, and only increases slightly through the next third. In the top third of

the predicted performance distribution do we see a sharp increase in the proportion hired, but

even among the top 5 percent of applicants only 30 percent ended up working in the DCPS.

Assuming that this is at least partly driven by demand on the part of DCPS schools, this suggests

considerable scope for improving teacher quality through the hiring process.

       To explore the relationship between the application measures and teacher performance in

the classroom, Figure 3 presents box plots of actual performance for each vingtile of predicted

first-year performance. This is the same predicted performance measure in Figures 1 and 2,

except Figure 3 uses only observations on new hires. As suggested by the earlier regression

results, we see a positive relationship between predicted and actual performance. Interestingly, it

appears that the relationship is somewhat steeper at the top and bottom of the predicted

performance distribution. In order to gain a better sense of the magnitude of these performance

differences, Figure 4 plots kernel densities of actual performance separately by quartile of

predicted performance. Teachers in the top quartile of predicted effectiveness score roughly two-

thirds of a standard deviation higher in actual effectiveness than their peer applicants who scored

in the bottom quartile. This illustrates that the predictions captured by the application measures

incorporate considerable information regarding actual effectiveness.

       Collecting and scoring detailed information about applicants does create additional costs,

but those costs appear to be small relative to the potential gains from improved selection. The



                                                 38
primary marginal cost is the labor of the DCPS school administrators who conduct and score the

interviews and teaching auditions. Each administrator spends about one hour per interview and

one hour per audition. DCPS budgets $63K per year for interviews and auditions at $34 per hour

of administrator work. The screening steps leading up to the interviews and auditions is much

less costly at $7,500 per year total. In addition, DCPS budgets $133K per year for the staff who

manage recruitment and screening. Some of that management cost would be required even

without the additional screening measures, so the marginal cost is something less than $133K.

Altogether, approximate total marginal costs are between $70-200K per year, or between $370-

1,070 per new hire. 47 This cost is likely to be quite small relative to the anticipated long-run

benefits to future students of hiring more effective teachers (Chetty et al. 2014a,b, Jackson 2013,

2014), and small relative to the costs of proposals for screening after hiring—removing low-

performing teachers (Staiger and Rockoff 2010, Rothstein 2015).

         “Hire the right employees” is an intuitive goal for managers in all sectors, including

school principals. How to go about improving selection in hiring is much less clear. This paper

documents one example where atypically-detailed assessments of applicants’ backgrounds and

skills can improve hiring decisions. This new empirical evidence is an important contribution to

the small but growing economics literature on employee selection and, for the literature on

teachers in particular, is an encouraging contrast to many failed attempts to explain differences in

teacher performance. Yet the fact that the applicant assessments weak predictors of hiring

decisions suggest that the schools we study do not fully capture the potential gains from teacher

selection. Providing useful information to decision makers, such as school principals, may

47
  This cost per new hire divides the total cost by 190 new hires—the average annual number of new hires during the
study period who completed all stages of the TeachDC screening process. The per hire cost would be lower if we
count new hires who completed only part of the TeachDC process, but, as discussed earlier, it is difficult to know
exactly how the TeachDC measures influenced those hires.


                                                       39
therefore be an important part of the hiring, and we plan to study the impact of such information

in future work.




                                               40
References

Abernathy, Tammy V., Al Forsyth and Judith Mitchell. 2001. “The Bridge from Student to
      Teacher: What Principals, Teacher Education Faculty, and Students Value in a Teaching
      Applicant,” Teacher Education Quarterly, 28(4): 109-119.
Adnot, Melinda, Thomas Dee, Veronica Katz, and James Wyckoff. 2016 “Teacher Turnover,
       Teacher Quality, and Student Achievement in DCPS.” NBER Working Paper No. 21922.
Ahn, Tom. 2013. “The Missing Link: Estimating the Impact of Incentives on Teacher Effort and
      Instructional Effectiveness Using Teacher Accountability Legislation Data.” Journal of
      Human Capital 7(3): 230-273.
Arvey, Richard D., and James E. Campion. 1982. “The Employment Interview: A Summary and
       Review of Recent Research.” Personnel Psychology 35(2): 281-322.
Baker, A. and Santora, M. (2013, January 18). “No Deal on Teacher Evaluations; City Risks
       Losing $450 Million.” The New York Times, p. A1.
Ballou, D. (1996) “Do Public Schools Hire the Best Applicants?” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 111(1): 97-133.
Balter, Dana and William D. Duncombe. 2005. “Teacher Hiring Practices in New York State
        Districts,” Report prepared for the Education Finance Research Consortium.

Barrick, M. R. and Mount, M. K. (1991) “The Big Five Personality Dimensions and Job
       Performance: A meta-analysis,” Personnel Psychology, 44(1), 1-26.
Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges, 28th Edition. (2009) Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s
      Educational Series.
Bolton, D.L. 1969. “The Effect of Various Information Formats on Teacher Selection
       Decisions,” American Educational Research Journal, 6(3): 329-347

Boyd, Donald, et al. "The narrowing gap in New York City teacher qualifications and its
      implications for student achievement in high‐poverty schools." Journal of Policy Analysis
      and Management 27.4 (2008): 793-818.
Boyd, Don, Hamp Lankford, Susanna Loeb, Matthew Ronfeldt, and Jim Wyckoff (2011), “The
      Role of Teacher Quality in Retention and Hiring: Using Applications to Transfer to
      Uncover Preferences of Teachers and Schools,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
      Management 30:1, 88-110.
Brophy, Jere, and Thomas L. Good. 1986. Teacher Behavior and Student Achievement. In M. C.
      Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Teaching. 3rd ed., 238-375, New York: Simon
      and Schuster.
Burks, S. V., Cowgill, B., Hoffman, M., & Housman, M. 2015). “The value of hiring through
       employee referrals.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(2): 805-839.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman & Jonah E. Rockoff, 2014. "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I:
       Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates," American Economic Review,
       104(9), pages 2593-2632.

                                              41
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman & Jonah E. Rockoff, 2014. "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
       II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood," American Economic
       Review, 104(9), pages 2633-79
Clotfelter, Charles, Elizabeth Glennie, Helen Ladd, and Jacob Vigdor. 2008. "Would higher
        salaries keep teachers in high-poverty schools? Evidence from a policy intervention in
        North Carolina." Journal of Public Economics 92(5): 1352-1370.
Costa, Paul T., and Robert R. McCrae. "Neo PI-R professional manual." (1992): 653-65.
Dee, Thomas, and James Wyckoff. Incentives, selection, and teacher performance: Evidence
       from IMPACT. No. w19529. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.
Dobbie W. 2011. Teacher Characteristics and Student Achievement: Evidence from Teach for
      America. Harvard University Working Paper.
Dolton, Peter and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 1995. “Leaving Teaching in the UK: A Duration
       Analysis,” The Economic Journal 105(429):431-444.
Dolton, Peter and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 1999. “The Turnover of Teachers: A Competing
       Risks Explanation,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(3): 543-550.
Donovan, JJ, Dwight S.A., Schneider, D. (2014) “The Impact of Applicant Faking on Selection
      Measures, Hiring Decisions, and Employee Performance,” Journal of Business
      Psychology 29:479–493.
Duckworth, Angela Lee, and Patrick D. Quinn. "Development and validation of the Short Grit
     Scale (GRIT–S)." Journal of personality assessment 91.2 (2009): 166-174.
Gallagher, H. Alix. 2004. “Vaughn Elementary’s Innovative Teacher Evaluation System: Are
       Teacher Evaluation Scores Related to Growth in Student Achievement?” Peabody
       Journal of Education, 79(4): 79-107.

Goldhaber, D., Grout, C., and Huntington-Klein, N. (2014). Screen Twice, Cut Once: Assessing
      the Predictive Validity of Teacher Selection Tools. CEDR Working Paper 2014-9.
      University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
Goldhaber and Theobald (2013) “Managing the Teacher Workforce in Austere Times: The
      Determinants and Implications of Teacher Layoffs,” Education Finance and Policy
      8(4):494-527
Gordon, R., Kane, T.J., Staiger, D.O. (2006) “Identifying Effective Teachers Using Performance
      on the Job” Hamilton Project Discussion Paper 2006-01.
Haberman, M. (1993). Predicting the Success of Urban Teachers (The Milwaukee Trials). Action
      in Teacher Education, 15(3), pp.1-5.
Hanushek, E.A. (2011) “The Economic Value of Higher Teacher Quality” Economics of
      Education Review 30(3):466-479
Hanushek Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin (2004) “Why Public Schools Lose
      Teachers,” Journal of Human Resources 39(2): 326-354.




                                               42
Hansen, Cecil Ray, 1976. Practices and Procedures Used by Selected Utah Public School
      Districts in the Recruitment and Selection of Teachers. Doctoral Dissertation, Brigham
      Young University.
Harris, D.N and Sass, T.R. (2011) “Teacher training, teacher quality and student achievement,”
        Journal of Public Economics 95(7–8):798-812.
Heckman, James and Salvador Navarro-Lozano (2004). “Using Matching, Instrumental
     Variables and Control Functions to Estimate Economic Choice Models.” Review of
     Economics and Statistics, 86(1): 30-57.
Hill, H. C., Schilling, S. G., & Ball, D. L. (2004). Developing measures of teachers’ mathematics
        knowledge for teaching. Elementary School Journal, 105, 11–30.
Hinrichs, Peter 2014. “What Kind of Teachers Are Schools Looking For? Evidence from a
       Randomized Field Experiment,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 14-
       36.
Hoffman, Mitchell, Lisa B. Kahn, and Danielle Li. 2015 “Discretion in Hiring.” NBER Working
      Paper 21709.
Holtzapple, Elizabeth. 2003. “Criterion-related validity evidence for a standards-based teacher
       evaluation system.” Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education 17(3): 207-219.
Hunter, John E., and Ronda F. Hunter. 1984 “Validity and utility of alternative predictors of job
       performance." Psychological Bulletin 96(1): 72-98.
John, O.P., Donahue, E.M., and Kentle, R. L. (1991). The "Big Five" Inventory—Versions 4a
       and 54. Berkeley: University of California, Berkeley, Institute of Personality and Social
       Research.
Jackson, C.K. (2013) “Non-Cognitive Ability, Test Scores, and Teacher Quality: Evidence from
       9th Grade Teachers in North Carolina,” NBER Working Paper No. 18624.
Jackson, C.K. (2014) “Teacher Quality at the High-School Level: The Importance of Accounting
       for Tracks,” Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4): 645-684.
Jackson, C. Kirabo. 2009. “Student demographics, teacher sorting, and teacher quality: Evidence
       from the end of school desegregation.” Journal of Labor Economics 27(2): 213-256.
Jacob, Brian A. (2011). “Do Principals Fire the Worst Teachers?” Educational Evaluation and Policy
        Analysis. 33(4): 403-434.

Jacob, Brian A. (2013). “The Effect of Employment Protection on Worker Effort: Evidence from Public
        Schooling.” Journal of Labor Economics. 31(4): 727-761.

Jacob, Brian and Elias Walsh (2011). “What’s in a Rating?” Economics of Education Review. 30(3):
        434-448.

Jacobson, Stephen L. 1989. “The effects of pay incentives on teacher absenteeism.” Journal of
       Human Resources 24(2): 280-286.

Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2005. “Using Imperfect Information to Identify
       Effective Teachers.” Unpublished manuscript, April 2005.
                                                 43
Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. "What Does Certification
       Tell Us About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City." Economics of
       Education Review 27: 615-631
Kane, Thomas J., Douglas O. Staiger, and Dan McCaffrey. 2012. “Gathering Feedback for
       Teaching,” Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation Research Paper. Accessed in May 2015
       at http://www.metproject.org/reports.php.
Kane, Thomas J., Eric S. Taylor, John H. Tyler, and Amy L. Wooten. 2011. “Identifying
       effective classroom practices using student achievement data.” Journal of Human
       Resources 46(3): 587-613.
Kimball, Steven M., Brad White, Anthony T. Milanowski, and Geoffrey Borman. 2004.
      “Examining the Relationship Between Teacher Evaluation and Student Assessment
      Results in Washoe County.” Peabody Journal of Education, 79(4): 54-78.
Liu, E. and Kardos, S.M. (2002) “Hiring and professional culture in New Jersey Schools,”
        Cambridge: Project on the Next Generation of Teachers at the Harvard Graduate School
        of Education.
Liu, E. and Moore Johnson, S. (2006) “New teachers’ experiences of hiring: Late, rushed, and
        information poor,” Educational Administration Quarterly, 42(3): 324-360.

Luthy TF (1982) Policies and procedures for selection of Missouri school teachers. Doctoral
       Dissertation, University of Missouri, Columbia.

Mason, Richard W. and Mark P. Schroeder. 2010. “Principal Hiring Practices: Toward a
      Reduction of Uncertainty,” The Clearing House, 83(5): 186–193.
McDaniel, Michael A., Deborah L. Whetzel, Frank L. Schmidt, and Steven D. Maurer. 1994.
     “The validity of employment interviews: A comprehensive review and meta-analysis."
     Journal of Applied Psychology 79(4): 599-616.
Meriam, Junius Lathrop. 1906. “Normal School Education and Efficiency in Teaching,”
      Columbia University Contributions to Education No. 1.
Milanowski, Anthony. 2004. “The Relationship Between Teacher Performance Evaluation
      Scores and Student Achievement: Evidence From Cincinnati.” Peabody Journal of
      Education, 79(4): 33-53.
Morsh, Joseph E. and Eleanor W. Wilder (1954) “Identifying the Effective Instructor: A Review
       of the Quantitative Studies, 1900-1952” Air Force Personnel and Training Research
       Center, Research Bulletin 54-44.
Motowidlo, Stephen J., Marvin D. Dunnette, and Gary W. Carter. 1990. “An alternative selection
     procedure: The low-fidelity simulation." Journal of Applied Psychology 75(6): 640-647.
Mueller-Hanson, Rose, Eric D. Heggestad, and George C. Thornton III. 2003. “Faking and
      Selection: Considering the Use of Personality from Select-In and Select-Out
      Perspectives,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(2): 348–355
Nalley, B. J. (1971) A descriptive survey of the recruitment and selection process of teachers for
       the District of Columbia and a comparison of procedures used in selected school systems


                                                44
       of comparable size. Doctoral dissertation, George Washington University, Dissertation
       Abstracts International, 32, 3626A.

Neely, Melvin E. (1957) “A Survey of Present Procedures in the Selection of Teacher Personnel”
       Doctoral Dissertation, University of Kansas.

Ost, Ben. 2014. "How Do Teachers Improve? The Relative Importance of Specific and General
       Human Capital." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(2): 127-51.

Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer. 2011. “Personnel economics: hiring and incentives.” Handbook
       of Labor Economics 4: 1769-1823.

Papay, John P., Matthew A. Kraft. 2015. “Productivity returns to experience in the teacher labor
       market: Methodological challenges and new evidence on long-term career improvement,”
       Journal of Public Economics, 130: 105–119

Place, Andrew W. and Theodore J. Kowalski. 1993. “Principal Ratings of Criteria Associated
       with Teacher Selection,” Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education 7(): 291-300.
Pounder, Diana G. 1989. “Improving the Predictive Validity of Teacher Selection Decisions:
      Lessons from Teacher Appraisal,” Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education
      2(2):141-150.
Rice, Jennifer K. 2013. “Learning from experience? Evidence on the impact and distribution of
        teacher experience and the implications for teacher policy,” Education Finance and
        Policy, 8(3): 332–348.
Rivkin, Steven. G., Eric. A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. "Teachers, Schools and
       Academic Achievement." Econometrica 73: 417-458.
Rockoff J.E. (2004) “The impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
      from Panel Data,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94(2):247-252
Rockoff J.E., Jacob B.J., Kane T.J., Staiger D.O. (2011) Can You Recognize an Effective
      Teacher When You Recruit One? Education Finance and Policy. 6(1):43-74.
Rockoff J.E., Speroni C. 2010. Subjective and Objective Evaluations of Teacher Effectiveness.
      American Economic Review 100(2): 261–66
Rockoff, Jonah E., Douglas O. Staiger, Eric Taylor, and Thomas J. Kane. 2012. “Information
      and Employee Evaluation: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Public Schools.”
      American Economic Review 102(7): 3184-3213.
Rothstein J. (2015) “Teacher Quality Policy When Supply Matters,” American Economic Review
       105(1):100-130.
Rutledge, Stacey A., Douglas N. Harris, Cynthia T. Thompson, W. Kyle Ingle. 2008. “Certify,
       Blink, Hire: An Examination of the Process and Tools of Teacher Screening and
       Selection,” Leadership and Policy in Schools, 7(3): 237–263.
Scafidi, Benjamin, David L. Sjoquist, and Todd R. Stinebrickner. 2007. "Race, poverty, and
        teacher mobility." Economics of Education Review 26(2): 145-159.


                                              45
Schacter, John, and Yeow M. Thum. 2004. “Paying for High- and Low- Quality Teaching.”
       Economics of Education Review, 23(4): 411-440.
Schmitt, Neal. 1976. “Social and Situational Determinants of Interview Decisions: Implications
       for the Employment Interview.” Personnel Psychology 29(1): 79-101.
Schmutte, Ian M. 2015. “Job Referral Networks and the Determination of Earnings in Local
      Labor Markets” Journal of Labor Economics, 33(1)
Staiger DO, Rockoff JE. 2010. Searching for Effective Teachers with Imperfect Information.
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 24: 97-117
Stanton, Christopher, and Catherine Thomas. (2013) “Landing the first job: the value of
       intermediaries in online hiring.” Unpublished manuscript.
Strauss, R. 1998. “Teacher Preparation and Selection in Pennsylvania,” Research Report to the
       Pennsylvania State Board of Education.
Wede, Richard J. 1996 “Teacher Selection: Use of Demonstration Lessons” Doctoral
      Dissertation, Drake University.
Young, I.P., Pounder, D.G. 1986. “Salient Factors Affecting Decision Making in Simulated
      Teacher Selection Interviews,” Journal of Educational Equity and Leadership, 5(3):216-
      233




                                               46
                      1.5
                      1
            Desnity
                      .5
                      0




                            -2                     -1                           0                      1
                                                        Predicted performance

                                                          Hired            Not hired



                            Figure 1—Predicted performance for applicants hired and not hired

Note: Kernel densities estimated separately for applicants hired and not hired of predicted performance in the first
year. Predicted performance is estimated as follows: First, using the sample of new hires in their first year at DCPS,
fit a regression similar to Tables 7 Column 4. The dependent variable is the first predicted factor from a factor
analysis of IMPACT evaluation component scores from a teacher's first year at DCPS. The covariates include all of
the background characteristics and application scores. The specification also includes subject-taught by year fixed
effects. Second, the estimated coefficients from that regression are applied to the applicant sample. This predicted
performance measure does not include differences between the subject-taught by year fixed effect groups.




                                                              47
                    .3
                    .25
            Proportion hired
             .15    .1
                    .05.2




                               -1.5             -1                 -.5
                                                        Predicted first-year          0
                                                                             performance                .5


                                            quadratic fit    (x,y) mean of performance vingtile bins



                               Figure 2—Relationship between predicted performance and hiring

Note: The dashed line represents results of a regression with 7,442 observations (all applicants). In each case the
binary outcome being hired by DCPS is regressed on predicted first-year job performance, and year-by-subject-
applied fixed effects. Each square marks the (x,y) mean for 20 bins. Each bin is a vingtile of predicted performance.
The x-axis is limited to the 2nd through 98th percentiles of predicted performance.
   Predicted performance is estimated as follows: First, using the sample of new hires in their first year at DCPS, fit
a regression similar to Tables 7 Column 4. The dependent variable is the first predicted factor from a factor analysis
of IMPACT evaluation component scores from a teacher's first year at DCPS. The covariates include all of the
background characteristics and application scores. The specification also includes subject-taught by year fixed
effects. Second, the estimated coefficients from that regression are applied to the applicant sample. This predicted
performance measure does not include differences between the subject-taught by year fixed effect groups.




                                                               48
                    2
                    1
           Actual performance
               -1   -2
                    -3   0




                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                            Vingtile of predicted first-year performance


          Figure 3—Relationship between predicted performance and actual performance

Note: Box-plots of actual performance for each vingtile of predicted performance. Actual performance is the first
predicted factor from a factor analysis of IMPACT evaluation component scores. Predicted performance is the fitted
value obtained after the following regression: Using the sample of new hires, fit a regression similar to Table 7
Column 4. The dependent variable is the first predicted factor of IMPACT scores. The covariates include all of the
background characteristics and application scores. The specification also includes subject-taught by year fixed
effects.




                                                                 49
               .4
               .3
            Desnity
             .2.1
               0




                      -6                -4                  -2                      0                   2
                                                    Actual performance

                                   Quartile of predicted first-year performance:
                                    Bottom                 2nd                3rd               Top



                 Figure 4—Relationship between screening measures and performance

Note: Kernel densities estimated separately by quartile of predicted performance using teacher-by-year observations.
Predicted performance is the fitted value obtained after the following regression: Using the sample of new hires, fit a
regression similar to Table 7 Column 4. The dependent variable is the first predicted factor of IMPACT scores. The
covariates include all of the background characteristics and application scores. The specification also includes
subject-taught by year fixed effects.




                                                         50
                                Table 1—DCPS teacher characteristics

                                      Hired before 2011            New hires, first year on the job
                                      First year in data         Non TeachDC              TeachDC
                                                  Mean                    Mean                   Mean
                                       Obs.      (st.dev.)       Obs.    (st.dev.)      Obs.    (st.dev.)
    Female                             2,920       0.76          842       0.75         927       0.75
    Race/ethnicity                     2,704                     380                    823
     Black                                         0.60                    0.39                   0.44
     White                                         0.32                    0.42                   0.47
     Hispanic                                      0.04                    0.11                   0.05
     Asian                                         0.04                    0.08                   0.01
     Other                                         0.01                    0.00                   0.03

    Age                                2,914       42.32         820      29.97         900      31.41

    School type                        2,917                     839                    926
     Education center                              0.17                    0.19                   0.18
     Elementary school                             0.46                    0.38                   0.44
     Middle school                                 0.09                    0.17                   0.15
     High school                                   0.25                    0.23                   0.20
     Other                                         0.03                    0.03                   0.03
    Final IMPACT score                 2,920      315.04         842     290.50         930     297.95
                                                  (45.36)                (48.51)                (46.87)
    Not in DCPS next year              2,920       0.19          842       0.21         930       0.22
    Not in same school next year       2,920       0.26          842       0.29         930       0.31


Note: Authors' calculations. Sample restricted to DCPS teachers with IMPACT scores. Calculations based on one
observation per teacher, the first year they appear in the data.




                                                     51
                       Table 2—Applicant progress through TeachDC process
                                               2011 applicants         2012 applicants         2013 applicants
                                                        Fraction               Fraction                Fraction
                                                 #       hired           #      hired            #      hired
Eligible but Initial Stage Incomplete:          174        0.13         787      0.10         1,041      0.02
    General       Failed this Stage:            228        0.04
     Essay        Incomplete Next Stage:        362        0.09
   Content        Failed this Stage:            530        0.06         622      0.05          260       0.02
  Knowledge       Incomplete Next Stage:        314        0.09         304      0.09          150       0.06
 Interview +      Failed this Stage:            239        0.09         283      0.05          184       0.03
Sample Lesson     Incomplete Next Stage:        269        0.32         39       0.18          302       0.09

   Teaching       Failed this Stage:             80        0.31         100      0.01          156       0.04
   Audition       Passed Stage:                 164        0.48         392      0.42          462       0.52

Note: Authors' calculations. "Stage reached" is the highest stage in which the data include a score or pass/fail
determination.




                                                      52
                     Table 3—Characteristics of TeachDC applicants, 2011-2013
                                                               All applicants            Applicants hired
                                                                         Mean                       Mean
                                                             Obs.       (st.dev.)        Obs.      (st.dev.)
      Hired                                                  7,442        0.13           982           1
      Prior teaching experience                              7,314                        978
        Novice                                                            0.33                       0.28
        1 to 2                                                            0.17                       0.19
        3 to 5                                                            0.18                       0.20
        6 to 10                                                           0.17                       0.20
        11 or more                                                        0.14                       0.14
      Undergraduate GPA                                      7,112        3.40            939         3.42
                                                                         (0.43)                      (0.44)

      SAT math+verbal (or ACT equivalent)                    4,600      1148.72           674      1148.75
                                                                        (175.15)                   (168.58)
      Undergraduate college Barron's ranking                 6,588        2.81            907         2.91
       Barron's rank (1-5)                                               (1.24)                      (1.26)
      Master's degree or higher                              7,442        0.51            982         0.54
      Location of undergrad or grad school                   7,076                        940
       DC                                                                 0.12                       0.17
       Maryland or Virginia                                               0.28                       0.28
       Outside DC, MD, VA                                                 0.60                       0.55


Note: Authors' calculations. Excluding applicants who were not eligible for a teaching license in DC.7,442 total
observations. Location indicators are mutually exclusive, applicants with multiple locations coded based on location
nearest DC.




                                                        53
                                                        Table 4—Pairwise correlations of applicant characteristics and scores

                                                                                                                            Personality questions    Haber-
                                                          SAT     GPA     Barr.   Exper.   PCK     Interv.   Aud.    Essay Extrov. Pos.      Neg.     man

                             SAT M+V (or ACT equiv)         1
      2011-2013 applicants




                             Undergraduate GPA            0.31      1
                             College Barron's ranking     0.34    0.13      1
                             Years of experience          -0.05   -0.10   -0.14     1
                             PCK written test             0.22    0.16     0.19   -0.11     1
                             Interview                    0.13    0.12     0.08   -0.02    0.10      1
                             Audition                     0.08    0.06     0.03   0.04     0.10     0.22      1

                             General essay                0.19    0.15    0.23    -0.17    0.19     0.17     0.04     1
  2011 applicants




                             Personality questions
                              Extroversion                0.07    0.02     0.06   -0.12    0.06     0.14      0.13   0.07        1
       only




                              Positive spin               -0.04   0.01    -0.01   0.04     -0.02    0.04     -0.01   0.05       0.28    1
                              Negative spin               -0.05   0.01    -0.04   0.04     -0.02    0.04     -0.04   0.01       0.26   0.70    1
                             Haberman total score         0.21    0.20     0.19   -0.14    0.20     0.12      0.01   0.25       0.13   0.11   0.07     1



Note: Pairwise correlations of applicant characteristics and scores. Maximum observations for a cell is 7,442, see Table 2.




                                                                                           54
                                                  Table 5—Hiring
                                                             Characteristics                 Characteristics
                                                                separately                   simultaneously
                                                            (1)            (2)               (3)         (4)
     Years prior experience
      1 to 2                                             0.029*          0.023*             0.027*        0.025*
                                                         (0.012)         (0.011)           (0.011)       (0.011)
       3 to 5                                            0.027*          0.024*             0.024*        0.025*
                                                         (0.012)         (0.011)           (0.011)       (0.011)
       6 to 10                                           0.040**        0.042**            0.041**       0.042**
                                                         (0.012)         (0.011)           (0.011)       (0.011)
       11 or more                                         0.006          0.026*             0.027*        0.029*
                                                         (0.013)         (0.012)           (0.012)       (0.012)
     Undergrad GPA (std)                                  0.006         -0.014**           -0.010*       -0.011*
                                                         (0.004)         (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.004)
     SAT math+verbal (std)                                0.000         -0.016**          -0.016**      -0.015**
                                                         (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.005)       (0.005)
     Barron's Rank (linear 0-5)                          0.009*          -0.002              0.001        -0.000
                                                         (0.004)         (0.003)           (0.004)       (0.003)
     Master's degree or higher                            0.009          -0.001             -0.006        -0.007
                                                         (0.008)         (0.007)           (0.008)       (0.008)
     Location of undergrad or grad school
      DC                                                 0.056**        0.057**           0.055**        0.057**
                                                         (0.013)        (0.012)           (0.012)        (0.012)
       Maryland or Virginia                               0.014         0.026**           0.022**        0.025**
                                                         (0.009)        (0.008)           (0.009)        (0.008)
     PCK written test (std)                              0.060**        0.008+            0.015**         0.008
                                                         (0.005)        (0.005)           (0.006)        (0.005)
     Interview (std)                                     0.108**        0.028**           0.058**        0.024**
                                                         (0.007)        (0.007)           (0.007)        (0.007)
     Audition (std)                                      0.158**        0.053**           0.148**        0.050**
                                                         (0.010)        (0.012)           (0.010)        (0.012)
     Recommended-pool by year FE                                           √                                √
     Adjusted R-squared                                                                     0.167         0.207
     F-statistic subject-applied by year FE                                                 1.65           1.26
      p-value                                                                               0.000         0.052
     F-statistic recommended-pool by year FE                                                               91.8
      p-value                                                                                             0.000

Note: Estimates from linear regressions with 7,442 observations, where being hired is the dependent variable. In
columns 1-2 each group of coefficients separated by a solid line are estimates from a separate regression. Columns
3-4 each report estimates from a single regression. Each specification includes year-by-subject-applied fixed effects.
Location indicators are mutually exclusive, applicants with multiple locations coded based on location nearest DC.
The recommended-pool by year FE include four mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who reach the
recommended pool in 2013, (ii) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2012, (iii) applicants who pass the
audition in 2011, and (iv) applicants who pass the interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text for more
details). The left out category is all other applicants. When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set the value
to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone missing that covariate.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01



                                                          55
                  Table 6—Additional characteristics from 2011 applicants and hiring
                                                          Characteristics              Characteristics
                                                            separately                 simultaneously
                                                          (1)         (2)               (3)        (4)
              Positive spin factor (std)                -0.015      -0.013            -0.016     -0.013
                                                       (0.012)     (0.011)           (0.012)    (0.011)
              Negative spin factor (std)                 0.006       0.011             0.006      0.010
                                                       (0.011)     (0.011)           (0.011)    (0.011)
              Big Five Index: Extroversion
              (std)                                    0.030**      0.019**         0.028**      0.018*
                                                       (0.008)      (0.007)         (0.008)      (0.007)
              Haberman total score (std)               0.018*        0.005           0.012        0.002
                                                       (0.007)      (0.007)         (0.008)      (0.007)
              General teaching essay (std)             0.018*        0.001          0.015+        0.001
                                                       (0.008)      (0.008)         (0.009)      (0.008)
              Recommended-pool FE                                      √                            √
              Number of observations                                                  2,360       2,360
              Adjusted R-squared                                                      0.027       0.133
              F-statistic subject-applied FE                                          1.95        1.12
               p-value                                                                0.002       0.300
              F-statistic recommended-pool FE                                                      143
               p-value                                                                            0.000

Note: Estimates from an LPM with 2,360 observations (all from 2011) where being hired is the dependent variable.
In columns 1-2 each group of coefficients separated by a solid line are estimates from a separate regression.
Columns 3-4 each report estimates from a single regression. Each specification includes year-by-subject-applied
fixed effects. The recommended-pool FE include two mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who pass the
audition in 2011, and (ii) applicants who pass the interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text for more
details). The left out category is all other applicants. When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set the value
to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone missing that covariate.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                          56
                                           Table 7—Job performance
                                               Characteristics                         Characteristics
                                                 separately                            simultaneously
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)                 (4)       (5)       (6)
      Years prior experience
       1 to 2                        0.081     0.100               0.024          0.100        0.098       0.058
                                    (0.089) (0.090)              (0.077)        (0.082)      (0.083)     (0.073)
        3 to 5                       0.121     0.101               0.109        0.163+       0.156+      0.182*
                                    (0.101) (0.099)              (0.083)        (0.088)      (0.088)     (0.078)
        6 to 10                      0.017     0.034               0.080          0.069        0.064       0.115
                                    (0.093) (0.092)              (0.083)        (0.086)      (0.087)     (0.083)
        11 or more                 -0.255* -0.214+                -0.163         -0.104       -0.109      -0.054
                                    (0.115) (0.117)              (0.112)        (0.109)      (0.109)     (0.105)
      Undergrad GPA (std)          0.259** 0.243**               0.185**        0.181**      0.185**     0.160**
                                    (0.035) (0.037)              (0.036)        (0.034)      (0.035)     (0.035)
      SAT math+verbal (std)        0.173** 0.155**               0.092*           0.019        0.019      -0.011
                                    (0.040) (0.039)              (0.037)        (0.038)      (0.038)     (0.038)
      Barron's Rank (linear 0-5)   0.155** 0.149**               0.098**        0.108**      0.109**     0.088**
                                    (0.029) (0.029)              (0.027)        (0.027)      (0.027)     (0.025)
      Master's degree or higher    0.230** 0.215**               0.173**        0.116+       0.112+        0.079
                                    (0.065) (0.064)              (0.056)        (0.062)      (0.062)     (0.055)
      Location of undergrad or grad school
        DC                          -0.030     0.020               0.045         -0.016       -0.020       0.037
                                    (0.096) (0.094)              (0.079)        (0.085)      (0.087)     (0.081)
        Maryland or Virginia       -0.131+    -0.085              -0.004         -0.076       -0.075      -0.011
                                    (0.073) (0.074)              (0.067)        (0.069)      (0.069)     (0.064)
      PCK written test (std)       0.279** 0.260**               0.204**        0.182**      0.186**     0.150**
                                    (0.056) (0.056)              (0.052)        (0.052)      (0.053)     (0.050)
      Interview (std)              0.316** 0.298**               0.270**        0.271**      0.283**     0.257**
                                    (0.051) (0.055)              (0.051)        (0.048)      (0.051)     (0.049)
      Audition (std)               0.174** 0.149*                0.152*         0.118*         0.104     0.107+
                                    (0.062) (0.066)              (0.064)        (0.059)      (0.065)     (0.062)
      Recommended-pool by year FE                √                   √                           √           √
      School FE                                                      √                                       √
      Adjusted R-squared                                                          0.176       0.176        0.358
      F-statistic recommended-pool by year FE                                                 0.681        0.980
        p-value                                                                               0.665        0.438
      F-statistic school FE                                                                                8.932
        p-value                                                                                            0.000
Note: Estimates from least squares regressions with 1,581 teacher-by-year observations, and 917 unique teachers.
The dependent variable is job performance measured by the first predicted factor from a factor analysis of IMPACT
evaluation component scores, standardized. In columns 1-3 each group of coefficients separated by a solid line are
estimates from a separate regression. Columns 4-6 each report estimates from a single regression. Each specification
includes year-by-subject-taught fixed effects, and indicators for second year in the district and third year in the
district. The recommended-pool by year FE include four mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who reach the
recommended pool in 2013, (ii) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2012, (iii) applicants who pass the
audition in 2011, and (iv) applicants who pass the interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text for more
details). The left out category is all other applicants. When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set the value
to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone missing that covariate. Clustered (teacher) standard errors in
parentheses.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01

                                                          57
                         Table 8—Robustness to parametric selection correction
                                                                Table 7                    With control
                                                            Columns 4 & 5                     function
                                                            (1)         (2)               (3)          (4)
       Years prior experience
        1 to 2                                             0.100         0.098           0.067         0.066
                                                         (0.082)       (0.083)         (0.084)       (0.084)
         3 to 5                                          0.163+        0.156+            0.141         0.131
                                                         (0.088)       (0.088)         (0.088)       (0.088)
         6 to 10                                           0.069         0.064           0.023         0.009
                                                         (0.086)       (0.087)         (0.088)       (0.088)
         11 or more                                       -0.104        -0.109          -0.144        -0.155
                                                         (0.109)       (0.109)         (0.110)       (0.109)
       Undergrad GPA (std)                               0.181**       0.185**         0.185**       0.191**
                                                         (0.034)       (0.035)         (0.034)       (0.034)
       SAT math+verbal (std)                               0.019         0.019           0.034         0.040
                                                         (0.038)       (0.038)         (0.039)       (0.039)
       Barron's Rank (linear 0-5)                        0.108**       0.109**         0.106**       0.109**
                                                         (0.027)       (0.027)         (0.027)       (0.027)
       Master's degree or higher                         0.116+        0.112+          0.134*        0.134*
                                                         (0.062)       (0.062)         (0.063)       (0.062)
       Location of undergrad or grad school
        DC                                                -0.016        -0.020          -0.059        -0.069
                                                         (0.085)       (0.087)         (0.088)       (0.087)
         Maryland or Virginia                             -0.076        -0.075          -0.098        -0.096
                                                         (0.069)       (0.069)         (0.069)       (0.069)
       PCK written test (std)                            0.182**       0.186**         0.167**       0.175**
                                                         (0.052)       (0.053)         (0.053)       (0.051)
       Interview (std)                                   0.271**       0.283**         0.237**       0.232**
                                                         (0.048)       (0.051)         (0.054)       (0.053)
       Audition (std)                                    0.118*          0.104           0.084         0.068
                                                         (0.059)       (0.065)         (0.066)       (0.059)
       Predicted probability of hire                                                    1.411*        -0.017
                                                                                        (0.708)      (0.681)
       Predicted probability of hire ^ 2                                                 -1.154        0.865
                                                                                        (0.781)      (0.807)
       Recommended-pool by year FE                                        √
       F-statistics excluded instruments                                                 23.37         2.30

Note: Estimates from least squares regressions with 1,581 teacher-by-year observations, and 917 unique teachers.
The dependent variable is our standardized job performance factor from IMPACT evaluation component scores.
Columns 1 and 2 simply repeat the estimates in Table 7 Columns 4 and 5 for convenient comparison. Columns 3 and
4 are estimated just as Column 1 is, except that we add a quadratic function of the predicted probability of hire. The
predicted probability of hire is estimated using the specification reported in Table 5 Column 3 (all characteristic and
score regressors and subject-applied by year fixed effects, but no recommended-pool by year fixed effects) but with
additional instruments added as regressors. The hiring prediction regressions include 7,442 observations.
   For the estimates reported above in Column 3, the instruments in the hire equation are four indicator variables: (i)
Applicants in any year who scored above the stage 4 cut-score designated by DCPS as the threshold for the
recommended pool. (ii) Applicants in 2011 who scored above the stage 3 cut-score; we assume these applicants
were also placed in the recommended pool as discussed in the text. (iii) Applicants in 2011 who scored below the

                                                         58
stage 2 cut-score but were nevertheless randomly selected to move on to stage 3. (iv) Applicants in 2011 who
applied in the first weeks of the recruitment season. All of these early applicants were allowed to move on to stage 3
regardless of their scores in stage 2 or 1.
   For the estimates in Column 4, the added instruments include five indicator variables: (i)-(iii) Applicants in any
year who scored above the cut-score in stage 2, 3, and 4 respectively. And again for 2011 (iv) applicants randomly
selected to advance or (v) early applicants automatically advanced. We also allow the slope on each stage score to
be different above and below the stage cut-score, and include fixed effects for the highest stage an applicant was
invited to complete. All these added coefficients are allowed to vary by year.
Clustered (teacher) standard errors in parentheses.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                         59
                              Table 9—Additional characteristics from 2011
                                 applicants and teacher job performance
                                                                          (1)        (2)
                         Positive spin factor (std)                     0.032       0.015
                                                                       (0.061)     (0.062)
                         Negative spin factor (std)                     -0.000      0.023
                                                                       (0.074)     (0.074)
                         Big Five Index: Extroversion (std)             -0.001      -0.016
                                                                       (0.059)     (0.059)
                         Haberman total score (std)                    0.291** 0.270**
                                                                       (0.054) (0.054)
                         General teaching essay (std)                  0.222** 0.187**
                                                                       (0.070) (0.069)
                         Recommended-pool by year FE                              √

Note: Estimates from least squares regressions with 744 teacher-by-year observations, and 314 unique teachers
(hired in 2011 only). The dependent variable is job performance measured by the first predicted factor from a factor
analysis of IMPACT evaluation component scores, standardized. Each group of coefficients separated by a solid line
are estimates from a separate regression. Each specification includes year-by-subject-taught fixed effects, and
indicators for second year in the district and third year in the district. The recommended-pool FE include two
mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who pass the audition in 2011, and (ii) applicants who pass the
interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text for more details). The left out category is all other applicants.
When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set the value to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone
missing that covariate. Clustered (teacher) standard errors in parentheses.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                         60
                                     Table 10—Attrition after first year
                                                  Leave DCPS                        Leave school
                                                 (1)        (2)                    (3)        (4)
             Years prior experience (novice omitted)
               1 to 2                           0.011      0.006                  0.005        -0.001
                                              (0.043)    (0.040)                (0.047)       (0.045)
               3 to 5                          -0.029      0.010                  0.013         0.056
                                              (0.041)    (0.040)                (0.046)       (0.045)
               6 to 10                         -0.003      0.010                  0.035         0.051
                                              (0.043)    (0.039)                (0.049)       (0.045)
               11 or more                      -0.018     -0.029                 -0.004        -0.019
                                              (0.049)    (0.047)                (0.056)       (0.054)
             Undergrad GPA (std)                0.013    0.030+                  -0.002         0.018
                                              (0.017)    (0.016)                (0.019)       (0.019)
             SAT math+verbal (std)              0.030    0.033+                 0.035+        0.041*
                                              (0.018)    (0.019)                (0.020)       (0.020)
             Barron's Rank (linear 0-5)         0.000      0.004                 -0.001         0.005
                                              (0.013)    (0.012)                (0.015)       (0.014)
             Master's degree or higher        0.050+     0.058*                   0.040         0.048
                                              (0.030)    (0.028)                (0.034)       (0.032)
             Location of undergrad or grad school
               DC                            -0.148** -0.124**                 -0.205**      -0.184**
                                              (0.037)    (0.035)                (0.040)       (0.038)
               Maryland or Virginia            -0.052     -0.044                 -0.053        -0.047
                                              (0.034)    (0.032)                (0.039)       (0.037)
             PCK written test (std)            -0.019     -0.010                 -0.037        -0.029
                                              (0.020)    (0.019)                (0.024)       (0.023)
             Interview (std)                   -0.015      0.005                 -0.031        -0.007
                                              (0.021)    (0.021)                (0.025)       (0.024)
             Audition (std)                    -0.044     -0.037                 -0.051        -0.043
                                              (0.030)    (0.027)                (0.032)       (0.030)
             IMPACT rating FE                                √                                    √
             Adjusted R-squared                 0.024      0.123                 0.026          0.115
             DCPS mean for outcome              0.199      0.199                 0.276          0.276

Note: Estimates from least squares regressions with 902 teacher observations. The dependent variable in Columns 1
and 2 is an indicator for having left DCPS after their first year, while in Columns 3 and 4 it is an indicator for
leaving DCPS or the school in which they taught during their first year. Each specification includes year-by-subject-
taught fixed effects and recommended-pool by year fixed effects. The recommended-pool by year FE include four
mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2013, (ii) applicants who reach the
recommended pool in 2012, (iii) applicants who pass the audition in 2011, and (iv) applicants who pass the
interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text for more details). The left out category is all other applicants.
When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set the value to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone
missing that covariate.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                         61
                                 1
            Proportion invited to stage 3 (bin mean)
                                 .5
                                 0




                                                       -3   -2            -1               0               1   2
                                                                 Stage 2 score (one-tenth of a point bins)



      Appendix Figure 1—Applicant stage 2 score and likelihood of being invited to stage 3

Note: Each marker represents a bin of applicant observations, grouped by stage 2 score into one-tenth of a point
bins. The y-axis measures the bin mean of an indicator = 1 if the applicant was invited to complete stage 3. The x-
axis has been re-centered so that the official cut-off for being invited to stage 3 is set to zero. The plot also shows the
bi-variate linear fit from a regression using applicant observations, not bin observations.




                                                                                62
                                 1
            Proportion invited to stage 4 (bin mean)
                     0           -.5   .5




                                                       -4   -2                    0                     2   4
                                                              Stage 3 score (one-tenth of a point bins)



      Appendix Figure 2—Applicant stage 3 score and likelihood of being invited to stage 4

Note: Each marker represents a bin of applicant observations, grouped by stage 3 score into one-tenth of a point
bins. The y-axis measures the bin mean of an indicator = 1 if the applicant was invited to complete stage 4. The x-
axis has been re-centered so that the official cut-off for being invited to stage 4 is set to zero. The plot also shows the
bi-variate linear fit from a regression using applicant observations, not bin observations.




                                                                             63
            Proportion placed on 'recommended pool' list (bin mean)
               0         .2         .4     .6          .8        1




                                                                      -10   -5                    0                     5   10
                                                                              Stage 4 score (one-tenth of a point bins)



Appendix Figure 3—Applicant stage 4 score and likelihood of being placed on the recommended
                                         pool list

Note: Each marker represents a bin of applicant observations, grouped by stage 4 score into one-tenth of a point
bins. The y-axis measures the bin mean of an indicator = 1 if the applicant was placed on the recommended pool list.
The x-axis has been re-centered so that the official cut-off for being in the recommended pool is set to zero. The plot
also shows the bi-variate linear fit from a regression using applicant observations, not bin observations.




                                                                                             64
               .4
               .3
            Desnity
             .2.1
               0




                      -6                -4                 -2                     0                    2
                                                   Actual performance

                                Bottom Quartile Predicted                   Top Quartile Predicted
                                First Year in DCPS                          Third Year in DCPS



                 Figure 4—Relationship between screening measures and performance

Note: Kernel densities estimated separately for the top and bottom quartile of predicted performance, and for
teachers in their first and third years working in DCPS as teachers. Predicted performance is the fitted value
obtained after the following regression: Using the sample of new hires, fit a regression similar to Table 7 Column 4.
The dependent variable is the first predicted factor of IMPACT scores. The covariates include all of the background
characteristics and application scores. The specification also includes subject-taught by year fixed effects.




                                                        65
                 Appendix Table A1—Factor analysis of personality and grit questions
                                                          Positive          Negative
                                                           Spin              Spin            Extraversion
             + BFI Q3                                       0.43             -0.10               0.09
             + BFI Q8                                       0.44             -0.04              -0.02
             + BFI Q15                                     -0.41             -0.13               0.06
             + BFI Q17                                      0.55              0.01              -0.06
             + BFI Q23                                      0.39              0.22               0.00
             + BFI Q26                                      0.45              0.00              -0.01
             + BFI Q28                                      0.48             -0.02               0.03
             + Grit Q2                                      0.26              0.17               0.00
             + Grit Q4                                      0.55             -0.06              -0.05
             + Grit Q7                                      0.41              0.28              -0.11
             + Grit Q8                                      0.60              0.11              -0.11
             - BFI Q5                                       0.09              0.43               0.01
             - BFI Q11                                      0.09              0.46              -0.03
             - BFI Q12                                      0.20              0.17               0.11
             - BFI Q22                                      0.00              0.69               0.01
             - BFI Q24                                      0.17              0.20              -0.07
             - BFI Q25                                      0.20              0.26               0.02
             - BFI Q29                                     -0.07             -0.42              -0.17
             - Grit Q1                                     -0.04              0.64               0.01
             - Grit Q3                                     -0.04              0.62               0.08
             - Grit Q5                                     -0.01              0.51               0.04
             - Grit Q6                                      0.08              0.54              -0.06
             Extraversion Q1                                0.04             -0.18               0.60
             Extraversion Q4                               -0.15              0.04               0.60
             Extraversion Q7                                0.40             -0.05               0.34
             Extraversion Q10                               0.43             -0.06               0.34
             Extraversion Q13                              -0.11              0.07               0.71
             Extraversion Q16                               0.19             -0.01               0.34
             Extraversion Q19                              -0.16              0.25               0.62
             Extraversion Q21                               0.26             -0.08               0.59

Note: This table presents the results of a factor analysis on items used to assess the Big Five personality traits as well
as Duckworth's Grit measure, where factors having an eigenvalue greater than 1 were retained. Factor weights are
given with a Promax Rotation. Items with "+" are positively scored, those with "-" are negatively scored. BFI refers
to big five items that do not pertain to extraversion. Note that items BFI 15 and 29 relate to neuroticism, and hence
are inversely related to the underlying factors.




                                                           66
                         Appendix Table A2—IMPACT component weights

                                                2011-12          2012-13 and 2013-14
                                           Group 1 Group 2       Group 1     Group 2

       Individual value-added                0.50                     0.35
       Teacher assessed student learning              0.10            0.15    0.15
       Teaching and learning framework       0.35     0.75            0.40    0.75
       Commitment to school community        0.10     0.10            0.10    0.10
       School value-added                    0.05     0.05


Source: DCPS.




                                            67
                            Appendix Table A3—Hiring and offers, 2012 and 2013
                                                 Hired                                               Offered
                               Characteristics            Characteristics          Characteristics             Characteristics
                                 separately               simultaneously             separately                simultaneously
                               (1)        (2)              (3)       (4)           (5)        (6)               (7)       (8)
Years prior experience
 1 to 2                        0.030*   0.020            0.024+    0.023+        0.048**    0.040**        0.042**     0.042**
                               (0.014) (0.013)           (0.013)   (0.013)       (0.016)    (0.015)        (0.015)     (0.015)
  3 to 5                       0.027+  0.023+            0.023+    0.024+        0.071**    0.067**        0.068**     0.069**
                               (0.014) (0.012)           (0.013)   (0.013)       (0.016)    (0.015)        (0.015)     (0.015)
  6 to 10                      0.051** 0.047**           0.046**   0.046**       0.093**    0.089**        0.088**     0.089**
                               (0.014) (0.012)           (0.013)   (0.013)       (0.016)    (0.015)        (0.015)     (0.015)
  11 or more                    0.021  0.037**            0.035*   0.037**       0.067**    0.082**        0.081**     0.084**
                               (0.015) (0.013)           (0.014)   (0.014)       (0.017)    (0.016)        (0.017)     (0.017)
Undergrad GPA (std)            0.015** -0.009+            -0.004    -0.006       0.013*      -0.008         -0.003      -0.004
                               (0.005) (0.005)           (0.005)   (0.005)       (0.006)    (0.006)        (0.006)     (0.006)
SAT math+verbal (std)           0.002  -0.012*           -0.014*   -0.012*        0.001     -0.013+        -0.017*     -0.014*
                               (0.006) (0.005)           (0.006)   (0.006)       (0.007)    (0.007)        (0.007)     (0.007)
Barron's Rank (linear 0-5) 0.008+       -0.004            -0.001    -0.002       0.009+      -0.002         0.003       0.001
                               (0.004) (0.004)           (0.004)   (0.004)       (0.005)    (0.005)        (0.005)     (0.005)
Master's degree or higher      0.019*   0.002             -0.004    -0.005        0.004      -0.011         -0.010      -0.011
                               (0.010) (0.008)           (0.010)   (0.009)       (0.011)    (0.010)        (0.011)     (0.011)
Location of undergrad or grad school
  DC                           0.046** 0.046**           0.046**   0.046**       0.077**    0.076**        0.073**     0.072**
                               (0.014) (0.013)           (0.013)   (0.013)       (0.016)    (0.015)        (0.015)     (0.015)
  Maryland or Virginia          0.015  0.028**           0.024*    0.027**       0.027*     0.039**        0.039**     0.041**
                               (0.011) (0.010)           (0.010)   (0.010)       (0.013)    (0.012)        (0.012)     (0.012)
PCK written test (std)         0.063**  0.009            0.017*     0.007        0.068**    0.016*         0.026**     0.015*
                               (0.006) (0.006)           (0.007)   (0.007)       (0.007)    (0.007)        (0.008)     (0.008)
Interview (std)                0.096** 0.022**           0.041**   0.018*        0.102**    0.030**        0.051**     0.024*
                               (0.008) (0.008)           (0.008)   (0.008)       (0.010)    (0.010)        (0.010)     (0.010)
Audition (std)                 0.177** 0.051**           0.170**   0.050**       0.183**    0.069**        0.171**     0.062**
                               (0.011) (0.013)           (0.011)   (0.013)       (0.013)    (0.015)        (0.013)     (0.015)
Highest-stage-reached by year FE
Recommended-pool by year FE                √                          √                        √                           √
Adjusted R-squared                                        0.191     0.239                                      0.154     0.190
F-statistic subject-applied by year FE                    1.78      1.34                                       1.82      1.61
  p-value                                                 0.000     0.048                                      0.000     0.003
F-statistic recommended-pool by year FE                              158                                                  111
  p-value                                                           0.000                                                0.000

   Note: Estimates from linear regressions with 7,442 observations, where being hired or being offered a job is the
   dependent variable. In columns 1-2 each group of coefficients separated by a solid line are estimates from a separate
   regression. Columns 3-4 each report estimates from a single regression. Each specification includes year-by-subject-
   applied fixed effects. Location indicators are mutually exclusive, applicants with multiple locations coded based on
   location nearest DC. The recommended-pool by year FE include four mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants
   who reach the recommended pool in 2013, (ii) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2012, (iii) applicants
   who pass the audition in 2011, and (iv) applicants who pass the interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text
   for more details). The left out category is all other applicants. When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set
   the value to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone missing that covariate.
   + indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                             68
                                Appendix Table A4—Hiring by subject area
                                             Elementary  MS/HS         Special
                                              and ECE       core      education                    Other
                                                  (1)        (2)          (2)                       (4)
           Years prior experience
             1 to 2                             0.045*    0.043*         0.064                     -0.025
                                               (0.019)   (0.020)       (0.040)                    (0.030)
             3 to 5                              0.027   0.059**         0.021                     -0.018
                                               (0.020)   (0.019)       (0.037)                    (0.030)
             6 to 10                          0.065**     0.045*         0.055                     -0.004
                                               (0.021)   (0.021)       (0.038)                    (0.030)
             11 or more                          0.032     0.014         0.041                      0.008
                                               (0.023)   (0.023)       (0.042)                    (0.031)
           Undergrad GPA (std)                  -0.011    -0.009        -0.009                     -0.012
                                               (0.008)   (0.008)       (0.014)                    (0.012)
           SAT math+verbal (std)                -0.008   -0.016+      -0.045**                     -0.011
                                               (0.009)   (0.009)       (0.016)                    (0.014)
           Barron's Rank (linear 0-5)            0.005    -0.001        -0.010                     -0.014
                                               (0.006)   (0.006)       (0.012)                    (0.010)
           Master's degree or higher             0.013    -0.006        -0.008                     -0.017
                                               (0.014)   (0.014)       (0.028)                    (0.022)
           Location of undergrad or grad school
             DC                               0.079**      0.036         0.038                    0.059+
                                               (0.021)   (0.023)       (0.038)                    (0.030)
             Maryland or Virginia                0.022    0.026+         0.002                    0.039+
                                               (0.015)   (0.016)       (0.028)                    (0.023)
           PCK written test (std)                0.009    -0.005         0.014                    0.025+
                                               (0.009)   (0.009)       (0.018)                    (0.014)
           Interview (std)                     0.023+     0.033*         0.019                     0.012
                                               (0.013)   (0.013)       (0.022)                    (0.020)
           Audition (std)                      0.036+    0.071**         0.055                     0.033
                                               (0.020)   (0.021)       (0.043)                    (0.032)
           Adjusted R-squared                    0.218     0.223         0.231                     0.177
           Number of observations                2,441     2,059          710                      1,208

Note: Estimates from linear regressions where being hired is the dependent variable. Each specification includes
year-by-subject-applied fixed effects and recommended-pool by year fixed effects. The recommended-pool by year
FE include four mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2013, (ii)
applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2012, (iii) applicants who pass the audition in 2011, and (iv)
applicants who pass the interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text for more details). The left out category is
all other applicants. ECE stands for early childhood education. "Core" middle school (MS) and high school (HS)
subjects include English, math, science, and social studies. When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set
the value to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone missing that covariate.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                          69
                   Appendix Table A5—Robustness to parametric selection correction,
                      using job offer in first-stage in place of hired, 2012 and 2013

                                                            Like Table 7                  With control
                                                           Columns 4 & 5                     function
                                                           (1)        (2)                (3)          (4)
        Years prior experience
         1 to 2                                          -0.027       -0.031           -0.073        -0.062
                                                        (0.110)      (0.109)          (0.111)       (0.113)
          3 to 5                                          0.053        0.032           -0.023        -0.011
                                                        (0.123)      (0.124)          (0.125)       (0.130)
          6 to 10                                        -0.033       -0.042           -0.134        -0.115
                                                        (0.120)      (0.120)          (0.126)       (0.128)
          11 or more                                    -0.262+      -0.276+          -0.368*       -0.353*
                                                        (0.146)      (0.147)          (0.149)       (0.155)
        Undergrad GPA (std)                             0.240**      0.239**          0.236**       0.244**
                                                        (0.054)      (0.054)          (0.054)       (0.054)
        SAT math+verbal (std)                             0.003        0.002            0.029         0.024
                                                        (0.055)      (0.054)          (0.057)       (0.056)
        Barron's Rank (linear 0-5)                        0.048        0.050            0.042         0.046
                                                        (0.035)      (0.035)          (0.035)       (0.035)
        Master's degree or higher                         0.017        0.014            0.054         0.033
                                                        (0.087)      (0.087)          (0.086)       (0.086)
        Location of undergrad or grad school
         DC                                              -0.030       -0.036            -0.095       -0.073
                                                        (0.111)      (0.112)           (0.112)      (0.110)
          Maryland or Virginia                           -0.068       -0.054            -0.099       -0.081
                                                        (0.094)      (0.095)           (0.094)      (0.093)
        PCK written test (std)                          0.144+       0.148+              0.123        0.132
                                                        (0.081)      (0.081)           (0.081)      (0.081)
        Interview (std)                                 0.202**      0.207**           0.167*       0.183**
                                                        (0.067)      (0.068)           (0.069)      (0.068)
        Audition (std)                                  0.157+       0.149+              0.106        0.108
                                                        (0.084)      (0.083)           (0.083)      (0.085)
        Predicted probability of job offer                                             2.298*        -0.315
                                                                                       (1.092)      (0.918)
        Predicted probability of job offer ^ 2                                          -1.847        1.019
                                                                                       (1.223)      (1.021)
        Recommended-pool by year FE                                      √
        F-statistics excluded instruments                                               23.62         4.43

Note: Estimates from least squares regressions with 1,581 teacher-by-year observations, and 917 unique teachers.
The dependent variable is our standardized job performance factor from IMPACT evaluation component scores.
Columns 1 and 2 show estimates like in Table 7 Columns 4 and 5 but restricted to the 2012 and 2013 cohorts.
Columns 3 and 4 are estimated just as Column 1 is, except that we add a quadratic function of the predicted
probability of hire. The predicted probability of hire is estimated using the specification reported in Table 5 Column
3 (all characteristic and score regressors and subject-applied by year fixed effects, but no recommended-pool by year
fixed effects) but with additional instruments added as regressors. The hiring prediction regressions include 7,442
observations.
   For the estimates reported above in Column 3, the instruments in the hire equation are four indicator variables: (i)
Applicants in any year who scored above the stage 4 cut-score designated by DCPS as the threshold for the

                                                         70
recommended pool. (ii) Applicants in 2011 who scored above the stage 3 cut-score; we assume these applicants
were also placed in the recommended pool as discussed in the text. (iii) Applicants in 2011 who scored below the
stage 2 cut-score but were nevertheless randomly selected to move on to stage 3. (iv) Applicants in 2011 who
applied in the first weeks of the recruitment season. All of these early applicants were allowed to move on to stage 3
regardless of their scores in stage 2 or 1.
   For the estimates in Column 4, the added instruments include five indicator variables: (i)-(iii) Applicants in any
year who scored above the cut-score in stage 2, 3, and 4 respectively. And again for 2011 (iv) applicants randomly
selected to advance or (v) early applicants automatically advanced. We also allow the slope on each stage score to
be different above and below the stage cut-score, and include fixed effects for the highest stage an applicant was
invited to complete. All these added coefficients are allowed to vary by year.
Clustered (teacher) standard errors in parentheses.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                         71
                    Appendix Table A6—Job performance by school characteristics
                                                                     Middle &           School % FRL
                                                    Elementary         high              <         ≥
                                                      schools         schools          median median
                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)       (4)
            Years prior experience
             1 to 2                               0.042                0.213           -0.027     0.209+
                                                (0.106)               (0.147)         (0.122)     (0.111)
              3 to 5                              0.024               0.374*            0.112     0.214+
                                                (0.120)               (0.146)         (0.129)     (0.126)
              6 to 10                            -0.005                0.232            0.067       0.152
                                                (0.113)               (0.144)         (0.128)     (0.117)
              11 or more                         -0.206                0.149           -0.246       0.075
                                                (0.148)               (0.185)         (0.171)     (0.142)
            Undergrad GPA (std)                0.144**                0.180**         0.199**     0.162**
                                                (0.046)               (0.055)         (0.053)     (0.048)
            SAT math+verbal (std)                 0.001                0.061            0.072      -0.038
                                                (0.051)               (0.065)         (0.058)     (0.052)
            Barron's Rank (linear 0-5)         0.106**                0.107*            0.067     0.113**
                                                (0.035)               (0.049)         (0.044)     (0.036)
            Master's degree or higher             0.111                0.145            0.111       0.081
                                                (0.080)               (0.111)         (0.097)     (0.082)
            Location of undergrad or grad school
              DC                                 -0.065                 0.011           0.092      -0.087
                                                (0.110)               (0.152)         (0.129)     (0.119)
              Maryland or Virginia               -0.093                -0.102          -0.026      -0.097
                                                (0.091)               (0.124)         (0.102)     (0.096)
            PCK written test (std)             0.247**                  0.115           0.098     0.214**
                                                (0.080)               (0.077)         (0.072)     (0.079)
            Interview (std)                    0.264**                0.287**         0.292**     0.277**
                                                (0.068)               (0.076)         (0.079)     (0.069)
            Audition (std)                        0.087               0.266+            0.031     0.196+
                                                (0.077)               (0.139)         (0.078)     (0.104)
            Adjusted R-squared                    0.171                 0.147           0.148       0.175
            Number of observations                 948                   601             741         816
            Number of teachers                     570                   328             413         494

Note: Estimates from least squares regressions where the dependent variable is job performance measured by our
standardized IMPACT performance measure. Each specification includes year-by-subject-taught fixed effects,
indicators for second year in the district and third year in the district, and recommended-pool by year fixed effects.
The recommended-pool by year FE include four mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who reach the
recommended pool in 2013, (ii) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2012, (iii) applicants who pass the
audition in 2011, and (iv) applicants who pass the interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text for more
details). The left out category is all other applicants. When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set the value
to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone missing that covariate. Clustered (teacher) standard errors in
parentheses.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                          72
                         Appendix Table A7—Components of job performance
                                       TLF class observation
                                                     Master
                                      Principal        Ed.               CP            CSC            TAS
                                         (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)            (5)
      Years prior experience
       1 to 2                      0.207**             0.176*          -0.009         -0.002         0.029
                                   (0.080)             (0.073)        (0.027)        (0.084)        (0.091)
        3 to 5                     0.282**             0.244**         -0.015          0.033         0.066
                                   (0.083)             (0.076)        (0.028)        (0.089)        (0.090)
        6 to 10                     0.182*              0.132          -0.048         -0.033         0.025
                                   (0.087)             (0.083)        (0.029)        (0.089)        (0.089)
        11 or more                   0.014              0.004          -0.002        -0.189+        -0.239*
                                   (0.110)             (0.095)        (0.035)        (0.110)        (0.117)
      Undergrad GPA (std)          0.130**             0.134**        0.051**        0.164**        0.109**
                                   (0.033)             (0.031)        (0.012)        (0.038)        (0.036)
      SAT math+verbal (std)         -0.008              0.011           0.005          0.006         0.036
                                   (0.036)             (0.036)        (0.012)        (0.041)        (0.038)
      Barron's Rank (linear 0-5)   0.088**             0.099**        0.028**        0.083**         0.035
                                   (0.026)             (0.025)        (0.009)        (0.028)        (0.029)
      Master's degree or higher      0.033              0.001           0.012         0.153*         0.032
                                   (0.059)             (0.055)        (0.021)        (0.065)        (0.064)
      Location of undergrad or grad school
        DC                           0.088               0.009          -0.039        -0.077          0.042
                                   (0.082)             (0.077)         (0.028)       (0.089)        (0.092)
        Maryland or Virginia        -0.043              -0.021          -0.027        -0.101          0.031
                                   (0.068)             (0.063)         (0.023)       (0.072)        (0.071)
      PCK written test (std)       0.149**               0.055           0.024       0.185**        0.119*
                                   (0.050)             (0.045)         (0.015)       (0.049)        (0.049)
      Interview (std)              0.274**             0.213**         0.040*        0.229**        0.170**
                                   (0.047)             (0.045)         (0.018)       (0.052)        (0.056)
      Audition (std)                 0.095               0.080         0.050*        0.135*          -0.052
                                   (0.062)             (0.054)         (0.021)       (0.066)        (0.069)

Note: Estimates from least squares regressions with 1,581 observations and 917 teachers. The dependent variables
are indicated in the column headers. Each column reports estimates from a single regression. Each specification
includes year-by-subject-taught fixed effects, recommended-pool by year fixed effects, and indicators for second
year in the district and third year in the district. The recommended-pool by year FE include four mutually exclusive
indicators: (i) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2013, (ii) applicants who reach the recommended pool
in 2012, (iii) applicants who pass the audition in 2011, and (iv) applicants who pass the interview but not the
audition in 2011 (see the text for more details). The left out category is all other applicants. When a covariate is
missing for an observation, we set the value to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone missing that covariate.
Clustered (teacher) standard errors in parentheses.
+ indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                        73
                      Appendix Table A8—Components of job performance for IVA sample
                                              TLF class
                                             observation                                                       Value-added
                             Overall      Princi-     Master
                             Perform.       pal       Educ.          CP        CSC         TAS       Average      Math       Reading
                                (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
Years prior experience
 1 to 2                       0.305       0.270       0.273       0.063       0.100       0.276       0.307       0.293       -0.000
                             (0.221)     (0.214)     (0.214)     (0.081)     (0.228)     (0.266)     (0.213)     (0.280)     (0.289)
  3 to 5                      0.581*     0.644**     0.445*       0.145       0.300       0.340      0.501*       0.595        0.173
                             (0.228)     (0.203)     (0.206)     (0.088)     (0.233)     (0.263)     (0.223)     (0.456)     (0.266)
  6 to 10                     0.309       0.267       0.166       -0.090      0.220       0.248      0.355+      0.532*        0.094
                             (0.199)     (0.210)     (0.215)     (0.076)     (0.197)     (0.246)     (0.189)     (0.235)     (0.261)
  11 or more                  0.247       0.181       0.215       0.021       0.160       -0.279     0.672**     0.655*      0.643*
                             (0.266)     (0.307)     (0.274)     (0.104)     (0.257)     (0.307)     (0.240)     (0.309)     (0.283)
Undergrad GPA (std)           0.097       0.047       0.073       0.048       0.107       0.096       -0.124      -0.061      -0.170
                             (0.081)     (0.074)     (0.072)     (0.037)     (0.087)     (0.098)     (0.080)     (0.111)     (0.109)
SAT math+verbal (std)         -0.010      -0.064      -0.083      -0.021      -0.044      0.159       0.115       0.076        0.090
                             (0.090)     (0.086)     (0.092)     (0.036)     (0.091)     (0.111)     (0.099)     (0.126)     (0.118)
Barron's rank (linear 0-5)   0.174**      0.080      0.180**      0.035      0.159**      0.023       0.060      0.188*        0.006
                             (0.058)     (0.058)     (0.056)     (0.027)     (0.061)     (0.077)     (0.062)     (0.085)     (0.083)
Master's degree or higher     0.180       0.184       0.136       0.064       0.099       -0.236     0.455**     0.448+      0.575**
                             (0.154)     (0.149)     (0.142)     (0.062)     (0.162)     (0.178)     (0.148)     (0.232)     (0.192)
Location of undergrad or grad school
  DC                         -0.340+      -0.109      -0.322     -0.180*      -0.213      -0.383      -0.189      0.055       -0.319
                             (0.183)     (0.190)     (0.206)     (0.082)     (0.183)     (0.241)     (0.179)     (0.257)     (0.239)
  Maryland or Virginia        0.097       0.007       0.122       -0.004      0.097       0.009       0.109       -0.074       0.238
                             (0.162)     (0.157)     (0.140)     (0.071)     (0.163)     (0.173)     (0.164)     (0.272)     (0.201)
PCK written test (std)       0.188+       0.141       0.037       0.047      0.182+       0.073       0.072      0.241+        0.008
                             (0.096)     (0.104)     (0.097)     (0.036)     (0.095)     (0.101)     (0.102)     (0.137)     (0.125)
Interview (std)              0.393**     0.454**     0.411**      0.114*     0.233*      0.237+       -0.046      0.157       -0.119
                             (0.109)     (0.101)     (0.102)     (0.046)     (0.118)     (0.124)     (0.091)     (0.147)     (0.115)
Audition (std)                -0.092      -0.113      0.115       -0.002      0.033       -0.234     -0.212+      -0.201      -0.171
                             (0.154)     (0.159)     (0.141)     (0.051)     (0.154)     (0.159)     (0.125)     (0.169)     (0.164)
Teacher-year observations      286         286         286         286         286         286         286         157          210
Teacher observations           195         195         195         195         195         195         195         108          148

      Note: Estimates from least squares regressions. The dependent variables are indicated in the column headers. Each
      column reports estimates from a single regression. Each specification includes year-by-subject-taught fixed effects,
      recommended-pool by year fixed effects, and indicators for second year in the district and third year in the district.
      The recommended-pool by year FE include four mutually exclusive indicators: (i) applicants who reach the
      recommended pool in 2013, (ii) applicants who reach the recommended pool in 2012, (iii) applicants who pass the
      audition in 2011, and (iv) applicants who pass the interview but not the audition in 2011 (see the text for more
      details). The left out category is all other applicants. When a covariate is missing for an observation, we set the value
      to zero and include an indicator = 1 for anyone missing that covariate. Clustered (teacher) standard errors in
      parentheses.
      + indicates p < 0.10, * 0.05, and ** 0.01




                                                                74
