NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNIVERSITY INNOVATION AND THE PROFESSOR'S PRIVILEGE
Hans K. Hvide
Benjamin F. Jones
Working Paper 22057
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22057

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

We thank seminar participants at Bergen, Carlos III, Duke, Haugesund, Harvard, MIT, Oslo,
Stavanger, and Trondheim (NTNU), conference participants at ZEW, HEC, and NBER, Jin Li,
Michael Powell, and our discussants Andy Toole, Serguey Braguinsky, and Fiona Murray for
helpful comments. We are grateful to the Nordic Institute for Studies in Innovation, Research and
Education, to Bjarne Kvam and the Norwegian Patent Bureau, and Stefano Breschi for supplying
data. Tom Meling and Linyi Zhang provided excellent research assistance. This research has been
supported by the ESRC, grant no RES-000-22-2080. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Hans K. Hvide and Benjamin F. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

University Innovation and the Professor's Privilege
Hans K. Hvide and Benjamin F. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 22057
March 2016
JEL No. L26,O31
ABSTRACT
National policies take varied approaches to encouraging university-based innovation. This paper
studies a natural experiment: the end of the “professor’s privilege” in Norway, where university
researchers previously enjoyed full rights to their innovations. Upon the reform, Norway moved
toward the typical U.S. model, where the university holds majority rights. Using comprehensive
data on Norwegian workers, firms, and patents, we find a 50% decline in both entrepreneurship
and patenting rates by university researchers after the reform. Quality measures for university
start-ups and patents also decline. Applications to literatures on university technology transfer,
innovation incentives, and taxes and entrepreneurship are considered.

Hans K. Hvide
Solvberget 12
5038 Bergen
Norway
hans.hvide@econ.uib.no
Benjamin F. Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Management and Strategy
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu

I.

Introduction

University researchers can create valuable commercial innovations. Standing at the frontier of
knowledge, university researchers may start successful high-technology companies (e.g.,
Genentech and Google) and create valuable intellectual property (e.g., the Hepatitis B vaccine
and the pain medication Lyrica).1 Given these roles, university patenting and entrepreneurship
have become subjects of substantial public interest and an expansive research literature, as
reviewed below.
This paper studies a large shock to university innovation policy. The setting is Norway, which in
2003 ended the “professor’s privilege,” by which university researchers had previously enjoyed
full rights to new business ventures and intellectual property they created. The new policy
transferred two-thirds of these rights to the universities themselves, creating a policy regime like
that which typically prevails in the United States and many other countries today. In addition to
the policy experiment, Norway also provides unusual data opportunities. Registry data allows us
to identify all start-ups in the economy, including those founded by university researchers. We
can also link university researchers to their patents. We are thus able to study the reform’s
effects on both new venture and patenting channels.
Inspired partly by a belief that U.S. universities are more successful at commercial innovation
(Mowery and Sampat 2005, Lissoni et al. 2008), many European countries have enacted laws in
the last 15 years that substantially altered the rights to university-based innovations. In
Germany, Austria, Denmark, Finland, and Norway, new laws ended the so-called “professor’s
privilege”. Recognizing potential complementarities between institution-level and researcherlevel investments, the new laws sought to enhance university incentives to support
commercialization activity, including through the establishment of technology transfer offices
(TTOs). However, while these reforms may have encouraged university-level investment, they
1

For example, University of California San Francisco Professor Herbert Boyer founded Genentech to bring genetic
engineering into the marketplace, and Stanford graduate students Sergey Brin and Larry Page founded Google and
revolutionized Internet search. In the patenting sphere, University of California researchers produced the Hepatitis
B vaccine, and Northwestern University Professor Richard Silverman created the compound for a pain medication,
Lyrica, which was Pfizer’s top-selling drug in 2014, with global sales of $5 billion. U.S. universities and research
institutions were granted over 6,000 patents and executed over 5,000 licenses in fiscal year 2012, according to a
recent survey (AUTM 2015).

2

also sharply increased the effective tax rate on university-based innovators, leaving the effect of
such reforms theoretically ambiguous. Broadly, these national systems moved from an
environment where university researchers had full property rights to a system that looks much
like the U.S. system today (since the 1980 U.S. Bayh-Dole Act), where the innovator typically
holds a minority of the rights (often one-third) and the university holds the remainder (Jensen
and Thursby 2001, Lach and Schankerman 2008).
To study the end of the professor’s privilege, we leverage several datasets that allow us to
examine new venture and patenting activity for all university researchers in Norway. Registry
datasets provide detailed information about all Norwegian workers and firms, while also linking
specific individuals to specific firms. We are thus able to identify all new firms in Norway and
all new firms started by university employees. The data further provides far-reaching
information about all Norwegian adults, including educational attainment, degree type, age,
income, wealth, and family status, allowing us to compare the behavior of those directly affected
by the policy shock (i.e., university employees) with various control samples (e.g., all Norwegian
individuals, and various subsets with increasingly similar demographic characteristics to the
university employees). We separately collect all patents issued in Norway and compare
patenting by university-based researchers with other Norwegian inventors. Finally, we
integrated all publications in the Web of Science by Norway-based researchers to examine
publication outcomes.
Our primary empirical finding is that the shift in rights from researcher to university led to an
approximate 50% drop in the rate of start-ups by university researchers. This drop appears (1) in
a simple pre-post analysis of university start-up rates, (2) when compared to background rates of
start-ups in Norway, and (3) when analyzed at the level of the individual Norwegian citizen,
controlling for fixed and time-varying individual-level characteristics. We further find that
university researchers substantially curtailed their patenting after the reform, with patent rates
falling by similar magnitudes as seen with start-ups. In addition to these effects on the quantity
of innovative output, we find evidence for decreased quality of both start-ups and patents, where
university start-ups exhibit less growth and university patents receive fewer citations after the
reform, compared to controls. Overall, the reform appeared to have the opposite effect as
intended.
3

Primarily, this study informs the literature on university commercialization policy. The end of
the professor’s privilege constitutes a major policy shift that was enacted in Norway and
mirrored in several other European countries. The study thus informs the policy’s effects in
Norway, with potential additional applications to similar reforms and ex-post policy regimes
more generally. Notably, the post-reform regime is similar to policies that prevail in the U.S.
today, among many other countries. The central finding is that the policy change in Norway
effectively halved measured rates of innovation.
The analysis may also provide insight for other literatures. Noting that the experiment sharply
changed the allocation of rights between researchers and the university, the findings can inform
the role of rights allocations in knowledge production. How to balance the allocation of rights
between investing parties is a classic question in economics that also features in canonical
theories of innovation (Holmstrom 1982, Grossman and Hart 1986, Aghion and Tirole 1994,
Green and Scotchmer 1995, Hellmann 2007). The natural experiment in this paper can be seen
as supporting the idea that innovation rights matter, even in universities, where the norms of
science might otherwise suggest greater willingness to put output in the public domain (Merton
1973). Related, noting that the experiment acts, in part, to increase the effective tax rate on
individual university researchers, the policy change may also help inform the link between tax
rates and entrepreneurial activity for an important class of high-skilled workers. The literature
on taxes and entrepreneurship has almost exclusively examined sole-proprietors and selfemployed workers (e.g., Gentry and Hubbard 2000), who are typically quite different from the
growth-creating innovators that motivate many studies of entrepreneurship (Glaeser 2007,
Levine and Rubinstein 2015). The experiment in this paper considers a class of innovators who
work at the frontier of science and technology, face in part a large increase in their effective tax
rate, and subsequently substantially curtail their entrepreneurial activity.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II details the institutional setting, reviews relevant
literature, and discusses theoretical advantages and problems that can emerge when increasing
university rights at the expense of researcher rights. Section III introduces the data and

4

identification strategy. Section IV presents the core results of the paper. Section V discusses
these findings, including their relevance to broader settings, and Section VI concludes.2
II.

University-Based Innovation

To frame our research questions and the potential effects of the policy reform, we review here
the institutional setting of university-based innovation, including the “professor’s privilege” in
numerous European countries and the details of the Norwegian policy reform. We then consider
core conceptual frameworks that can clarify tradeoffs that arise when balancing rights between
the researcher and the university.
A. Institutions
The long-standing upward trend in patenting and new venture activity among U.S. universities
has triggered an enormous literature investigating university innovation and entrepreneurship.
Scholars have seen universities as increasingly important wellsprings of innovative ideas, and
researchers have investigated the legal systems, incentive conditions, organizational attributes,
technology areas, and local business environment among other features that may help explain the
relative success of various universities in commercializing innovations both along patenting and
new venture channels (see, e.g., Lockett et al. 2005, Rothaermel et al. 2007, Grimaldi et al. 2011,
National Academy of Sciences 2010). A major thrust of this research (and associated policy
debate) takes the goal of university-based innovation as given and seeks to understand the
features that influence its success.3

2

In addition, Appendix I presents a simple model to further clarify motivations and pitfalls when giving majority
rights to the university at the expense of the individual researcher. Appendix II considers additional empirical
findings, studying the publication behavior of university researchers and how this changes with the reform.
3
Separately, many scholars have addressed whether universities should engage in commercial innovation activity
given potential tradeoffs with other activities, especially basic research (e.g., Krimsky 2003, Washburn 2008,
National Academy of Sciences 2010). These potential tradeoffs bear on a complete assessment of the welfare
consequences of commercialization policy. In prior literature, however, individual-level publishing and patenting
appear positively rather than negatively correlated (e.g., Fabrizio and Di Minin 2008, Azoulay et al. 2007, Buenstorf
2009) which suggests that basic research and invention may be complements rather than substitutes. This finding is
consistent with conceptualizations of scientific progress based on Pasteur’s Quadrant (Stokes 1997), so that the
tradeoffs between research and invention may not be so acute. In Appendix II, we examine publications in the
context of our data and confirm a positive correlation between patenting and publications at the individual level. We
further examine publication output within individual researchers, harnessing the reform as a shock to patenting
incentives, and find no evidence that publications and patents are substitute activities. See Appendix II.

5

The 1980 Bayh-Dole Act is a signal event for researchers and policymakers in this space. The
law eliminated U.S. government claims to university-based innovation, giving U.S. universities
the rights to innovative ideas that were federally funded. Studies have since examined the
potential effects of Bayh-Dole on patent rates (e.g., Mowery et al. 2001), patent quality (e.g.,
Henderson et al. 1998), and entrepreneurship (e.g., Shane 2004) among other issues.
Interestingly, while U.S. university patenting rates were approximately five times larger in 1999
than in 1980, there is no evidence that Bayh-Dole caused a structural break in the pre-existing
trend (Mowery and Sampat 2005).
The acceleration of patenting and licensing from U.S. universities eventually caught the attention
of European policymakers, who concluded that European universities lagged their U.S.
counterparts in commercialization outcomes (Geuna and Rossi 2011). European policymakers
associated Bayh-Dole with high rates of university-based innovation and sought to emulate
Bayh-Dole (Mowery and Sampat 2005, Lissoni et al. 2008). Thus, in the early 2000s, numerous
European countries passed laws that attempted to encourage universities’ interest and success in
commercialization. New legislation was implemented in several countries (Germany, Austria,
Denmark, Finland and Norway) by ending the “professor’s privilege”. Under the professor’s
privilege (i.e., prior to the reform), a university researcher retained blanket rights to his or her
invention. The new policies shifted substantial rights to the university. Notably, although policy
makers in Europe were inspired by the post-Bayh-Dole Act environment in the U.S., the policy
changes around the professor’s privilege were quite different from the Bayh-Dole Act. Instead
of transferring rights away from the government, this transfer came from the researchers
themselves. The end result was that these European countries obtained a legislative environment
similar to that in the U.S. post Bayh-Dole.
In Norway, the professor’s privilege (laererunntaket in Norwegian) was abolished by unanimous
Parliament decision in June 2002, and made effective for all public higher education institutions
from January 1, 2003.4 The new law gave the university the formal ownership rights to the
commercialization of research (including startups and patents). Each Norwegian university also

4

The non-public higher education sector is very small in Norway. The law change is named Proposition No. 67 of
the Odelsting (2001–2002). A full transcript of the Parliamentary session leading to Proposition 67 is available at
https://www.stortinget.no/globalassets/pdf/referater/odelstinget/2002-2003/o021107.pdf.

6

formally established a Technology Transfer Office (TTO).5 After the law change, Norwegian
universities shared one third of the net income with the researcher, so in effect the policy change
reduced the inventor’s pre-tax expected income by two thirds.6 Given income taxes in Norway,
this change represents an approximately 33 percentage point increase in the effective tax rate the
researcher faces when forming new ventures or creating patentable inventions.7 In the case of
patents, university bylaws obligate the university to claim its property rights within six months
after the researcher discloses the invention. Should the university decide not to use its option, the
rights are returned to the inventor.
The premise behind the policy change was to encourage universities to make investments that
support patenting and licensing by their researchers and labs, so that this property rights transfer
would improve commercialization outcomes on net (Czarnitzki et al. 2011). However, as
discussed in Section II.A, empirical evidence that could motivate this view was lacking (Lissoni
et al. 2008). Moreover, the policy arguments – and literature on the Bayh-Dole Act more
generally – tend to focus on university-owned IP as the mode of technology transfer from
universities. This focus leaves aside the potential for university academics to start companies,
rather than license, which is a primary commercialization alternative (e.g. Gans and Stern 2003).
As we will show, both patenting and this “other” commercialization mode – new ventures –
appear to have been severely affected by the end of the “professor’s privilege”.8

5

These TTOs were established in 2003, although they were often based on precursor technology offices that had
been financed by the Norwegian Research Council since 1996. By 2005, the TTO offices typically had
approximately ten employees, were led by a director, and were financed partially by the university itself, partially by
the Norwegian Research Council (FORNY program), and partially by the Ministry of Education (Rasmussen et al.
2006).
6
While Germany included a clause in the new law that the university must share 1/3 of net revenues with the
researcher, in Norway this norm was not formally established in the law per se but rather was called for by the
parliamentary committee chairman, who stated explicitly at the time the law was passed that a one-third split with
the researcher was expected. This norm was then further formally established in university bylaws later in the
decade.
7
The marginal tax rate in Norway is approximately 50% on both labor and business income, so that pre-reform 100
kroner in commercialization profits would have net value of about 50 kroner for the researcher. Post-reform the net
value would be one-third, i.e., 16.7 kroner, so that the post-reform effective tax rate would be 83%. The increase in
effective tax rate is thus approximately 33 percentage points.
8
Interestingly, Lissoni et al. (2008) have shown that, in contrast to the U.S. experience where 69% of universitybased inventions are assigned to universities, the great majority of university-based inventions in France, Italy, and
Sweden are actually assigned to private firms. While it is not known whether these firms are new ventures, the
Lissoni et al. study raises further questions about the empirical motivation for the European policy reforms. Once
these privately-owned patents are accounted for, university researchers in these three European countries (especially
Sweden) show only modestly lower patenting rates than U.S. universities, which undercuts the empirical view that
European universities were laggards in commercialization activities in the first place.

7

B. Theoretical Perspectives
Several theoretical perspectives could be used to motivate the professor’s privilege reform (and,
by extension, motivate systems like those typically found in the U.S. and many other countries
today). However, theory also suggests substantial caution. This section reviews core
perspectives in the economics of innovation to better understand the motivations and pitfalls
associated with the policy change. The richness of these theories suggests the importance of
empirical analysis. The empirical analysis in turn can help limit the set of relevant mechanisms,
as we will further discuss in Section V.
Fundamentally, the professor’s privilege reform creates a large shift in the allocation of rights,
and core theoretical ideas in the economics of innovation engage these issues (Aghion and Tirole
1994, Green and Scotchmer 1995, Scotchmer 2004, Hellman 2007). Aghion and Tirole (1994)
provide canonical analysis of innovation contexts where different agents bear private costs but
share in future payoffs and emphasize the challenge in effectively balancing incentives across
investing parties. A broad intuition in these theories is that rights should be balanced toward the
party whose investment matters more.9
A natural mapping to the university-based innovation context is the rights allocation between the
researcher and the research institution, where both may make separate investments in pursuit of a
commercial outcome. Investments by the individual researcher, as the source of the ideas,
appear critical. The university may also play important roles by supporting infrastructure for
applied research, searching for commercializable ideas within university laboratories, facilitating
patent applications, managing licensing, and otherwise investing to promote successful
commercial outcomes (e.g., Rothaermel et al. 2007). For instance, noting potentially substantial
costs in time and money to achieve a patent (e.g., Hall 2007, Gans et al. 2008), it can be natural
for such costs to limit entry, and university researchers report that they do (e.g., Baldini 2009).
Should the establishment of a TTO reduce entry costs (e.g., via scale advantages in providing
commercialization services), it is possible that the professor’s privilege reform could encourage
more university technology transfer. Universities and their TTOs may also act as useful
9

Other things equal, giving a greater share of the surplus to the party whose investment affects the surplus more will
encourage more surplus creation. It is possible to undo this intuition, however, if a particular agent’s effort responds
relatively weakly to their share (for example, if a party faces a multitasking problem and would not devote effort to
creating this particular joint surplus even if given substantial rights to it).

8

intermediaries in markets for technology and improve the quality of innovative outcomes (e.g.,
Macho-Stadler et al. 2007).
The professor’s privilege reform most directly acts to reallocate income rights. To the extent that
investments by both parties matter, giving all income rights to the professor (as in the professor’s
privilege) may reduce university-based innovation compared to a policy with more balanced rent
sharing.10 Moreover, one can construct examples where university-based innovation is
maximized when the university receives two-thirds of the income and the researcher receives
one-third – as in the more typical regime. Appendix I provides a formal model and example. An
interesting insight is that strengthening the university’s income share (at the expense of the
researcher’s share) can actually cause the researcher to invest more. This follows when the
university’s investment raises the marginal product of the researcher investment (i.e., the
investments are complements), so that the researcher finds investment more worthwhile even
though the researcher’s share of the innovation income has declined.
This income rights reasoning, as a potential a priori justification for the reform, can also point
out potential pitfalls. In particular, one may be skeptical about the value of university-level
investments. Some scholars argue that university technology transfer offices (TTOs) have poor
capabilities or inappropriate incentives and suggest reallocating rights toward the faculty in
pursuit of greater technology transfer (Litan et al. 2007, Kenney and Patton 2009). To the extent
that the complementary investments by the university are not especially important, giving the
university income rights may reduce rather promote innovation (see also Appendix I). In
practice, the appropriate income rights allocation in the university context remains unknown.
Looking more closely at researcher interests, the professor’s privilege reform might also be
motivated in a belief that university researchers may care relatively little about income, so that
lessened income rights would have little effect on researcher’s entrepreneurial or inventive
effort. For example, Mertonian norms of science, including classic ideas of communalism and
disinterestedness that emphasize the placement of research outputs in the public domain (Merton
1973), may suggest relatively weak links between personal financial reward and effort in the
10

Incentive mechanisms limited to sharing the joint surplus are known to be an imperfect instrument for achieving
first-best effort (Holmstrom 1982). Thus neither the professor’s privilege nor the post-reform regime with a onethird / two-third split would produce first-best investment. At the same time, second-best outcomes will typically
depend on a careful balance of income rights across the investing parties.

9

university setting. Evidence suggests that university-based researchers on average value income
relatively less than industrial researchers (Stern 2004), and entrepreneurs in general appear to
have strong tastes for autonomy and other motivational characteristics distinct from income (e.g.,
Evans and Leighton 1989, Hamilton 2000, Shane et al. 2003). Moreover, studies of university
entrepreneurs further suggest the importance of motivations beyond income and distinct traits
from other university researchers (Roach and Sauermann 2012). The extent to which universitybased innovators, or high-skill innovators more generally, react to effective tax rates appears
unknown.
Beyond changing income shares, the professor’s privilege reform also affected control rights,
noting that the university gained decision-making authority over knowledge-related assets. Such
control rights may matter to the extent that university and researcher interests are not aligned and
contracts are incomplete. As one example, the researcher might prefer her patented invention to
be used as widely as possible, while the university may prefer monopoly pricing. Beyond issues
of how the surplus is ultimately split, disagreement may result in Williamsonian haggling costs
that further destroy surplus. Anticipation of such haggling may in turn dissuade effort.
While theories emphasizing rights allocations in the economics of innovation are highly
influential, empirical studies examining these theories remain relatively few (Lerner & Merges
1998; Lach and Schankerman 2008, Lerner & Malmendier 2010). Coupling the “professor’s
privilege” reform with the richness of Norwegian data provides a context for examining the
potential importance of rights allocations, leveraging a large change in the rights regime.
Overall, integrating across these theoretical perspectives, there are many contending ways in
which the professor’s privilege reform might affect university-based innovation. The actual
effects are very much an empirical question, which we turn to next.
III.

Data and Identification

In this section, we describe the data sets and the econometric methods we employ.
A. Data
The startup analysis draws on several Norwegian register databases. The socio-demographic
data, compiled by Statistics Norway, covers the Norwegian adult population and consists of
10

yearly records of workplace ID in addition to education level, gender, income, wealth, marital
status, and many other variables. We identify university employees through their workplace ID
and researchers as individuals with a PhD degree. These university-employed PhDs are the
‘treatment group’ in our analyses.
The startup data, collected from the government registry “Bronnoysundregisteret”, covers the
population of incorporated companies started in Norway between 2000 and 2007, and provides
total equity, owner ID, and ownership shares at the incorporation date. The owner ID, which is
available for any individual who owns at least 10% of the company, can be matched to the
sociodemographic data, and in this manner we identify new firms started up by university
researchers as well as the sociodemographic characteristics of entrepreneurs more generally.
The data further contains anonymous ID numbers for the startups, which allows us to match at
firm level with longitudinal, yearly, accounting data collected from Dun & Bradstreet. The
accounting data runs through 2012; it identifies which sector the startup operates in and contains
annual measures of startup performance such as sales, profits and employees.11
The patenting analysis is based on separate data collected from several sources. We first
obtained a list of the names of university-sector researchers for the period 1995-2010 from the
Nordic Institute for Studies in Innovation, Research and Education (NIFU).12 There are 11,905
unique university researchers in this data. In addition to full names, this dataset contains
sociodemograhic information such as gender, age, and PhD type, as well as the specific
university employer. From the Norwegian Patent Office (NPO) we obtained a list of all
Norwegian patents issued to inventors in Norway from 1990-2014.13 We then matched the
names from NIFU with the inventor names in the patent data to determine which patents had
university inventors. These matches are based on employment at the university at the time of the
11

Note that we focus on incorporated companies, which does not include self-employment. Levine and Rubinstein
(2015) show in the U.S. context that incorporation is an important indicator for locating growth-creating innovators
and organizations, while self-employment is misleading for capturing such entrepreneurial firms. As in other
industrialized countries, starting an incorporated company in Norway carries tax benefits relative to selfemployment (e.g., write-offs for expenses such as home office, company car, and computer equipment). With the
exception of very small projects, incorporation is more tax efficient than self-employment status. The formal capital
requirement for registering an incorporated company was NOK 100,000 (EUR 13,000) during the study period.
Incorporated companies are required to have an external auditor certify annual accounting statements submitted to
tax authorities.
12
The NIFU list of university researchers is biannual for 1995-2006 and annual for 2007-2010.
13
These Norwegian patents include patents that were granted by the European Patent Office and then waived in by
the Norwegian Patent Office.

11

patent application. The matching procedure uses full first names and surnames; robustness
checks to account for potential noise in name-matching for the patent data are included below.
We further matched all the NPO patents with the European Patent Office’s PATSTAT database,
to determine the number of citations each Norwegian patent receives.14
Table 1A provides summary statistics for start-up firms in Norway between 2000 and 2007. In
total there were 48,844 startups and 128 of these were started up by individuals with PhDs
employed at a university. We define a university startup as a newly incorporated company
where at least one of the initial owners is a full-time university employee with a PhD. By
comparison, there were 452 start-ups by individuals with PhDs who were not employed at
universities. Overall, we see that university PhD start-ups were substantially more likely to
survive than companies started by the broader background population, while survival among
non-university PhD startups is more similar.15 University PhD startups tend to be somewhat
smaller in employees, sales, and profits than non-university start-ups, with a closer match to nonuniversity PhD startups.16 Comparing the university PhD start-ups and non-university PhD
startups, t-tests indicate that differences in means are not statistically significant except for
profits at 5 years.17 Looking at median outcomes, the firms at five years tend to be very small.
The 75th percentile company in each category features 1-3 employees while sales reach 1.2-3.3
million NOK, depending on the population, while the 95th percentile companies are substantially
larger, with 5-12 employees and sales of 6.9-16.4 million NOK across categories. Overall, we
see greater performance similarity among start-ups by PhDs than with start-ups in the
background population. These findings also indicate the relative rarity of substantial
entrepreneurial success, which suggests the low likelihood of substantial returns to starting new
companies.18

14

We are indebted to Stefano Breschi for help in matching the NPO and EPO data.
Non-surviving firms are defined as those that stop reporting profits or whose sales fall below 50 thousand NOK
after their first year.
16
Performance at five years is not conditional on survival. The greater survival but lower average performance is
consistent, for example, with university PhDs relying less on the start-up for income, given their university
employment, and hence being more likely to continue with lower performing firms.
17
These t-tests for differences in sample means find p-values as follows: survival (p=.28), sales (p=.61), employees
(p=.14), and profits (p=.064).
18
See Guzman and Stern (2015a, 2015b) for analysis of the rarity of high-growth entrepreneurship in the U.S. and in
the environs of U.S. universities.
15

12

Table 1B provides summary statistics on entrepreneurs in Norway. On average, university
entrepreneurs are older, more educated, higher income, and more likely to be male and married
than non-university entrepreneurs. Compared to non-university PhD entrepreneurs, the
university entrepreneurs look much more similar. By construction, individuals in both groups
have PhDs. They also have similar average ages (47) when starting companies and similar
marital status (74% married). The income and wealth for the non-university PhDs is somewhat
larger and the non-university PhD entrepreneurs are slightly less likely to be male.19
Table 1C provides summary statistics for patents. We see that 431 university researchers
produced 750 patents over the 1995-2010 period. Although about two-thirds of the university
PhD workforce is male, university inventors are 93% male. The background population of
Norwegian inventors is estimated to be 94% male. The substantial propensity toward male
inventors echoes the similar gender propensity seen in entrepreneurship above. Note that we
otherwise have little information about the demographics of the Norwegian inventors, as the
inventor data (which gives full names) does not link to the Norwegian census data (which uses
anonymized identification numbers).
Based on the Norwegian census data at the end of 2002, there were 3,747 university researchers
in Norway, 8,272 PhDs who worked outside universities, and a total Norwegian workforce of
2.501 million. The PhD workforce expanded more rapidly than the broader Norwegian
workforce over the period from 2000-2007. In particular, the university PhD workforce, nonuniversity PhD workforce, and total Norwegian workforce grew by 65%, 39%, and 7%
respectively.
B. Econometric Approach
Our analyses primarily consider difference-in-difference regressions, using the end of the
professor’s privilege to divide the sample into pre and post periods and comparing start-up and
patenting rates inside the university sector (the treatment group) and outside the university sector
(the control group). We first study panel models of the following form:
19

Two sample t-tests indicates no significant difference for age (p=.83) or marital status (p=.89) while there is a
marginally significant difference for gender (p=.095) and differences for prior year earnings (p=.017) and wealth
(p=.040). The somewhat greater income of the non-university PhDs is consistent with observations elsewhere that
university researchers are paid less than those taking jobs in industry (Stern 2004). In the regression analyses below,
the results are robust to including individual fixed effects as well as time-varying, individual-level controls.

13

(1)
where the dependent variable

is a count of start-ups or patents,

equal to 1 in years after the reform (2003 or later), and

is a dummy variable

is a dummy equal to 1 if the

observation represents universities – i.e. those affected by the end of the “professor’s privilege”.
We start by looking simply at the pre-post difference for university start-up rates and patent
counts, before introducing control groups (start-up and patenting behavior in Norway more
generally) and using the difference-in-difference specification in (1).
When using data at the sector or individual level, we extend the panel model in (1) to incorporate
sector or individual fixed effects ( ) and time fixed effects ( ). In some specifications we will
also incorporate time-varying individual characteristics (

), such as lagged income and wealth.

These difference-in-difference regressions thus generally take the form:20
(2)
In the relevant regression models, we cluster standard errors at the individual level.
IV.

Results

In this section we present the main results of the paper. We consider entrepreneurship in Section
IV.A and patents in Section IV.B.
A. Startups
The Rate of Entrepreneurship
We first consider how the rate of start-ups for university researchers changes after the reform and
then compare it to changes in start-up rates for the background Norwegian population. Figure
1A plots the annual number of university start-ups (red line, left vertical axis) and non-university
startups (blue line, right vertical axis) over the sample period.21 While the non-university startup
rate is approximately constant across years, the university startup rate drops dramatically from
20

Note that the time fixed effects absorb the
term. The sector-level fixed effects do not absorb the
term because treatment status varies within sectors. The individual fixed effects do not in general absorb the
term because individuals may move between university and non-university employment.
21
The vertical axes in Figure 3 and related figures in the paper begin at 0 so that the percentage changes in the data
being compared can be seen visually.

14

the pre-reform (2000-2002) to the post-reform (2003-2007) period. The pre-reform period
averaged 24.7 university start-ups per year, while the post-reform period averaged 10.8
university startups per year, for a drop of 56%.
Figure 1B considers the same data on a per-worker basis for the relevant groups. On average,
0.678% of university researchers started a new firm in a given year prior to the reform, while
0.224% of university researchers started a new firm in a given year after the reform, for a 67%
drop in the per-worker rate. The drop is slightly larger on a per-worker basis (Figure 1B) than on
a count basis (Figure 1A) because the number of university researchers is increasing relatively
rapidly over the period compared to the Norwegian workforce as a whole.
Together, these figures show a sharp drop in entrepreneurship by university researchers that is
coincident with the professor’s privilege reform. By contrast, the start-up rate for the
background population is largely flat, increasing 5.9% comparing the post and pre periods
(Figure 1A) and increasing 2.1% on a per-capita basis (Figure 1B). Thus, the large decline in
start-up rates by university researchers is not seen in the background Norwegian population.
The “visual” differences-in-differences shown in Figure 1 are explored further by regression.
Table 2 presents aggregate analysis, looking at changes in log annual counts per year and log
annual counts per worker. The regressions implement the econometric model (1). Examining
the

coefficient, we see that the drops in both start-up counts and start-up counts

per worker are statistically significant compared to the Norwegian workforce as a whole
(columns (1) and (2)). On net, and consistent with the mean changes seen in Figure 1, we find a
67% decline (i.e., 1-e-1.102) in the start-up rate per worker comparing university PhDs against the
Norwegian workforce. Columns (3) and (4) repeat this analysis using PhDs not employed at
university as the control group. We again see statistically significant declines in startups by
university PhDs, with a 49% decline in start-ups per worker comparing university PhDs against
non-university PhDs.
Table 2 further considers sector-level analysis. This analysis can account for compositional
changes in the sectors of start-up activity that might otherwise influence the results. In this
analysis, the start-up counts are constructed by sector-year for the treatment and control groups,

15

where sector is determined by the 1-digit NACE code.22 Columns (5) and (6) examine the log
start-up count as the dependent variable, and shows broadly similar results using either control
group. Because this approach drops sector-years with zero counts, column (7) repeats the
analysis with a Poisson count model that includes the full set of observations. The difference-indifference drop in university start-up rates is now 45%.
Table 3 considers regression evidence at the individual level, using econometric model (2) and
exploiting data for every individual in the Norwegian workforce. The dependent variable is now
binary, indicating whether a given individual started a company in a given year. We use a linear
probability model, which allows the inclusion of individual fixed effects, with standard errors
clustered by the individual. Non-linear models, such as logit or probit, show similar results.23
Column (1) presents the simplest analysis, with no individual-level controls. Column (2) adds
individual and year fixed effects, and column (3) additionally adds time-varying individual-level
information, including age fixed effects, fixed effects for highest educational degree, marital
status, lagged income, and lagged wealth.24 The latter two specifications allow us to control for
population differences between the treatment and control groups – either via unobservable, fixed
individual level characteristics or several observable and time-varying characteristics – that may
explain individual startup tendencies, including possible compositional changes with time that
might create shifts around the reform year. In practice, we see little change in the
coefficient when adding these controls, which suggests that changes in the socioeconomic
characteristics of the underlying populations in the treatment and control samples do not drive
the results. Given that most Norwegian workers do not start companies, columns (4) and (5)
repeat the individual-level specifications while restricting the sample to those individuals who
started at least one company in the 2000-2007 period. These regressions show that, conditional
on starting a company at some point, university PhD entrepreneurs were far less likely to do so
after the reform compared to other active entrepreneurs in Norway. The magnitude of the effect
22

We use 1-digit sectors because start-up counts for the treatment group are not large enough to allow analysis for
more granular sector categorizations. NACE is the standard industrial classification system in the European Union.
23
We present the linear probability model primarily to allow inclusion of individual fixed effects and to compare
results with and without these fixed effects. Logit or probit specifications are also presented below as alternatives
and typically show more precise results (smaller standard errors). Given the increased precision seen with the nonlinear models, the emphasis on the linear probability model in the exposition also appears conservative. Complete
results using non-linear models are available from the authors upon request.
24
Income and wealth controls for each worker are quadratics in the log of each variable, lagged by one year. Wealth
is provided in the registry data due to the Norwegian tax code, which includes a wealth tax.

16

in these individual-level analyses remains very large. For example, using column (1), the
propensity for university PhDs to start companies declines by 63% after the reform.25
In Table 1A we see that a small minority of Norwegian entrepreneurs have advanced degrees,
especially PhDs. Table 4 thus presents further individual-level analysis, using control samples of
workers who share increasingly similar observable characteristics to university researchers.
Column (1) of Table 4 limits the control group to those with at least a Master’s degree and shows
large declines in startup propensities of university researchers compared to this narrower control
group. The remaining columns of Table 4 limit the control group to those with PhDs, who thus
match the educational attainment of the university researchers. Column (2) suggests a somewhat
less precise effect for this control group using the linear probability model (p=.11) while nonlinear models show greater precision as shown in column (3) (p<.001). Using a propensity score
match to find the single nearest neighbor to each university-employed PhD, with matching based
on age, PhD type, gender, and marital status, the magnitude and statistical significance using the
linear probability model increases, as shown in column (4). This propensity-score sample
provides the most closely matched control group to the university workers. In columns (5) and
(6), the sample is restricted to those who started at least one company in the 2000-2007 period.
Conditional on starting a company at some point, university PhD entrepreneurs were far less
likely to do so after the reform compared to other PhD entrepreneurs in Norway.
While the PhD control group shares close observable similarities to the treatment group, which
may provide identification advantages, this control group might also be entangled to some degree
by the reform. For instance, the university’s rights may extend to recent PhD students, to the
extent their innovations are based on research conducted while at the university. Column (7)
thus drops those with recently received PhDs. We see slightly larger and more precise effects
than before with the linear probability model. More generally, to the extent that startups by nonuniversity PhDs (the control group) could be negatively affected by the reform, either because
PhDs themselves were recently university-based researchers or because they tend to start
companies in partnership with university researchers, the difference-in-difference results

25

To see this magnitude, consider that the mean of the dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is 0.00389 of Table 3.
Looking at column (1), we see that university PhDs, prior to the reform, started companies at a rate 0.00358 higher,
or at about twice the background rate for the average Norwegian worker. After the end of the professor’s privilege,
university PhDs start companies at a rate 0.00450 less than before, which is a 63% decline in their prior rate.

17

comparing university and non-university PhDs would be biased against finding effects, i.e.,
conservatively. One might alternatively imagine sources of non-conservative biases for this
control sample, although the plausibility for the reform positively affecting startups by nonuniversity PhDs may be limited.26 To the extent that the reform affects non-university PhDs in
ways that could lead to biases, one may return toward the analyses using broader control
populations, as featured first above.
We can further investigate underlying margins of response by university researchers. One
question is whether the decline in university entrepreneurship is seen among individuals who
remain employed at the university (the intensive margin) versus a decline driven by
entrepreneurially minded individuals leaving the university (the extensive margin). The latter
case, were it the main story, might suggest substitution in the accounting for university-based
entrepreneurship rather than a decline in entrepreneurship from these individuals.
Table 5 provides evidence to tease out these dimensions. We first consider a balanced panel of
individuals over the 2000-2007 period and define “pre-period university researchers” as those
who were employed at universities from 2000-2002. In columns (1) through (3), we analyze the
start-up rates for these workers, regardless of whether they stay at university, compared against
workers who were not employed at universities over the period of our data. This analysis
includes among the treated any start-up created by a university researcher after the individual
leaves the university. The findings are similar to the earlier findings. Thus the decline in startups in university settings is not offset by university researchers departing the university and
starting new firms.
Table 5 further considers the intensive margin of “stayers”, defined as university researchers who
are employed at the university throughout the 2000-2007 period. The control group consists of
workers who were never employed at universities during the 2000-2007 period. Columns (4)
through (6) show that the “stayers”, who are the large majority of university researchers,
experience a large decline in entrepreneurship. The results for “stayers” are extremely similar to
26

One mechanism might be as follows. To the extent that non-university PhD startups compete with university PhD
startups, the decline in university PhD startups might potentially encourage more entry by the non-university PhD
group. This possibility is hard to test specifically, although the broader evidence and environment does not suggest
it. For example, the non-university PhD startup rate doesn’t go up in absolute terms after the reform, and more
generally university researcher startups are a very small percentage of businesses in any sector, which may limit the
plausibility of such competition effects.

18

the prior results. Thus there is strong evidence of reform effects at the intensive margin: the
decline in entrepreneurship came among a consistent set of university employees, who started
firms at lower rates after the reform than they did before.
The Quality of Entrepreneurship
Beyond the quantity of startups, we can also consider the quality of startups and whether this
changes after the reform. We examine the rate of survival as well as the sales, employees, and
assets of new ventures. Lastly, we consider measures for the technology-orientation of start-up
firms and the patenting behavior of university start-ups.
Tables 6A and 6B consider start-up performance before and after the reform. As before, we use
differences-in-differences. In Columns (1)-(4) of Table 6A, the control group is the background
population of new ventures in Norway. Column (1) shows the probability of survival to year 5.
We see a weakly significant but large decline of 15 percentage points in the probability of
survival by university start-ups after the reform. Conditional on survival, sales also become
substantially lower for university start-ups, while employment in and the assets of these startups
are negative but statistically insignificant. When comparing to start-ups by non-university PhDs
in Columns (5)-(8), the results appear broadly similar in their point estimates but with less
precision, so that there is no statistical significance at conventional levels.
Table 6B considers performance at year 5 using a binary dependent variable for whether the
performance indicator is in the upper quartile of performance among Norwegian new ventures.
This analysis can account transparently for changes in the rate of “relatively good” startups while
avoiding upper tail outliers that can otherwise influence the results.27 The threshold for an upper
quartile start-up is 3.3 million NOK in sales and 3 employees at an age of 5 years.28 The
findings in Table 6B broadly echo the above results. The probability that a university startup
surpasses the 75th percentile of sales declines by 12 percentage points at conventional
significance levels after the reform, compared to other startups. The probability of surpassing
the 75th percentile of assets at year 5 declines by a similar magnitude while employment shows
27

In general, evidence suggests that successful startups are rare, even in clusters around universities (Guzman and
Stern 2015a, 2015b), and the evidence about firm size in Table 1A further suggests the thick upper tail in startup
growth, so that mean regression analysis of performance may be driven by outliers.
28
The upper quartile is determined across the set of all new ventures (i.e., including those that do not survive to five
years, for which we impute a value of 0 for sales, assets, and employees).

19

little effects. As before, effects are statistically weaker, but broadly similar in magnitude, when
using the non-university PhD start-ups as the control group.
Separately from accounting performance, and with the caveat that sample sizes become small,
we can further examine whether there is a decline in higher-technology start-ups. To perform
this analysis, we examine start-up counts again but now use the Eurostat classifications of 2-digit
NACE codes to exclude (a) manufacturing sectors that are defined as “low-technology” and (b)
service sectors that are considered “less knowledge intensive.”29 Table 6C considers the
aggregated counts, using the same regression as in Table 2 but now counting only the remaining,
higher-technology firms.
Table 6C column (1) indicates a substantial decline in higher-technology startups by university
researchers after the reform when compared to higher-technology startups in Norway as a whole.
Column (2) shows a negative but insignificant decline compared to non-university PhDs. In both
column 1 and column 2, the

dummy is notably negative and significant, indicating that

higher-technology start-ups declined more generally in Norway after the reform. The decline
seen in the

dummy is driven by the decline in information and computing technology (ICT)

startups across Norway.30 Columns (3) and (4) show, removing such ICT startups from the
sample, the

coefficient is no longer large or significant. These columns further show large,

negative effects of the decline in (non ICT) technology-oriented startups from university
researchers, with similar size effects using either control group.31 Poisson models (not reported)
rather than OLS show similar effects with increased precision. The decline in higher-technology
start-ups by university researchers can also be seen in individual-level analysis, controlling for
individual level characteristics.32 Notably, the difference-in-difference decline in technology
start-up rates in columns (3) and (4) implies a 71% drop. This decline is larger than the decline

29

The Eurostat sectoral classifications by technological-intensity can be found at:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/Annexes/htec_esms_an2.pdf.
30
Startups in “computer and related activities” (NACE code 72) were frequent in the early 2000s in Norway, as they
were elsewhere.
31
These findings are also consistent with the findings in Table 2, which analyzed counts at the 1-digit sector level.
Overall, PhDs are more active in higher-technology sectors than the general population and were more active in ICT
startups as well. When controlling for sector, the results become more similar across the control groups. See
columns 5-7 of Table 2 as well as Columns 3 and 4 in Table 6C.
32
These further analyses follow those in Tables 3 and 4. Results are available from the authors upon request.

20

for university start-ups generally, indicating that these university technology startups fell
proportionately more on average, although this excess decline is not statistically significant.33
Lastly, we collected the incorporation documents for all university start-ups to search for patents
by these young firms. In particular, we searched the Norwegian Patent Office database for
patents where the start-up was listed as either the applicant or the assignee. We found that,
among startups by university researchers founded prior to the reform, 12% obtained a patent
within five years of founding. Among university startups founded after the reform, only 2%
percent obtained a patent within this window. This decline is significant at the 1% level using a
simple t-test.
Overall, integrating across performance measures based on accounting data, technology-intensity
of the sector, or patenting, these results indicate that start-up performance measures, if anything,
declined after the end of the professor’s privilege.
Hidden Ownership
As a robustness check, we further considered whether the end of professor’s privilege might
potentially provoke “hidden ownership”, where university researchers continue to start
businesses but attempt to shield their ownership via family members or possibly through preexisting companies. We can test this possibility in two ways. First, the Norwegian registry data
identifies the family members of each worker. We can therefore also examine new venture
activity by the family members of university researchers and test for any increase, after the
reform, in businesses started by family members. Second, the Norwegian business registry traces
ownership of businesses by other businesses. We can therefore additionally ask whether
university researchers might own new start-ups indirectly through other companies the
researchers own, thus opening a different potential means of attempting to hide ownership from
the university. Implementing these analyses, we find no evidence for hidden ownership. There
is no increase in start-ups among family members. Moreover, taking all firms owned by
university researchers, we find zero cases of such indirect ownership of new firms.34

33

Prior to the reform, 27% of university-based start-ups were in higher-technology sectors (41% including ICT);
after the reform only 17% of university-based startups were in these sectors (33% including ICT).
34
These analyses are available from the authors upon request.

21

Summary
In sum, we see a large drop in entrepreneurship by university researchers starting in the year of
the professor’s privilege reform. This decline (56%) appears in a simple pre-post of university
researcher start-up behavior, and it appears similarly large when compared to the background
startup rates for a range of control groups. Detailed individual-level controls do not change this
conclusion, which is driven on the intensive margin of individual university researchers who
started firms at a substantially lower rate after the policy reform. We also see a decline in some
accounting performance measures for new ventures started by university researchers and,
separately, a substantial decline in university start-ups in higher-technology sectors or with
associated patents. Thus, not only does the quantity of startups by university researchers decline,
but there are declines in several quality measures for these startups as well.
B. Patents
To study patenting, we follow similar lines as the entrepreneurship analysis above but with more
limited data. Recall that university-based patents were determined by matching Norwegian
inventor names with the NIFU registry of Norwegian university researchers (see Section III.A).
The resulting dataset cannot be linked to the Norwegian registry data; therefore, the patent
analysis allows comparisons among inventors only (university vs. non-university inventors) and
does not contain demographic information, beyond name and address, for non-university
inventors.35
The Rate of Patenting
Figure 2A plots the annual number of university patents (red line, left vertical axis) and nonuniversity patents (blue line, right vertical axis) over the 1995-2010 period, with the year defined
by the patent application date.36 We see that the non-university patent rate rises through the late
1990s and then falls somewhat after 2000. The university patent rate rises similarly in the late
1990s, with a peak in 2002, the pre-reform year, before falling more steeply in the post-reform
35

The Norwegian census and business registry data use an anonymized numerical identifier for each individual,
while the Norwegian Patent Office data does not use such identifiers. Thus we do not have socio-demographic
information for Norwegian inventors in general (although, via NIFU, we do have detailed information about the
university researchers, including age, gender, PhD year, PhD type, and academic department).
36
We define a patent as a university patent if at least one inventor on the patent matches with a university
researcher.

22

period. Figure 2B considers the same data on a per-worker basis for the relevant groups.37
Given that the number of Norwegian university researchers rose relatively rapidly over the 19952010 period, the per-worker measures show a larger differential drop for the university patenting
rate. On average, 1.61% of university researchers applied for a patent in a given year prior to the
reform, while 0.75% of university researchers applied for patents per year after the reform, for a
53% drop in the per-worker rate. By contrast, the broader Norwegian workforce averaged
0.0176% patents per year prior to the reform and 0.0152% after the reform, for a 14% drop in the
per-worker rate. Together, these figures show a sharp drop in patenting by university researchers
that is coincident with the professor’s privilege reform.
Table 7 considers regression results, looking at changes in log annual patent counts per year and
log annual patent counts per worker. Columns (1) and (2) show that the log number of university
patents declines relative to non-university patents. The first column includes a dummy to
indicate the post period while the second column includes application year fixed effects to better
capture the background dynamics seen in Figure 2. The

coefficient indicates a

20% decline in patenting by universities. Column (3) repeats the analysis for patents per-worker.
Consistent with the larger visual difference-in-difference in Figure 2B, the
coefficient now indicates a 48% decline in the patenting rate per university worker, compared to
the background per-worker rate. Column (4) considers the number of unique inventors per
employed worker and finds similarly large declines.
The last two columns of Table 7 analyze the data in technology-class-by-year form, with the
patent counts now constructed at the 1-digit IPC code level.38 This analysis can help account for
compositional changes in the technologies receiving patents. Column (5) uses the log patent
count as the dependent variable in OLS, while column (6) presents a Poisson count model. We
see that these technology-class level analyses and the aggregate count analyses in columns (1)
and (2) show similar results.
Table 8 considers regression evidence at the individual level. In these regressions, all individuals
are inventors and the question is how the patenting rate per inventor changes for university
37

For non-university inventors, this normalization is the number of non-university patents divided by the size of the
non-university Norwegian workforce.
38
As with the start-up analysis, we use 1-digit categories because patent counts for the treatment group are not large
enough to allow analysis for more granular technology categorizations.

23

inventors compared to non-university inventors. The dependent variable is a dummy variable
indicating whether an individual applies for one or more patents in a given year.39 Column (1)
shows that university-based inventors show a large drop in their patenting after the reform,
where the individual university researcher (conditional on being an inventor at some point) sees a
4.5 percentage point drop in their probability of producing a patent during the post period.
Interestingly, this decline almost exactly offsets the tendency for university researchers to
produce patents more regularly than non-university inventors. Thus university inventors move
from being unusually prolific in their patenting rate prior to the reform to being rather ordinary in
their patenting rate after the reform. This finding is virtually identical whether or not we control
for individual fixed effects or application year fixed effects in columns (2) and (3). Column (4)
provides a robustness check by reducing the sample (both inside and outside universities) to
“rare names” – those individuals whose names appear three or less times in the Norwegian
population as a whole. We see that the results remain similar.
Lastly, Table 9 considers whether the decline in university patenting may be driven by the exit of
university researchers, or whether it appears on the intensive margin of university employees
who remain at the university. Commensurate with analysis of Table 5, columns (1) and (2)
consider “pre-period university researchers”, those individuals employed at universities from
2000-2002, and then tracks patenting by these individuals regardless of whether they remain in
university employ. Columns (3) and (4) focus instead on “stayers”, examining whether the
patenting decline appears among those who are consistently employed at university in the post
period.40 The findings are all similar to the results in Table 8. Thus the decline in patenting in
university settings is not driven by individual researchers exiting university employment and
continuing to patent. Instead, we see large effects on the intensive margin, so that a consistent
set of individual university inventors patent much less often after the end of the professor’s
privilege.

39

Count data models, where the dependent variable is the patent count for the given individual-year as opposed to a
dummy variable, show similar results. In practice, conditional on patenting in a given year, 87% of inventors apply
for one patent only.
40
To match the start-up analysis, we define stayers based on continual university employment over the 2000-2007
period. The results are robust to alternative employment durations for defining these “stayers”, including using the
whole sample period for patents (1995-2010). These results are available upon request.

24

The Quality of Patenting
Table 10 considers changes in the quality of patenting using a standard proxy measure, the
number of citations that a patent receives (Trajtenberg 1990, Hall et al. 2005). Observations are
individual patents, and we again use difference-in-differences, comparing patents by university
researchers to patents by non-university researchers, before and after the reform. The dependent
variable is the count of citations each patent has received through 2014 using the PATSTAT
database. Given the presence of count data, we consider a Poisson model, negative binomial
model, and for comparison OLS in columns (1) through (3), respectively. Application year fixed
effects are included to capture non-linearities in the flow of citation counts over time.41 The final
columns further consider the propensity for unusually highly-cited patents, where the dependent
variable is an indicator for an upper tail patent according to a given citation threshold. Columns
(4)-(6) use the 75th, 90th, and 99th citation thresholds respectively.42
Across specifications, we see a robust decline in citations received by university patents. Using
either the Poisson or negative binomial model, there is an approximate 25% decline in citations
received per patent. As shown by the OLS model, this change represents an average loss of 2.2
patent citations. Studying upper-tail patents, the final three columns further show large declines
in the propensity for university researchers to produce such patents, after the reform.
Interestingly, the treated coefficient in all specifications indicates that, prior to the reform,
university patents were more highly cited than non-university patents. The reform acts to largely
offset this advantage (compare the

coefficients with the

coefficients),

so that university patents went from being extraordinary to ordinary in their citations.
Summary
In sum, we see a large drop in patenting by university researchers after the “professor’s
privilege” reform. This decline is commensurate on many dimensions with the findings for start41

Patenting later in the period provides less time to be cited, leading to the usual pattern of declining observed
citations in more recent application years. Application year fixed effects help account for this dynamic. An
alternative approach is to only include citations that come within N years after publication of the focal patent, and
end the sample N years prior to 2014. In this approach, citations are only considered when they come within a
common length of time. This alternative approach, for various N, yields similar results to those shown in Table 10
(results available from authors upon request).
42
The thresholds are determined, by application year, examining the citation distribution across all issued NPO
patents with the given application year.

25

ups. The patent rate per worker falls by approximately 50%, which is broadly similar to the
decline in the start-up rate. The decline in patenting, like the decline in entrepreneurship, is
driven on the intensive margin of individual university researchers who patented substantially
less after the reform. Lastly, citations received per patent also declined for university patents
after the reform. Overall, and like the start-up analysis, university patenting exhibited a decline
in both quantity and quality measures.
V.

Discussion

This section considers the policy experiment and results in light of several existing literatures.
After summarizing the core empirical findings, we first discuss additional evidence from crosscountry and cross-university empirical studies to help inform potential representativeness for
broader settings. We then consider possible tradeoffs between innovative activity and research
activity among university researchers. Finally, we discuss mechanisms in light of our findings
and consider potential applications to literatures regarding rights allocations in innovation and
taxes and entrepreneurship.
Summary of Empirical Results
University researchers are potential wellsprings of innovative ideas that may deliver substantial
social returns. A large literature has sought to understand policies that influence innovative
activity by this workforce, and the design of these policies remains the subject of substantial
debate. This paper investigates a large change in national commercialization policy. In the first
regime, under the “professor’s privilege”, university-based researchers enjoyed full rights to their
inventions and new ventures. In the second regime, after the reform, Norwegian university
researchers moved to a one-third / two-third income split with the university. Moreover, the
universities each established TTOs to boost commercialization output. The post-reform regime
was designed to look broadly similar to the U.S. today. Similar reforms were implemented in
several European countries, including Germany.
The empirical findings suggest that the policy reform had several, measurable effects. First,
there was an approximate 50% drop in the rate of new venture formation by university
researchers. Second, there was a similar drop in patenting. Third, the quality of new ventures
and patents also appeared to decline. These stark findings appear in sharp contrast to the
26

motivations behind the Norwegian policy reform. The findings may also raise questions about
similar reforms in other European countries that eliminated the professor’s privilege: were the
Norwegian results representative, one would imagine that the rates of start-ups and patenting by
university researchers would rise substantially, as would the quality of these innovations, should
universities give the researchers full rights. More generally, since the post-reform regime looks
like the U.S. regime, among others, the interest in the external validity of these findings may
broaden further.
Representativeness
As guideposts on the potential generalizability of these results, descriptive facts may be
informative. On a cross-country basis, Lissoni (2008) examines the share of academic patents
among domestic patents for several countries. The academic patenting share in professor’s
privilege countries, when the policy is in place, is high (Sweden is 6%, Finland is 8%, and
Norway is 9%) compared to countries in Europe that did not feature the professor’s privilege
over similar time periods (France was 3%, Italy was 4%, and the Netherlands was 4%).43
Comparing across universities in the U.S., Lach and Schankerman (2008) show that university
licensing income is substantially increasing in the researcher’s royalty share.44 Their regression
estimates suggest at least a doubling in income comparing universities with a one-third
researcher share to those with nearly full researcher royalty shares. Thus, while such crosssectional differences do not control for many possible conflating factors, and do not study
behavior at the individual level, the cross-sectional evidence appears broadly consistent with the
patent findings in this paper.
Two new working papers, one studying patenting and the other studying entrepreneurship, also
consider the professor’s privilege and find evidence in some broadly similar directions.
Czarnitski et al. (2015) study patenting in Germany and find that university researchers patented
43

The U.S. academic patenting share is not clear, but university-owned patents in the U.S. are 4% of all U.S.
patents, and samples suggest that these patents represent perhaps 65-80% of all U.S. patents with academic inventors
(Fabrizio and DeMinin 2008, Lissoni 2008). Thus the academic patenting share in the U.S. also appears less than
that in the professor’s privilege countries, when the policy was in place.
44
Lach and Shankerman (2008) study licensing income across universities, a type of data not available in our
context (changes in licensing income cannot be easily observed since Norwegian universities did not track licensing
income under the professor’s privilege regime). Our context looks upstream of licensing income to the patenting
itself. The drop in the quantity and quality of patenting after the reform suggests that the pipeline for licensing is
substantially diminished.

27

less after the professor’s privilege was eliminated. The decline among university researchers is
greater than the decline among researchers in public research organizations that were not
affected by the reform, although a puzzling feature in the German case is that the decline in
patenting for both groups appears to start 5 years prior to the reform and there is little change in
the rate of decline around the reform year (2002) per se. Separately, a recent study by Astebro et
al. (2015) considers PhDs who exit university employment, comparing the U.S. with Sweden,
which has maintained its professor’s privilege. The paper finds that Swedish academics are twice
as likely to exit universities and start firms as U.S. academics are, compared to the background
rates for non-university PhDs in their respective countries.
Overall, the difference-in-difference estimates established for all new ventures and patents in
Norway appear broadly consistent with other evidence. While the effect of the professor’s
privilege is difficult to identify using cross-sectional data, and analyses of new ventures are
especially few, the existing evidence indicates that professor’s privilege countries have tended to
see greater rates of commercialization activity by academics, often by similar magnitudes as seen
through the Norwegian policy shock. These commonalities may suggest broader external
validity from the natural experiment we study.
Nonetheless, important caveats are in order as one assesses both the scope of representativeness
and potential policy implications. First, the Norwegian university system is predominantly
public. This feature is common in European countries but less so in the United States. It is
possible that the effects of rights-sharing policies may differ depending on the extent of state
control, although the limited empirical evidence on this question does not suggest it.45
Additionally, the effects of a system-wide change may be quite different from the effects of a
policy change at a single university.46 Thus the results in this paper may generalize more
45

For example, the public university may believe that any commercialization income will be lost to public coffers.
That said, the state also has revenue-oriented objectives (and private universities are typically non-profit with
public-oriented norms), so it is not clear a priori that public universities have more or less pecuniary interests than
private universities. Separately, one may make arguments about the relative organizational efficiency of
universities, depending on their governance. That said, Lach and Schankerman (2008) examine U.S. public and
private universities separately and find large increases in licensing income correlated with the inventor’s royalty
share in both governance settings.
46
A system with more heterogeneous royalty structures (i.e., the U.S.) may also allow easier migration of
innovation-oriented researchers to universities offering them higher royalty shares, as argued by Lach and
Schankerman (2008). This migration effect could increase the elasticity of innovative activity to the royalty share
policy at a given university (by attracting or repelling innovators), yet soften the effect of one university’s policies
on the broader innovative output of the national system.

28

naturally to public university systems, like those in Europe. Second, given that the Norwegian
TTOs were born with the 2003 reform, one may imagine that they are not as effective as more
experienced TTOs and that their performance might improve with time. That said, there is no
evidence within the scope of our data that patenting or new venture rates improve as the years
progress. If anything, the decline appears to worsen relative to the controls, but the long-run
effects may be different, given enough time. More generally, to the extent that Norway’s
researchers, technology orientation, access to complementary inputs (e.g., venture financing),
and broader institutions may differ from those in other countries, the findings may not
generalize.
Research Output
Beyond measures of new ventures and patenting, university commercialization policy may resist
strong prescriptions given the complexity of welfare analysis in this setting. Tradeoffs between
innovative activities and other activities by university researchers (such as basic research or
teaching), where the social returns may be large but in general are unknown, suggest substantial
care (Thursby and Thursby 2003, National Academy of Sciences 2010). While a complete
welfare description is infeasible, we can make some further progress by looking at publication
behavior to see if there is any obvious tradeoff with other research outputs. This analysis is
provided in Appendix II. In line with existing studies (e.g., Fabrizio and Di Minin 2008,
Azoulay et al. 2009, Buenstorf 2009), we find that academic inventors typically appear more
productive when studying their research publications compared to other university researchers.
Academic inventors in our study are found to produce not only more publications but also
publications with higher average citation impact. These findings, which are robust to field,
researcher age, and university fixed effects, do not suggest a tradeoff between invention and
research when comparing across individuals.
Our analysis can also push further, comparing not just across individuals, but also looking at
changes within individuals before and after the professor’s privilege reform. While finding
adequate control groups raises challenges, we find no evidence that the reform (which led to a
substantial decline in patenting) encouraged increased publication output among individuals who
were relatively likely to be affected by the reform. For example, those university researchers
who patented in the pre-reform period show no increase in publications compared to closely
29

matched researchers who did not patent in the pre-reform period. While noisy, point estimates
suggest if anything a decline in publication outputs after the reform within individuals. See
Appendix II.
In sum, we find little evidence for a tradeoff between inventive output and research output. This
finding appears across individuals but also appears when looking within individuals and
harnessing the policy shock of the professor’s privilege reform. Conceptualizations of science
based on “Pasteur’s Quadrant” may help explain this result, where the same creativity scientific
activity may produce both applied output and new knowledge so that inventive and research
activity become complements rather than substitutes (Stokes 1997, Murray and Stern 2007).
Mechanisms
For both new ventures and patenting, we find large declines in quantity after the reform.
Additional metrics suggest that quality also declined. These findings appear to reject, in our
context, several specific mechanisms as driving forces for understanding the results, especially
regarding the roles that TTOs may play. First, TTOs might arguably lower the costs of
commercialization, thus helping university researchers overcome the hurdles of patent
applications and new venture market entry (e.g., Debackere and Veugelers 2005). However,
lowering entry costs would be associated with more innovative entry, not less, which the
empirical findings appear to strongly reject. Related, TTOs may perform an important function
“searching the closets” for latent applied research ideas to increase technology transfer.
However, were this mechanism the driving force, we would expect the quantity of innovative
output from the universities to go up, not down. Third, TTOs might through commercialization
expertise and/or reputational functions promote higher quality inventions and new ventures (e.g.,
Macho-Stadler et al. 2007). However, the tendency for quality measures to also decline does not
point to an effective TTO function in this regard, at least in our context.47 In sum, theories
whereby giving the university rights and the ensuing creation of TTOs will unleash substantial
additional innovation, either by improving search, selection, or lowering entry costs, appear
inconsistent with our empirical findings. The TTOs may still perform these functions at some
level, but if so the benefits therein are being overwhelmed by other forces.
47

More generally, the capacity to choose promising innovations ex-ante may be limited given the uncertainty
inherent to innovation and entrepreneurship (e.g., Arrow 1962, Kerr et al. 2014).

30

A richer perspective, which may explain the findings, emphasizes the problem of university
researcher incentives, and how these can be balanced with any rights given to the university
itself. The appropriate allocation of rights between investing parties is a classic question in
economics and also provides canonical perspectives in studies of innovation (Holmstrom 1982,
Grossman and Hart 1986, Aghion and Tirole 1994, Green and Scotchmer 1995, Hellmann 2007).
The professor’s privilege reform is a large shock to the rights regime.
One key element of the reform is the shock to income rights. Recognizing the potential
importance of investments by both the university researcher and the university itself, one can
motivate a royalty sharing regime that favors balancing rights across parties rather than giving all
royalties to one party, as under the professor’s privilege. Appendix I studies these tradeoffs
formally and shows circumstances under which the one-third / two-third split, which is prevalent
in many countries today, could be (second-best) optimal.48 The basic presumption here is that
university-level investments are important and cannot be easily replicated by the university
researcher. Under circumstances where the university-level investments are much less important
than researcher-level investments, royalty shares would be optimally balanced toward the
university researcher.49 Some analyses of commercialization practices, putting little store in
university capabilities and/or emphasizing incentive conflicts between the parties, have argued
for sharply curtailing the role of TTOs and increasing researcher’s rights (Litan et al. 2007,
Kenney and Patton 2009). The empirical analysis in this paper appears broadly consistent with
this perspective.
A related feature that could motivate the reform is the view that university researchers do not
care (much) for income, so that their investment incentives would be little affected by a loss of
income rights. Taking scientific norms of openness seriously, where scientists place the typical
fruits of their labor (i.e., research articles) in the public domain (Merton 1973), and in many
cases earn far less than in industry, one might imagine that scientists have weak pecuniary
interests or otherwise would care little if rights were transferred to the university. The evidence
in this paper, by contrast, suggests that the loss of rights severely diminishes the

48

While proportional sharing of the joint surplus cannot provide first-best efforts (Holmstrom 1982), within the
class of second-best outcomes, some royalty sharing regimes may be vastly superior to others.
49
Appendix I takes an income rights perspective. A control rights perspective will also tend to suggest that rights
should favor the party whose investment matters more (e.g., Aghion and Tirole 1994).

31

commercialization activity of university researchers. This finding suggests that, at least among
those researchers inclined to actually engage in patenting or new ventures, rights matter.
Taking an income rights view, the policy shock may also provide some insight on the link
between taxation and entrepreneurship among a class of highly-skilled knowledge workers. In
particular, the loss of income rights can be thought of in part as increasing the tax rate on
researcher’s commercialization income. While the additional effect on university investment
distinguishes the experiment from a narrower tax experiment on the university researcher, an
income rights perspective suggests that the policy reform provides a lower bound on the effect of
an equivalent tax. Intuitively, should the university investments be at least weakly
complementary to the researcher’s investments, the taxation effect on the researcher’s income
incentives is offset to some extent by the benefit of university-level support. This argument is
shown formally in Appendix I. Based on this reasoning, university researchers appear very
sensitive to the effective tax rates on their expected income, where a loss of two-thirds of pre-tax
expected income is associated with an approximate fifty percent decline in innovative output, for
a lower bound tax elasticity of 0.75.
It may also be, however, that university interests and actions create greater commercialization
obstacles for the university researcher, rather than providing support. The professor’s privilege
reform, in giving majority income rights to the university, also gave the university control rights,
and control rights perspectives, emphasizing contractual incompleteness and the possibility of
hold-up by the university, may additionally dissuade university researchers from undertaking
innovative activities. It is difficult in our context to separate control rights effects from income
rights effects, although some considerations suggest that control rights may not be the key
mechanisms at work here. Ex-post of our empirical analysis, we conducted telephone interviews
with the directors of the TTOs at the three largest Norwegian universities.50 These TTO
directors emphasized that the university researcher retains important de facto control where the
ongoing involvement of the researcher is essential to commercialization prospects, which is

50

These universities are the University of Oslo, the University of Bergen, and the Norwegian University of Science
and Technology in Trondheim.

32

consistent with other literature (e.g., Jensen and Thursby 2001).51 The formal contractual
incompleteness challenges may also be mitigated here given the ongoing, multi-agent nature of
the university’s relationships with its researchers, suggesting that relational contracts may limit
hold-up problems (Levin 2002). Lastly, to the extent that transaction cost problems would
materialize as up-front “haggling costs” between researchers and universities, one might expect
that the loss of control rights would (like a fixed cost) cause the quantity of innovative activity to
decline but the quality to go up, as only the most worthwhile projects ex-ante would be
attempted. The empirical fact that both quantity and quality decline would then reject this
view.52
More generally, and integrating across potential theories, the policy experiment indicates that
these university researchers appear very sensitive to their inventive rights. While scientists
might broadly value freedom over income and operate largely according to scientific norms that
emphasize open access to their ideas (Merton 1973, Stern 2004), there is at least a subset of
university researchers – those on the margin of important technology transfer avenues – who
respond with high elasticity to their rights allocations.
VI.

Conclusion

Following a pan-European policy debate in the 1990s, many European countries abolished the
“professor’s privilege” in order to boost commercialization activities from universities, and
moved to a policy regime similar to the U.S. post Bayh-Dole. This paper has considered the
policy reform in Norway, deploying registry data and other datasets that allow us to
comprehensively study new ventures and patenting. The policy change transferred two-thirds of
the income rights enjoyed by university researchers to their university employer. The basic
empirical finding is a large decline, by approximately 50%, in the quantity of both start-ups and
patenting by university researchers. We also see declines in measures of quality for start-ups and

51

We also find, consistent with this qualitative view, that university researchers are CEOs of their start-ups at a
stable rate (about 40% of cases) before and after the professor’s privilege reform. These results are available from
the authors on request.
52
Our findings instead appear consistent with theories emphasizing the decline of commercialization effort by
university researchers, leading to a worsening quality distribution of their innovations. With a worsening quality
distribution and a fixed cost of commercialization, fewer ideas will be started (the quantity effect). Conditional on
commercialization, the average quality would also decline.

33

patents. The declines are robust to using various control groups for the natural experiment and
are broadly similar when looking across both start-ups and patents.
The paper further discusses potential implications of these findings for university
commercialization policy. Broader interpretations in light of literatures on rights allocations in
innovation and taxes and entrepreneurship are also considered. The basic finding is that the
“professor’s privilege” policy regime in Norway saw far more university-based start-ups and
patenting than the regime where the university owns the rights and gives one-third of the income
to the researcher. This finding raises fundamental questions about whether much of the world,
which uses university commercialization policies that look like the ex-post regime in this study,
are producing much less university-based innovation than they could and that many
policymakers desire. Studies of additional policy reforms in Europe and the potential for formal
experimentation in the rights regimes employed by universities are key areas for future research.

34

References
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole, “The Management of Innovation,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109, No. 4 (1994), 1185-1209.
Arrow, Kenneth, “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in Richard
R. Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962.
Association of University Technology Managers, “Highlights of AUTM’s U.S. Licensing
Activity Survey FY2014,” autmvisitors.net/sites/default/files/documents/
FY2014%20Highlights.pdf, accessed: January 2016.
Astebro, Thomas, Serguey Braguinsky, Pontus Braunerhjelm, and Anders Brostrom, “Bayh-Dole
versus the Professor’s Privilege,” mimeo, HEC Paris, 2015.
Azoulay, Pierre, Waverly Ding, and Toby Stuart. “The Effect of Academic Patenting on the
Rate, Quality, and Direction of (Public) Research Output,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 57,
No. 4 (2009), 637-676.
Baldini, Nicola, “University Patenting: Patterns of Faculty Motivations,” Technology Analysis
and Strategic Management, 23, (2011), 103-121.
Buenstorf, Guido, “Is Commercialization Good or Bad for Science? Individual-level Evidence
from the Max Planck Society,” Research Policy, 38, no. 2 (2009), 281-292.
Bruce, Donald and Tami Gurley, “Taxes and Entrepreneurial Activity: An Empirical
Investigation Using Longitudinal Tax Return Data,” Small Business Research Summary, No. 252
(2005), 1-51.
Czarnitzki, Dirk, Katrin Hussinger, and Cédric Schneider, “Commercializing Academic
Research: The Quality of Faculty Patenting,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 20, (2011),
1403-1437.
Czarnitzki, Dirk, Thorsten Doherr, Katrin Hussinger, Paula Schliessler, and Andrew A. Toole,
“Individual versus Institutional Ownership of University-discovered Inventions,” ZEW
Discussion paper, no. 15-007 (2015).
Debackere, Koenraad, and Reinhilde Veugelers, “The role of academic technology transfer
organizations in improving industry science links,” Research Policy, 34, (2005), 321-342.
Evans, David S. and Linda S. Leighton, “Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,”
American Economic Review, 79, no. 3 (1989), 519-535.

35

Fabrizio, Kira, and Alberto Di Minin, “Commercializing the laboratory: Faculty patenting and
the open science environment,” Research Policy, 37, (2008), 914–931.
Gans, Joshua S. and Scott Stern, “The Product Market and the Market for ‘Ideas’:
Commercialization Strategies for Technology Entrepreneurs,” Research Policy, 32 (2003), 333350.
Gans, Joshua, David H. Hsu, and Scott Stern, “The Impact of Uncertain Intellectual Property
Rights on the Market for Ideas: Evidence from Patent Grant Delays,” Management Science, 54,
(2008), 982-997.
Gentry, William M. and R. Glenn Hubbard, “Tax Policy and Entrepreneurial Entry,” American
Economic Review, 90, no. 2 (2000), 283-287.
Geuna, Aldo and Federica Rossi, “Changes to University IPR Regulations in Europe and the
Impact on Academic Patenting,” Research Policy, 40 (2011), 1068-1076.
Glaeser, Edward L., “Entrepreneurship and The City,” NBER Working Paper No. 13551 (2007).
Green, Jerry R. and Suzanne Scotchmer, “On the Division of Profit in Sequential Innovation,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 26, no. 1 (1995), 20-33.
Grimaldi, Rosa, Martin Kenney, Donald S. Siegel and, Mike Wright, “30 Years after Bayh-Dole:
Reassessing Academic Entrepreneurship,” Research Policy, 40 (2011), 1045-1057.
Grossman, Sanford and Hart, Oliver, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
Lateral and Vertical Integration', Journal of Political Economy, 94, (1986), 691-719.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern, “Where is Silicon Valley?” Science, 347 (2015a), 606-609.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern, “Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality and
Performance” NBER Working Paper No. 20954 (2015b).
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “Market Value and Patent Citations.”
RAND Journal of Economics 36, no. 1 (2005), 16-38.
Hall, Bronwyn, “Patents and Patent Policy,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 23, (2007), 1–
20.
Hamilton, Barton H., “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to
Self-Employment,” Journal of Political Economy, 108, no. 3 (2000), 604-631.
Hellmann, Thomas, “When Do Employees Become Entrepreneurs?” Management Science, 53,
no. 6, (2007), 919-933.

36

Holmstrom, Bengt, “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13, no. 2, (1982), 324340.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, “Entrepreneurial Decisions and
Liquidity Constraints,” NBER Working Paper No. 4526, 1993.
Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi, “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, no. 2 (2004), 319-347.
Iversen, Eric J., Magnus Gulbrandsen, and Antje Klitkou, “A Baseline for the Impact of
Academic Patenting Legislation in Norway,” Scientometrics, 70, no. 2 (2007), 393-414.
Jensen, Richard and Marie Thursby, “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing of
University Inventions,” American Economic Review, 91, no. 1 (2001), 240-259.
Kenney, Martin and Donald Patton, “Reconsidering the Bayh-Dole Act and the Current
University Invention Ownership Model,” Research Policy, 38 (2009), 1407-1422.
Kerr, William, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, “Entrepreneurship as
Experimentation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28, (2014), 25-48.
Krimsky, Sheldon, 2003, Science in the Private Interest: Has the Lure of Profits Corrupted
Biomedical Research? Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, Maryland, 2003.
Lacetera, Nicola, “Academic Entrepreneurship,” Managerial and Decision Economics, 30
(2009), 443-464.
Lach, Saul and Mark Schankerman, “Incentives and Invention in Universities,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 39, no. 2 (2008), 403-433.
Lerner, Josh and Ulrike Malmendier, “Contractibility and the Design of Research Agreements,”
American Economic Review, 100, no. 1 (2010), 214-246.
_____, and Robert P. Merges, “The Control of Technology Alliances: An Empirical Analysis of
the Biotechnology Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, no. 2 (1998), 125-156.
Levin, Jonathan, “Multilateral contracting and the employment relationship,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, (2002), 1075-1103.
Levine, Ross and Yona Rubinstein, “Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes and Entrepreneur and Does
it Pay?” NBER Working Paper No. 19276 (2013).
Lindh, Thomas and Henry Ohlsson, “Self-Employment and Windfall Gains: Evidence from the
Swedish Lottery,” Economic Journal, 106, no. 439 (1996), 1515-1526.

37

Lissoni, Francesco, Patrick Llerena, Maureen McKelvey and Bulat Sanditov, “Academic
Patenting in Europe: New Evidence from the KEINS Database,” Research Evaluation, 17, no. 2
(2008), 87-102.
Litan, Robert, Lesa Mitchell, and E.J. Reedy, “The University as Innovator: Bumps in the Road,”
Issues in Science and Technology, 23, (2007), 57-66.
Lockett, Andy, Donald Siegel, Mike Wright, and Michael D. Ensley, “The Creation of Spin-off
Firms at Public Research Institutions: Managerial and Policy Implications,” Research Policy, 34,
no. 7 (2005), 981-993.
Macho-Stadler, Ines, David Pérez-Castrillo and Reinhilde Veugelers, “Licensing of university
inventions: The role of a technology transfer office,” International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 25, (2007) 483–510.
Merrill, Stephen and Anne-Marie Mazza (editors), Managing University Intellectual Property in
the Public Interest, Committee on Management of University Intellectual Property, National
Research Council, National Academies Press: Washington DC, 2010.
Merton, Robert K., “Priorities in Scientific Discovery: A Chapter in the Sociology of Science.”
American Sociological Review, 22 no. 6 (1957), 635-659.
_____, The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigation. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1973.
Mowery, David C., Richard R. Nelson, Bhaven N. Sampat, and Arvids A. Ziedonis, “The
Growth of Patenting and Licensing by U.S. Universities: An Assessment of the Effects of the
Bayh-Dole Act of 1980,” Research Policy, 30 (2001), 99-119.
Mowery, David, and Bhaven Sampat, “The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and University-Industry
Technology Transfer: A Model for Other OECD Governments?” Journal of Technology
Transfer, 30, (2005), 115–127.
Murray, Fiona, and Scott Stern, “Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of
scientific knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 63 (2007) 648–687.
O’Shea, Rory P., Thomas J. Allen, Arnaud Chevalier, and Frank Roche, “Entrepreneurial
Orientation, Technology Transfer and Spinoff Performance of U.S. Universities,” Research
Policy, 34 (2005), 994-1009.
Rasmussen, Einar, Øystein Moen, and Magnus Gulbrandsen, “Initiatives to Promote
Commercialization of University Knowledge,” Technovation, 26 (2006) 518–533.

38

Rothaermel, Frank T. Shanti D. Agung, and Lin Jiang, “University Entrepreneurship: A
Taxonomy of the Literature,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 16, no. 4 (2007), 691-791.
Sampat, Bhaven N., “Patenting and US Academic Research in the 20th Century: The World
Before and After Bayh-Dole,” Research Policy, 35 (2006), 772-789.
Sauermann, Henry and Michael Roach, “Taste for Science, Taste for Commercialization, and
Hybrid Scientists,” Mimeo, Druid Society, DRUID 2012.
Scotchmer, Suzanne, “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the Patent
Law,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5, no. 1 (1991), 29-41.
Shane, Scott A., Academic Entrepreneurship: University Spinoffs and Wealth Creation, Glos,
UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2004a.
_____, “Encouraging University Entrepreneurship? The Effect of the Bayh-Dole Act on
University Patenting in the United States,” Journal of Business Venturing, 19 (2004b), 127-151.
_____, Edwin A. Locke, and Christopher J. Collins, “Entrepreneurial Motivation,” Human
Resource Management Review, 13 (2003), 257-279.
Stern, Scott, “Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?” Management Science, 50, no. 6 (2004), 835853.
Stokes, Donald. Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation, The
Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1997.
Thursby, Jerry G. and Marie C. Thursby, “University Licensing and the Bayh-Dole Act,”
Science, 301 (2003), 1052.
Toole, Andrew A. and Dirk Czarnitzki, “Biomedical Academic Entrepreneurship Through the
SBIR Program,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 63 (2007), 716-738.
Trajtenberg, Manuel, “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
Innovations,” RAND Journal of Economics, 21, no. 1 (1990), 172-187.
Washburn, Jennifer. University Inc.: The Corporate Corruption of Higher Education, New York:
Basic Books, 2008.

39

Appendix I: A Simple Formalization
Numerous countries maintain systems where the university, not the researcher, receives the
majority of commercialization income. To sharpen the ideas behind these policies (which
includes Norway after the professor’s privilege reform and the U.S. after the Bayh-Dole Act), we
introduce a simple formalization in the spirit of Holmstrom (1982). Namely, consider a
policymaker that seeks to encourage the flow of commercially-valuable innovations from
universities. This policy must balance the incentives of individual researchers with that of the
university itself, which may make complementary investments that support successful
technology commercialization. The policymaker’s lever is rules on the allocation of rights
assigned to each party.
To fix ideas, let a researcher have a unit of time of which a share is devoted to producing a
commercially-valuable innovation and the remainder 1

is used for other tasks (like basic

research, teaching, or leisure). The university can also make investments (e.g., through a TTO)
that facilitate the discovery and commercialization of technologies. By making an investment ,
the university improves the commercial success of a researcher's insight.
Let the expected value of innovations that result be

,

both arguments and where the inputs are complements (
portion

, which is increasing and concave in
0). The policy parameter is the

that accrues to the individual researcher, leaving a portion 1

for the university. As

Aghion and Tirole (1994) and Scotchmer (2004) have emphasized in innovation contexts, giving
all the rights to one party can make the first-best difficult to achieve given the desire to
incentivize investment by both parties, and as Holmstrom (1982) emphasized broadly, there can
be deep challenges in achieving first-best outcomes via the rent-sharing parameter .
In particular, given a researcher investing in commercialization activities, the university solves
the problem
1

,

(A1)

where the cost per unit of investment is . The university's investment level is thus sensitive to
their expected share of income, 1

.

40

Meanwhile, let the individual researcher have quasi-linear preferences in income so that, for a
given , the researcher solves the problem
̂
The researcher earns

,
,

, where

(A2)
represents the individual's academic salary or other

non-commercialization income.53 The disutility of commercialization effort (i.e. the loss of time
for basic research, leisure, or other activities) is given by

.54

With this simple approach, we can now examine the Nash equilibrium that emerges where the
researcher and university make their choices, ̂ and , as above, given the policy environment .
A key observation is that, with complementarities between university and researcher
investments, innovative output may not be maximized at

1, i.e. with a “professor’s

privilege”.55 Moreover, taking some rent share from one party may not only create more
innovation but also encourage the party with the declining rent share to exert more effort.
To understand the role of such complementarities, consider a standard labor supply diagram for
the researcher (see Figure A.1) and consider how the researcher’s budget constraint rotates in the
presence of changes in the researcher’s rent share. In a normal labor supply problem, increasing
the tax rate on earned income will rotate the budget constraint counter-clockwise around the
point C. This rotation generally creates two effects: the substitution effect will dissuade effort at
the task, while the income effect pushes the other way, leading to the standard theoretical
ambiguity linking tax rates and labor effort. Here, however, we have turned off income effects
given the quasi-linear preferences of (A2), so the substitution effect will determine the worker’s
response. Nonetheless, the presence of complementarities in investment makes the direction of
the rotation itself ambiguous. The slope of the budget set at an interior solution is

̂,

(see

point B in Figure A.1). Since the equilibrium investment of the university is a function of , i.e.,
, there is both a direct effect of reducing the researcher share, rotating the budget line
53

For simplicity and to focus on the issue of complementarity, we take quasi-linear preferences, which turn off
income effects and also remove considerations of risk aversion.
54
For simplicity, we will consider the model taking as fixed, although more generally this could be considered as a
taste parameter drawn from a distribution
. Thus, in general, some fraction of researchers may participate in
commercialization activities while others may not.
55
For example, this result appears directly for a Cobb-Douglas production function or more generally where each
input is necessary to positive production ( , 0
0,
0). In such cases, either
1 or
0 would not
produce positive commercialization output, as one party would not invest.

41

counterclockwise (like a standard tax), and an indirect effect, via changes in the university
investment, that can rotate the budget line clockwise (via complementary investment). Formally,
̂,

Lemma.
̂,

0.

,

,

0

1.

Proof. By the first order condition for the university researcher, ̂ is chosen such that
̂,
. Totally differentiating this condition with respect to we have
̂,

̂′

̂,

0 iff
̂,
̂,
0. Hence the
Noting that
0, it follows that ̂
first part of the Lemma. From the maximization problem for the university (see (1)), it follows
by inspection that
0 at
1. Thus, must be weakly larger for
1. Therefore
0
1.
The first term in the Lemma,

, represents the “tax effect” from , while the second term,

, captures the “complementarity effect” from , operating through the university’s
investment decision. By inspection, in the absence of complementarities (
56

investment increases in the researcher’s rent share.
complementarities (
university’s rent share (

0), researcher

However, in the presence of

0), and where the university’s investment is increasing in the
0), researcher effort may actually decline in the researcher’s rent

share. Indeed, starting with a “professor’s privilege” where the researcher has all rights to an
innovation (

1), the university does not invest: increasing the rent share to the university can

then encourage greater university investment, and this in turn may encourage more
(complementary) investment by the researcher -- even as the researcher’s share of the pie is
declining.
An Example that Can Motivate the Reform
A simple example can further illustrate the potentially non-monotonic relationship between a
party’s rent share and their equilibrium effort level. In particular, consider a CES production
function

56

Recall again that we are turning off income effects, for focus. If preferences were not linear in income, then taxing
a researcher more could alternatively encourage more effort via a sufficiently strong income effect.

42

/

,
with returns-to-scale parameter

(A3)

and elasticity of substitution

. Equilibrium investment

levels and innovative income are shown in Figure A.2 as a function of the policy
57

illustrative parameters.

for

We see that both researcher and university investments increase as one

initially moves away from the professor’s privilege. Indeed, this example is constructed to show
a case where net innovation income from university-based researchers peaks at

1/3. Thus,

emphasizing complementarities in investment may provide a natural logic for reforming the
“professor’s privilege” in the vein of several European countries – and the similar balance
between researcher and university rent shares often found in the United States today.
Of course, given that the empirical findings show a decline in the quantity and quality of both
start-up activity and patenting, the candidate theoretical example in Figure A.2 appears rejected
by the data. Alternative examples in the income rights framework that match the findings are
similarly easy to construct. For example, while the example in Figure A.2 assumed that the
productivity of the researcher and the university are equivalent (
the researcher’s role is substantially more important (

≫

), an alternative where

) and the inputs are gross

substitutes can push the commercialization peak to the corner solution where the professor is
given full rights, as in the pre-reform regime.
Application to Tax Rates
This income rights framework can also generate an implication for the effect of taxation.
Namely, the decline in

can be thought of in part as increasing the tax rate on researcher’s

commercialization income. The policy change (lowering ) acts both as a tax on researcher
income and an incentive for complementary investments by the university which may, ceteris
paribus, raise the return to the researcher’s investment. The additional effect on university
investment distinguishes the experiment from a narrower tax experiment on the university
researcher’s commercialization income. However, under the conditions of the model, the shift in
provides a lower bound on the effect of an equivalent tax.
Namely, for this illustration we set
1 so that the inventor and university are equally productive in their
investments;
0.5 so that there is decreasing returns to scale;
1 and
0.1 so that the costs of investment
are higher for the individual than the university; and
1/3 so that the inputs are complements but neither input is
necessary for positive output.
57

43

To see this application formally, define a tax rate on earned income, 1

, so that a researcher’s

after tax income is
,

(A4)

Write the equilibrium commercialization effort of the individual researcher as ̂
compare two policy regimes, a tax regime where
where

,

,

1,

,

. Now

and a rent-sharing regime

, 1 , so that the tax rate and rent-sharing rate are of equivalent size.

Lemma. ̂ 1,

̂

, 1 for

.

Proof. By the first order condition for the university researcher, ̂ is chosen such that
̂,
. The first order condition for the “tax” case where ,
1,
is then
̂ 1, , 1,
. The first order condition for the “property rights allocation” case
where

,

̂ ,1 ,

, 1 is then
̂ 1,

,

1,

̂ ,1 ,

,1

. It therefore follows that

,1 .

(A5)

Now note that
,1
1,
0, since the university does not invest when it has no rights
(see (A1)). Therefore, with
0 (i.e. maintaining the assumption that investments are
complements), (A5) can only hold if ̂ 1,
̂ , 1 . Hence the Lemma.
Based on this reasoning, university researchers appear very sensitive to the effective tax rates on
their expected income. Noting that

in the policy experiment is increased by two-thirds and that

the ensuing decline in start-up and patenting rates is approximately one-half to two-thirds, the
implied elasticity to an equivalent tax rate has a lower bound of 0.75.

44

Appendix II: Analysis of Publications
The end of the professor’s privilege may separately affect university researchers’ publication
behavior. To the extent that marketplace innovation becomes less appealing, the individual
university researcher may shift effort toward other activities, including basic research, teaching,
or leisure. The university commercialization literature has been concerned particularly with the
balance between commercialization effort and research effort, noting potential welfare tradeoffs
should patenting or start-up behavior come at the expense of basic research (e.g., National
Academy of Sciences 2010).
To inform this issue, we collected all Web of Science (WOS) publications with at least one
Norwegian address and then matched this data, based on author name, to the NIFU database of
university researchers. This approach allows us to integrate publication data and patent data for
the university researchers. Further, the NIFU database incorporates demographic information
about university researchers, including doctoral field, PhD cohort, age, and gender among other
observables.58
In assessing potential tradeoffs between commercialization and research activities, a central
question is whether these activities are substitutes or complements. On the one hand, viewed
from the perspective of a budget constraint (in time and/or money) effort at one task may seem to
detract inevitably from the other. However, to the extent that the researcher substitutes
commercialization activity against leisure or other non-research activities, commercialization
activity need not come at the expense of basic research. On the other hand, viewed from the
perspective of the knowledge production function, innovative and basic research activities may
be complements. For example, effort in creating patentable inventions may spark an individual’s
research insights, which in turn increases an individual’s publication output (e.g., Stokes 1997,
Azoulay et al. 2009).

58

The WOS provides an author’s last name and first initial only. Given the potential increased matching noise with
the limited information on first name, the analysis below focuses on the sample of individuals with low frequency
names in Norway. These are individuals for whom the full name (from the NIFU data) appears three or less times in
Norway as a whole. In practice, this drops 20% of the matched sample. In any case, using the full sample shows
similar results.

45

To shed light on these issues, we first analyze whether university researchers who patent
(“university inventors”) tend to publish more or less than university researchers who do not
patent. We find strong evidence that university inventors tend to publish substantially more
papers and also more highly-cited papers. Table A.1 column 1 shows that university inventors
average an additional 0.67 journal publications per year. Given an average publication rate of
1.08 publications per year for university researchers, the publication rate of the inventors appears
about 60% greater. Column 2 shows that the publication advantage of university inventors is
robust to controlling for year, PhD cohort, university, and doctoral field fixed effects, as well as
gender. The robustness to doctoral field fixed effects shows that the heightened publication
activity of university inventors is not due to the differences between, say, material science and
economics, but rather appears within the same field. Columns 3 and 4 reconsider publication
volume counting “fractional publications”, where an author receives 1/N credit for a paper,
where N is the number of authors. The increased publication rate of university inventors is
robust to this alternative accounting. Columns 5 and 6 consider mean citations received per
publication and show that the average citation impact of university inventors’ papers is
substantially higher than the citation impact for other university researchers. Collectively, these
findings suggest that university inventors are especially productive researchers, producing both
more papers and more highly-cited papers than their non-patenting counterparts. This finding
appears both across and within fields.
The greater publication output of university inventors may suggest that patenting and publication
activities are complements in production (e.g., Fabrizio and Di Minin 2008, Azoulay et al. 2009,
Buenstorf 2009). However, the positive correlations in Table A.1 may also be driven by an
individual-level effect, where some researchers are simply more productive at both tasks. Then
patenting and publications may still be substitutes within a given individual. The question of
whether patents and publications are complements or substitutes at the individual level is thus
unclear – and remains an important question for assessing potential tradeoffs with basic research
that may emerge from university commercialization policies.
The professor’s privilege reform provides an opportunity to further investigate this issue by
looking at how the publications within individuals respond when the incentives to patent

46

change.59 We again take a differences-in-difference approach, but face a limitation. Namely,
publications outside universities are rare in Norway, which makes control groups outside the
university context (and hence unaffected by the reform) difficult to find.60 Nonetheless, we may
proceed on a different tack, noting that patenting is sequestered within a relatively small number
of disciplines within universities so that a change in patent incentives may naturally affect some
university researchers far more than others. A regression approach can then study publications
by asking whether a treated group, for whom patenting matters relatively strongly, changes their
publication output compared to other university researchers, who would presumably be less
affected by the reform.
We consider two types of analyses along these lines. First, organizing the 35 different PhD
disciplines in the Norwegian data, we find 15 disciplines for which university researchers never
patent between 1995 and 2010. By contrast, in the top 5 PhD disciplines by patent propensity,
university researchers produce patents in 1.2% of researcher-years. Table A.2 considers
regressions that compare individual researchers in the top 5 patenting PhD disciplines (the
treated group) with those in PhD disciplines where patenting has not occurred (the control
group). The regressions include individual fixed effects which allow us to focus on within
individual changes. In column 1, we first consider the tendency to patent. In line with the
analysis in Section IV.B, patenting rates declines after the reform for individuals in the patentheavy disciplines. The following columns investigate publication measures. The findings
indicate that individual university researchers in patent-heavy fields do not measurably change
their publication rates after the reform compared to university researchers in patent-free fields.
The potential exception is that average citation impact appears to decline within individual
researchers in patent-heavy fields, after the reform. The statistical significance of this finding is,
however, not robust to other reasonable specifications along these lines, including those below.

59

Note that this analysis examines the interplay of patenting and publications; entrepreneurship may show a
different relationship with research output. Recall that we cannot link publications to the university entrepreneurs,
because the entrepreneurship analysis uses anonymized personal identifiers in Norwegian registry datasets (i.e., we
do not know the entrepreneurs’ names).
60
. In particular, examining WOS publications with Norwegian authors that do not match to university researcher
names, we see that these authors only publish once in ten years, on average, which is also about one-tenth the
publication rate for university researchers. It is thus difficult to find a relevant non-university control group for
publications in Norway.

47

A possible difficulty with the analysis in Table A.2 is that, even in patent-heavy fields, most
researchers do not patent. Therefore, any publication effects on “patent-sensitive” researchers
may go undetected by mixing them together with those who have no intention to patent. An
alternative approach then is to focus explicitly on university researchers with a demonstrated
interest in patenting; i.e., individuals who patented before the reform. We can then ask whether
these specific university inventors, upon the reform, changed their publication behavior. Table
A.3 considers this analysis. In columns 1-4, the control group is all other university researchers.
In columns 5-8, the control group is constructed from the two nearest neighbors for each prereform university inventor, where the nearest neighbors share the same PhD discipline as the
university inventor and have the closest average number of publications per year in the preperiod. Columns 1 and 5 consider patenting to confirm that the patenting behavior of these
individual inventors drops substantially after the reform. The remaining columns, which consider
publication measures as indicated in the table, show no statistically significant changes. If
anything, the coefficients tend to be negative, suggesting that publications of university inventors
may have relatively declined.
Together, these analyses show no indication that an increase in publications acted as a kind of
“silver lining”, offsetting the decline in university-based innovation detailed in main text. On
net, the publications do not appear clearly as either complements or substitutes for more applied
innovative activities. A tradeoff between inventive activity and publication activity does not
visibly emerge at the individual level, which calls into question the concern that university
commercialization activity comes at the expense of basic research.

48

0

0

5

University Startups
10
15
20

25

1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
Non-University Startups

30

Figure 1A: University Startups vs. Non-university Startups

2000

2001

2002

2003
2004
Year of Foundation

University

2005

2006

2007

Non University

0

University Startups, per Researcher
.002
.004
.006

0
.001
.002
.003
Non-University Startups, per Norwegian Worker

.008

Figure 1B: University vs. Non-university Startups, per Worker

2000

2001

2002

2003
2004
Year of Foundation

University

2005

2006

Non University

49

2007

0

0

10

100

University Patents
20
30
40
50

200
300
400
Non-University Patents

60

500

70

Figure 2A: University Patents vs. Non-university Patents

1995

1997

1999

2001
2003
2005
Year of Patent Application

University

2007

2009

Non University

0
.00005
.0001
.00015
.0002
Non-University Patents, per Norwegian worker

University Patents, per University Researcher
0
.005
.01
.015
.02

Figure 2B: University Patents vs. Non-university Patents, per Worker

1995

1997

1999

2001
2003
2005
Year of Patent Application

University

2007

Non University

50

2009

Table 1A: Summary Statistics for Start-Up Firms in Norway, 2000-2007
Non University
48,844

Non University Ph.D.
452

University
128

Mean

0.74

0.83

0.87

Sales at 5 years

Mean
(St Dev)
Median
75th ptile
95th ptile

5,160
(13,282)
1,751
4,834
20,769

2,308
(4,777)
628
2,210
10,815

2,659
(9,934)
183
1,550
9,374

Employees at 5 years

Mean
(St Dev)
Median
75th ptile
95th ptile

3.31
(7.77)
1
4
13

1.68
(3.16)
1
2
7

1.22
(2.89)
0
1
5

Profits at 5 years

Mean
(St Dev)
Median
75th ptile
95th ptile

198
(554)
43.1
283
1,358

220
(599)
41.2
296
1,555

100
(600)
-6.50
215
1,555

Number of Start-Ups
Fraction Surviving
at 5 years

Notes: Sales, Employees, and Profits are conditional on survival at year 5. Profits and sales are measured
in 1000 NOK.

51

Table 1B: Summary Statistics for Entrepreneurs in Norway, 2000-2007

Number of Entrepreneurs

69,496

Non University
Ph.D.
413

Age of Founder, Mean
(St Dev)
Median

41.6
(9.95)
40

47.4
(8.98)
46

47.8
(8.90)
47

Fraction with highest degree
Bachelors
Masters
Ph.D.

0.23
0.09
0.006

1
1
1

1
1
1

Income, Mean
(St Dev)
Median

422
(675)
343

752
(513)
631

609
(265)
527

Wealth, Mean
(St Dev)
Median

1,520
(12,200)
449

1,610
(2,910)
731

1,140
(1,550)
581

Non University

University
125

0.74
0.74
0.59
Marital Status, Mean
(0.44)
(0.49)
(0.44)
(St Dev)
1
1
1
Median
Fraction male
0.79
0.88
0.94
Notes: Income and wealth are measured in 1000 NOK. Income, wealth, marital status, and age are
measured in year prior to founding of firm.

Table 1C: Summary Statistics for Patenting in Norway
All Norway

University

Number of Patents
7,341
750
Number of Unique Inventors
6,890
431
Percentage Male, workforce
50.4%
65.9%
Percentage Male, Inventors
94.3%*
92.8%
Period
1995-2010
1995-2010
Notes: *Male percentage for all inventors is estimated using gender for common names in Norway.
(Other gender calculations are not estimates; gender for university sample is given directly by NIFU
database and for Norwegian workforce from census data.)

52

Table 2: Startups, Aggregate and Sector Level Analysis
(1)

Log
Startups
Treated x Post
Treated
Post
Year FE
Sector FE
Control
Sample
Period
Model
Observations
R-squared

(2)
(3)
Aggregate
Log
Startups
Per
Log
Worker
Startups

(4)

(5)

(6)
Sector

Log
Startups
Per
Worker

Log
Startups

Log
Startups

(7)

Startups

-0.912*** -1.102*** -0.603** -0.667**
-0.504*
-0.431*
-0.591***
(0.172)
(0.179)
(0.232)
(0.242)
(0.265)
(0.224)
(0.206)
-5.477*** 1.167*** -0.961***
-0.998
-5.214*** -1.450*** -0.969***
(0.0546)
(0.0614)
(0.110)
(0.128)
(0.229)
(0.250)
(0.103)
0.0517
0.0163
-0.258
-0.478**
---(0.0671)
(0.0650)
(0.170)
(0.113)
----Yes
Yes
Yes
----Yes
Yes
Yes
Norwegian Norwegian
PhD
PhD
Norwegian
PhD
PhD
Workforce Workforce workforce workforce Workforce workforce workforce
20002000-2007 2000-2007
2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007 2000-2007
2007
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
Poisson
16
16
16
16
120
108
160
0.997
0.849
0.909
0.800
0.97
0.78
--

Notes: Columns (1) and (3) consider aggregate counts per year for the treatment and control groups. Columns (2)
and (4) consider aggregate counts per worker. In columns (5)-(7), observations are sector x year for the treatment
and control groups, with sector determined by the 1-digit NACE code. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

53

Table 3: Startups, Individual Level, All Workers

Treated x Post
Treated
Post
Observations
R-squared
Year FE
Individual FE
Age FE
Individual timevarying controls

(1)
All
Workers

(2)
All
Workers

(3)
All
Workers

(4)
(5)
Entrepreneurs Entrepreneurs
only
only

-0.00450***
(0.000974)
0.00358***
(0.000914)
-0.000275***
(2.88e-05)
19,937,044
0.000
NO
NO
NO

-0.00457***
(0.00110)
0.000343
(0.00156)
--

-0.00431***
(0.00111)
-0.000142
(0.00160)
--

-0.131***
(0.0283)
-0.000436
(0.0440)
--

-0.114***
(0.0285)
-0.0136
(0.0450)
--

19,937,044
0.164
YES
YES
NO

19,937,044
0.165
YES
YES
YES

535,039
0.029
YES
YES
NO

535,039
0.032
YES
YES
YES

NO

NO

YES

NO

YES

Period
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the individual started a company that year. Estimates are
the linear probability model. Non-linear probability models (Probit or Logit) produce similar results but must be
estimated without individual fixed effects. The individual time-varying controls include lagged marital status,
lagged total years of education dummies, log income, and log wealth. Standard errors are clustered by individual
(*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).

54

Table 4: Startups, Individual Level, Similar Workers
(1)
Masters or
more
Treated x Post
Treated
Observations
R-squared
Year FE
Individual FE
Age FE
Individual timevarying controls

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Ph.D.

Ph.D.
Logit

Ph.D.
Propensity
Score Match

Ph.D.
Entrepreneurs
only

Ph.D.
Entrepreneurs
only

Ph.D.
Earned pre
2000

-0.00177***
(0.199)
-0.00006
(0.0005)
97,167
-YES
NO
YES

-0.00382**
(0.00190)
-0.00142
(0.00267)
55,800
0.271
YES
YES
YES

-0.0865***
(0.0284)
0.0478**
(0.01999)
4,029
0.017
YES
NO
NO

-0.0878***
(0.0288)
0.0474**
(0.0200)
4,029
0.030
YES
NO
YES

-0.0028*
(0.0015)
-0.0011
(0.0021)
78,467
0.165
YES
YES
YES

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

-0.00339*** -0.00231
(0.00114)
(0.00143)
-0.00072
-0.00135
(0.00165)
(0.00190)
1,222,103
97,660
0.173
0.177
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES

20002000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
2007
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the individual started a company that year. Estimates are
the linear probability model, except in column (3) which computes Logit, marginal effects. Column (1) restricts
sample to Norwegian workers with at least a master’s degree. All other specification restrict sample to Norwegian
workers with a least a Ph.D. The individual time-varying controls include lagged marital status, lagged total years
of education dummies, log income, and log wealth. Propensity score matching predicts treatment status (university
employment) using age fixed effects, detailed Ph.D. type fixed effects, gender, and marital status. Standard errors,
in parentheses, are clustered by individual (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).

Period

2000-2007

55

Table 5: Startups, Individual Level, Intensive Margin
(1)
(2)
(3)
Pre-Period University Researchers
All
Ph.D.
Ph.D., Logit
Treated x Post
Treated

-0.00495***
(0.00130)
--

-0.00302*
(0.00165)
--

Observations
R-squared
Year FE
Individual FE
Age FE

16,523,512
0.153
YES
YES
YES

66,310
0.159
YES
YES
YES

(4)
All

(5)
Stayers
Ph.D.

(6)
Ph.D., Logit

-0.00240*** -0.00502*** -0.00305* -0.00248***
(0.000616)
(0.00138) (0.00173) (0.000625)
0.000134
--0.000134
(0.000722)
(0.000722)
63,161
16,521,472
64,270
63,996
-0.153
0.159
-YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES

Individual timeYES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
varying controls
Period
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
2000-2007
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the individual started a company that year. Estimates are
the linear probability model, except in columns (3) and (6), which reports marginal effects from logit regressions.
The control group is all Norwegian workers in columns (1) and (4) and non-university PhDs in columns (2), (3), (5)
and (6). Individual time-varying controls include lagged marital status, lagged total years of education dummies, log
income, and log wealth. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered by individual (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1).

56

Table 6A: Start-up Performance at Year 5

Treated x Post

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Survive

Log Sales

Log
Employees

Log
Assets

Survive

Log Sales

Log
Employees

Log
Assets

-0.1510*
(0.0868)
Treated
0.0326
(0.0547)
Observations
48,972
R-squared
0.0419
Year FE
YES
2-digit sector FE
YES
Control Sample
Norway

-0.9366**
-0.0337
(0.4489)
(0.1274)
-0.4647 -0.2682***
(0.2916)
(0.0878)
36,172
44,277
0.1441
0.0914
YES
YES
YES
YES
Norway
Norway

-0.5341
(0.3557)
0.0758
(0.1962)
36,199
0.0437
YES
YES
Norway

-0.0820
-0.7436
0.0827
-0.4037
(0.1047)
(0.5574)
(0.1449)
(0.4045)
-0.0102
-0.0461
-0.2011*
0.2476
(0.0689)
(0.3828)
(0.1025)
(0.2572)
580
485
543
485
0.317
0.1657
0.1378
0.1327
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Non-Uni Non-Uni
Non-Uni
Non-Uni
PhD
PhD
PhD
PhD
Notes: Dependent variables are indicated at top of each column and indicate performance at year 5 after the
founding year. Firms all founded 2000-2007, and performance data is then 2005-2012. Robust standard errors in
parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).

Table 6B: Probability of Achieving 75th Percentile Performance at Year 5
(1)
Sales

(2)
Employees

(3)
Assets

(4)
Sales

(5)
Employees

(6)
Assets

-0.1198**
(0.0490)
-0.0262
(0.0452)
48,972
0.0591

0.0170
(0.0536)
-0.1032***
(0.0373)

-0.1303*
(0.0757)
0.0810
(0.0550)

-0.1091*
(0.0628)
0.0169
(0.0547)

48,972
0.0283
YES

580
0.1197
YES

-0.0695
(0.0933)
0.0507
(0.0684)
580
0.0813

YES

48,972
0.0585
YES

0.0155
(0.0663)
-0.0418
(0.0484)
580
0.1036
YES

YES

2-digit sector FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Control Sample

Norway

Norway

Norway

Treated x Post
Treated
Observations
R-squared
Year FE

Non-Uni PhD Non-Uni PhD Non-Uni PhD

Notes: Dependent variables are binary indicators for achieving at least the 75th percentile of performance in the
indicated measure, where the 75th percentile is defined for Norwegian startups as a whole. Robust standard errors in
parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).

57

Table 6C: Start-up Sectors

Treated x Post
Treated
Post
Observations
R-squared
Control Sample
Startup Type

(1)
Log Startups

(2)
Log Startups

(3)
Log Startups

(4)
Log Startups

-0.727**
(0.322)
-4.046***
(0.263)
-0.252*
(0.117)
16
0.987
Norwegian
Workforce
Higher
Tech

-0.277
(0.391)
-0.484*
(0.243)
-0.701**
(0.251)
16
0.673
PhD
workforce
Higher
Tech

-1.239***
(0.352)
-3.201***
(0.265)
-0.0305
(0.0809)
16
0.978
Norwegian
Workforce
Higher Tech,
No ICT

-1.245*
(0.632)
0.520
(0.434)
-0.0240
(0.531)
16
0.386
PhD
workforce
Higher Tech,
No ICT

Notes: Dependent variables are log of start-up counts for the indicated startup-type in the last row of table.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).

58

Table 7: Patents, Annual Rates, Aggregate and Technology Level Analysis
(1)
Log
Patents
Treated x Post
Treated
Post
Application
Year FE
Tech Class FE
Control
Sample
Model
Observations
R-squared
Period

(2)

(3)

Aggregate
Log
Log Patents
Patents
per Worker

(4)
Log Inventors
per Worker

(5)
(6)
Technology
Log
Patents
Patents

-0.228*
(0.131)
-2.089***
(0.110)
-0.066
(0.054)

-0.228**
(0.089)
-2.089***
(0.073)
--

-0.647***
(0.111)
4.499***
(0.063)
--

-0.728***
(0.208)
7.614***
(0.099)
--

-0.257*
(0.137)
-2.060***
(0.103)
--

-0.242***
(0.057)
-2.064***
(0.173)
--

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

-Non
University
Inventors
OLS
32
0.98
1995-2010

-Non
University
Inventors
OLS
32
0.99
1995-2010

-Non
University
Inventors
OLS
32
0.99
1995-2010

-Non
University
Inventors
OLS
32
0.99
1995-2010

YES
YES
Non
Non
University University
Inventors
Inventors
OLS
Poisson
236
256
0.87
-1995-2010 1995-2010

Notes: In columns (1)-(4), observations consider aggregate patent counts for the treatment and control groups, by
year. In columns (1)-(2) we consider log annual patent counts, while columns (3)-(4) consider log counts per
worker, where worker count is the Norwegian workforce for the control sample and worker count is the university
researcher workforce for the treatment sample. In columns (5)-(6), observations are technology class x year for the
treatment and control groups, with technology class determined by the 1-digit IPC code. Model is Poisson for count
data, which allows incorporation of zero counts. Robust standard errors in parentheses, except column (6) which
clusters standard errors by technology class (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).

59

Table 8: Patents, Individual Level, Inventors
Dependent variable: Indicator for patenting in given year

Treated x Post
Treated
Post
Application Year FE
Individual FE
R2
Obs
Period

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

All Inventors

All Inventors

All Inventors

Rare Names

-0.045***
(0.011)
0.049***
(0.009)
-0.006***
(0.002)
NO
NO
0.00
109,184
1995-2010

-0.044***
(0.011)
0.048***
(0.009)
--

-0.045***
(0.011)
0.042***
(0.012)
--

-0.037**
(0.016)
0.040**
(0.017)
0.017***

YES
NO
0.00
109,184
1995-2010

YES
YES
0.00
109,184
1995-2010

YES
YES
0.00
75,008
1995-2010

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the individual patented at least once that year. Estimates
are the linear probability model. Standard errors clustered by individual (* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01).

60

Table 9: Patents, Individual Level, Intensive Margin
Dependent variable: Indicator for patenting in given year
(1)

(2)

(3)

Pre-Period University Researchers
Treated x Post
Treated
Post
Application Year FE
Individual FE
R2
Obs
Period

-0.045***
(0.012)
0.047***
(0.009)
-0.005**
(0.002)
NO
NO
0.00
105,840
1995-2010

-0.045***
(0.012)
--YES
YES
0.00
105,840
1995-2010

(4)
Stayers

-0.047***
(0.015)
0.049***
(0.012)
-0.005**
(0.002)
NO
NO
0.00
104,928
1995-2010

-0.046***
(0.015)
--YES
YES
0.00
102,864
1995-2010

Notes: Following Table 5, in columns (1) and (2) the treated sample includes university researchers employed at the
university from 2000-2002, regardless of whether they remain at university after the reform. In columns (3) and (4),
the treated sample contains researchers who are at the university throughout the 2000-2007 period. Results are
similar using the full sample period (2000-2015) to define these “stayers”. In all cases, the control sample is
inventors who were never employed at university throughout the sample period. Standard errors clustered by
individual (* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01).

61

Table 10: Patents, Citations Received

Treated x Post
Treated
Application
Year FE
Regression
Model
R2
Obs

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Citation
Count

Citation
Count

Citation
Count

75th
percentile
patent

90th
percentile
patent

99th
percentile
patent

-0.250*
(0.152)
0.341***
(0.099)

-0.292**
(0.149)
0.348***
(0.098)

-2.245**
(0.900)
2.516***
(0.827)

-0.474***
(0.178)
0.527***
(0.107)

-0.386*
(0.231)
0.533***
(0.144)

-1.574*
(0.810)
1.022***
(0.355)

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

OLS

Logit

Logit

Logit

0.04
7,162

-6,831

-7,162

-7,162

Poisson
-7,162

Negative
binomial
-7,162

Notes: In columns (1)-(3) the dependent variable is the count of citations received by each patent. Columns (4)-(6)
examine the propensity to produce unusually highly-cited patents. The dependent variable in these columns is an indicator
equal to 1 if the patent receives citations at or above the indicated threshold. Robust standard errors in parentheses (*
p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01).

62

Figure A.1: Researcher Utility Maximization and Effort at Commercial Innovation

Researcher
income
Slope is

,
B
C

0,

s=1

s=0

|

63

1‐s

Figure A.2: Investment and Innovation as Function of Researcher Rent Share (α)

0

0

5

Researcher Investment (s)
.1
.2
.3

10
15
20
University Investment (x)

.4

25

CES Example

0

.2

.4
.6
Researcher Share of Income

1

University Investment (x)

0

1

Total Income
2

3

4

Researcher Investment (s)

.8

0

.2

.4
.6
Researcher Share of Income

Notes: Example is CES (see equation (A3)). Parameters are

64

1,

.8

0.5,

1

1,

0.1, and

1/3.

Table A.1: The Publication Output of University Inventors

University Inventor
Doctoral Field FE
PhD Year FE
Year FE
University FE
Gender
R2
Obs

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Publications

Publications

Fractional
Publications

Fractional
Publications

Mean
Citations

Mean
Citations

0.668***
(0.188)
No
No
No
No
No
0.00
49,640

0.487***
(0.185)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.08
49,640

0.177***
(0.051)
No
No
No
No
No
0.07
49,640

0.131***
(0.051)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.00
49,640

3.317***
(0.976)
No
No
No
No
No
0.05
49,640

1.945**
(0.979)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.04
49,640

Notes: Regressions are OLS. Observations are individual name by year. The sample mean of the dependent
variables are 1.08 (publications), 0.30 (fractional publications), and 6.06 (mean citations). Doctoral field fixed
effects account for differences between 35 different fields. The sample is limited to university researchers with rare
names, though using entire sample produces similar results. Standard errors clustered by individual (* p<0.1; **
p<0.05; *** p<0.01).

Table A.2: The Change in Publication Output within Individuals Patent-Heavy vs. Patent-Free Research Disciplines

Patent-Heavy x Post
Individual FE
Year FE
R2
Obs

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Patents

Publications

Fractional
Publications

Mean
Citations

-0.006**
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
0.25

0.025
(0.107)
Yes
Yes
0.00

-0.034
(0.024)
Yes
Yes
0.64

-1.971***
(0.657)
Yes
Yes
0.00

17,329

17,329

17,329

17,329

Notes: Regressions are OLS. The patent-heavy and post terms are absorbed by the individual and year fixed
effects, respectively. Patent-heavy fields are the top 5 (of 35) PhD disciplines by patent propensity on a per-person
and per-year basis. Patent-free fields are the 15 (of 35) PhD disciplines with zero patents by university researchers
from 1995-2010. Observations are individual name by year. The sample is limited to university researchers with
rare names, though using the entire sample produces similar results. Standard errors clustered by individual (*
p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01).

65

Table A.3: The Change in Publication Output within Individuals University Inventors vs. Non-Inventors
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Control Group: All Other University Researchers
Patents

Publications

Fractional
Publications

Mean
Citations

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Control Group: Nearest Neighbors
Patents

Publications

Fractional
Publications

Mean
Citations

Inventor
-0.120***
-0.122
-0.073
-1.774
-0.123***
-0.177
-0.050
0.583
x Post
(0.018)
(0.194)
(0.057)
(1.414)
(0.018)
(0.275)
(0.073)
(1.982)
Indiv FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.26
0.75
0.64
0.32
0.23
0.77
0.61
0.35
R2
Obs
49,640
49,640
49,640
49,640
3,694
3,694
3,694
3,694
Notes: Regressions are OLS. The inventor and post terms are absorbed by the individual and year fixed effects,
respectively. Inventors are those university researchers who patented prior to the reform. In columns (1)-(4) the
control group is all other university researchers. In columns (5)-(8) the control group are the two nearest neighbors
to the inventor based on pre-reform publication rates, conditional on being in the same PhD field. Observations are
individual name by year. The sample is limited to university researchers with rare names, though using the entire
sample produces similar results. Standard errors clustered by individual (* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01).

66

