                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE LIMITS OF PROPAGANDA:
                        EVIDENCE FROM CHAVEZ'S VENEZUELA

                                         Brian Knight
                                          Ana Tribin

                                      Working Paper 22055
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22055


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




For helpful comments, we thank seminar participants at Brown University, Rice University,
Carnegie Mellon University, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Stony Brook Political Economy
Conference, and the New York City Media Seminar. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Brian Knight and Ana Tribin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Limits of Propaganda: Evidence from Chavez's Venezuela
Brian Knight and Ana Tribin
NBER Working Paper No. 22055
March 2016
JEL No. D6,D70,D8

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we investigate viewer responses to changes in the ideological content of television
programming using variation induced by cadenas, unannounced takeovers of the public television
airwaves by the government in Venezuela. Using high-frequency ratings data, we find that,
consistent with the predictions of our choice model, the drop-off in ratings during cadenas is
concentrated among viewers of news programming on opposition private channels, as opposed to
viewers of news on pro-government public channels. Also consistent with the predictions of our
model, the drop-off in ratings for private channels with moderate ideology takes an intermediate
value. In addition, the drop-off is stronger for viewers with access to cable channels, which are
not required to air cadenas. Consistent with this result, we also show that viewership of an
opposition cable channel rises during cadenas. Complementing this analysis, we then estimate the
parameters of the theoretical model in a structural analysis. Using these parameter estimates, we
consider counterfactual scenarios, allowing for an examination of the dynamic responses of
viewers of differing ideology to cadenas and an analysis of the welfare consequences of cadenas.


Brian Knight
Brown University
Department of Economics, Box B
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
Brian_Knight@brown.edu

Ana Tribin
Central Bank of Columbia
Bogota, Colombia
atribiur@banrep.gov.co
1      Introduction
The media is often considered essential in the functioning of democracy via the provision of infor-
mation to voters. At the same time, there is a temptation for incumbent governments to use media
outlets to deliver political propaganda. This propaganda can be used by the government, among
other ways, to promote its policies, increase its standing with the population in advance of elec-
tions, and to criticize opposition leaders and parties. If influential, propaganda may lead to moral
hazard, via poor monitoring of incumbents by voters, and the re-election of low quality politicians
and parties.
    Sophisticated consumers of information may respond to such propaganda in a variety of ways.
One possibility involves viewers discounting biased information.1 A second possibility involves
viewers switching to other media outlets that are not delivering government propaganda.2 With
a preference for like-minded information, this second possibility is particularly relevant for con-
sumers affiliated with the opposition. Given that the second option will only be available in media
sectors that are pluralistic, a third possibility involves consumers simply “tuning out”, or consum-
ing less information overall across all media outlets. Like the second option, tuning out may be
especially relevant for the opposition.
    In this paper, we focus on these two latter responses, switching to outlets with like-minded con-
tent and tuning out. By their very nature, these responses can limit the influence of propaganda.
Given that, as noted above, both switching and tuning out may be especially common among the
opposition, then propaganda, if influential, may lead to an increased polarization of the electorate.
Likewise, we examine whether or not switching and tuning out are more common among individ-
uals with a larger choice set. If so, and given that higher income individuals typically have larger
choice sets, polarization according to income may also increase, with the poor disproportionately
exposed to and influenced by propaganda.
    While Durante and Knight (2012) investigate, in the Italian context, switching over several
years, we investigate these issues, both switching and tuning out, using high-frequency television
ratings data from the country of Venezuela, where Hugo Chavez and his successor have routinely
used cadenas, speeches by government officials that are required to be aired live by all broad-
cast television channels. Thus, during a cadena, viewers watching television face the same pro-
gramming on every broadcast channel. Importantly, these cadenas are not announced in advance
to viewers, providing an experiment through which to examine short-run responses, in terms of
changes in viewership, to government propaganda. In addition, cadenas were not required to be
aired by cable channels during our sample period, allowing us to examine whether households with
    1 See   Chiang and Knight (2011).
    2 See   Durante and Knight (2012).



                                                 2
larger choice sets are more likely to switch to other outlets when faced with propaganda. Finally,
broadcast channels in Venezuela during our sample period cover the political spectrum and can be
naturally categorized as either opposition or pro-government. This allows us to examine whether
switching and tuning out are more common among opposition viewers, who, as we document using
survey data, are more likely to watch opposition news programming.
    To develop a set of testable hypotheses, we begin by building a simple model of consumer
choice of television programming. In the model, there are two types of consumers, opposition
and pro-government, both with a preference for like-minded information, two types of channels,
opposition and government, and two types of programming, news and cadenas. We begin by
assuming that both channels are required to air cadenas and thus initially focus on tuning out. The
model predicts that, with positive switching costs and a preference for like-minded news, the drop-
off in viewership when transitioning from news to cadena is more significant for the opposition
channel than for the pro-government channel. This is due to the selection of opposition viewers
into news programming on the opposition channel and the selection of pro-government viewers
into news programming on the government channel. Introducing a third channel, which is moderate
in nature, the model predicts that the drop-off in ratings when moving from news programming to
cadenas should be most significant for the opposition channel, followed by the moderate channel,
followed by the government channel. Finally, we consider an extension of the model to allow for
switching via a cable channel, which is not required to air cadenas, and this extension provides
two additional predictions. First, the model predicts that the drop-off in viewership on the private
network, relative to the public network, should be more significant for households with access to
cable, when compared to households without cable. Second, cable viewership, due to its role as
an outside option, should be higher during the airing of cadenas on broadcast channels, relative to
when cadenas are not aired on broadcast channels.
    We then test these predictions using data on television ratings from Venezuela. These data cover
the years 2006 and 2007 and are high-frequency in nature (i.e. day-by-day and show-by-show).
Consistent with the first prediction of the model, we find that the drop-off in viewership when
transitioning from news programming to cadenas is more significant for the opposition channel
than for the government channel. Consistent with the second prediction of the model, we find that
the drop-off in viewership for news programming on the moderate channel takes an intermediate
value, between that of opposition channels and that of government channels. Next, focusing on the
outside option, we find that, consistent with switching, cable viewership rises during cadenas and
the drop-off in viewership is more significant for those with access to cable.
    Complementing this analysis, we also estimate the underlying structural parameters of the
model; these include switching costs and the value of ideological information. Using these param-
eter estimates, we document the dynamic viewer responses to cadenas, which lead, for example, to


                                                 3
a persistent reduction in viewership among opposition viewers watching opposition channels. We
also use the parameter estimates to conduct a normative analysis, in which we measure the welfare
costs of cadenas to opposition and pro-government viewers.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a discussion of the relevant literature. Sec-
tion 3 provides an overview of the key institutional details. Section 4 develops our key hypotheses
in the context of a simple choice model. Section 5 describes the data, and Section 6 provides our
results. Section 7 provides the structural estimates and counterfactual exercises. Finally, Section 8
offers a brief conclusion.


2    Related Literature
This paper contributes to several literatures on media bias. Several studies have documented a pref-
erence for like-minded news. These include Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), Durante and Knight
(2012), Martin and Yurukoglu (2015), and Gentzkow et al. (2014). One difference between our
study and this literature involves the frequency of responses. While these studies tend to study
long-run relationships between the choice of media outlets and consumer ideology, our paper mea-
sures high-frequency, short-run changes in media consumption associated with a preference for
like-minded news. Given inertia, it is possible that short-run responses are much smaller than
long-run responses.
    In addition, there is a literature that examines the influence of media bias on political outcomes.
These include DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007), Enikolopov et al. (2011), George and Waldfogel
(2003), Chiang and Knight (2011), Gentzkow et al. (2011), Gerber et al. (2009), Martin and Yu-
rukoglu (2015), and Snyder and Stromberg (2010). See DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010) and Prat
and Stromberg (2013) for a comprehensive overview of this literature. To the extent that viewers
self-select into channels with like-minded ideological content and to the extent that such ideolog-
ical content is influential, then government propaganda may lead to increased polarization in the
electorate, with those already inclined to support the government being disproportionately exposed
to and influenced by propaganda.
    There is also a related literature focused on government propaganda disseminated by mass
media. DiTella et al. (2012) study the effects of government propaganda against privatization
of water services after the 2006 nationalization in Argentina, finding that the effect is large and
significant for households that had not experienced expansions in the water network during the
period of privatization. Qian and Yanagizawa-Drott (2013) document an increase in U.S. news
coverage of human rights abuses in countries not aligned with the U.S. when they rotated onto
the U.N. Security Council during the Cold War, with opposite effects, a reduction in coverage, for
countries aligned with the U.S. They report similar patterns for reports produced by the U.S. State

                                                  4
Department, suggesting an important role for government propaganda. Other literature focuses on
the power of propaganda to mobilize the masses. Welch (1993) and Adena et al. (2015) document
the importance of political propaganda to mobilize support for the Nazis, and Yanagizawa-Drott
(2014) provides evidence on the role of propaganda broadcast on radio by the Hutu government
during the Rwandan genocide. Finally, DellaVigna et al. (2014) document an instance in which
propaganda had negative consequences: cross-border exposure to Serbian radio among Croats is
associated with anti-Serbian sentiment and anti-Serbian behavior.


3     Institutional Context
This section covers the political career of Hugo Chavez, the role of the opposition during Chavez’s
time in office, and the role of television in the political system of Venezuela. This section draws
upon Wilpert (2007), Corrales and Penfold (2011), Nelson (2009), Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela
(2012) and Dinneen (2012).
    In 1998, the leftist candidate Hugo Chavez won the presidential elections in Venezuela with 56
percent of the vote. Chavez promised a "Bolivarian revolution" designed to lessen social exclusion,
poverty and government corruption. Chavez was re-elected in 2000, 2006, and 2012, and he served
as President until his death in 2013.
    Since the beginning of Chavez’s time in office, the right-wing opposition was committed to
removing him from power. In April 2002, the opposition led a coup, which failed a few days after
some initial successes. Later that year, during December 2002, the opposition organized a national
strike in the oil industry aimed at toppling Chavez. Then, in 2004, the right-wing coalition tried to
remove Chavez from power via a Presidential recall referendum, which ultimately failed, with 59
percent of voters supporting Chavez.3
    During these confrontations, the private media sector tended to side with the opposition. For
example, private television channels tended to cover only anti-government protests during the coup
and pointed to the government as the cause of violence in the struggle between Pro-Chavez and
Anti-Chavez protesters. Once Chavez returned to power, private channels stopped broadcasting
news, and a Chavez speech was aired in split-screen to broadcast anti-Chavez protests in parallel
with the speech by Chavez. During the strike, the media gave priority to this issue for more than
two months, often suspending regular programming for more extensive coverage of the crisis.
Even when the protests were significantly weakened, some private media commentators continued
to call for Chavez’s resignation in order to end the crisis.
    3 Chang-Tai et al. (2011) document that voters who supported the Presidential recall referendum against Chavez
experienced a significant reduction in earnings and employment following the public release of a list of voters who
signed the recall petition.



                                                        5
    During these events, tensions between the private media and government were at their peak,
with Chavez referring to major private television channels (Venevision, RCTV, Globovision and
Televen) as the "four Horsemen of the apocalypse", and, more generally, his language against the
private media became very aggressive.4 In 2004, before the recall referendum, Chavez met with the
owner of Venevision, leading to a warming in relations between the channel and President Chavez.5
Then, Televen followed the initiative to moderate their anti-Chavez tone around the same period.6
However, Globovision and RCTV (Radio Caracas Television), the oldest and largest television
station, remained in opposition to the government.
    This partitioning of private channels into opposition (RCTV and Globovision) and moderate
(Televen and Venevision) is consistent with media monitoring during the 2006 Presidential elec-
tions. In particular, EU-EOM (2006) document that RCTV and Globovision devoted a majority of
their coverage to the opposition party, whereas Televen and Venevision devoted a majority of their
coverage to Chavez’s party. Not surprisingly, the main public channel, VTV, also devoted dispro-
portionate coverage to Chavez’s party. Similar patterns were found with respect to the tone of the
coverage, with positive coverage of the opposition and negative coverage of Chavez on RCTV and
Globovision. Coverage of both Chavez and the opposition by Televen and Venevision, by contrast,
was largely positive in nature. Finally, coverage of Chavez on the main public channel VTV was
primarily positive, with decidedly negative coverage of the opposition.
    In May 2007, the broadcasting license of RCTV expired and was not renewed by the govern-
ment, and RCTV was replaced overnight by TVES, a government-run channel. The government’s
rationale for closing RCTV had two key components: alleged violations of broadcast laws and
their coverage of the coup and the strike in the oil sector. Later that year, during July 2007, RCTV
re-emerged as a cable channel under the name RCTV International.7
    In addition to not renewing the broadcast license of RCTV, Chavez attempted to influence the
media via government channels and cadenas, speeches by government officials that must be aired
live by all non-cable (i.e. broadcast) channels and which are not announced in advance to stations
or viewers.8 Bisbal (2009) estimates that 1,731 cadenas were broadcast between 1999 and June
2008, totaling over 1,000 hours. According to Kitzberger (2010) and Reporters Without Borders
(2003), cadenas are used by Chavez to mobilize supporters, criticize and threaten adversaries, and
   4 Chavez accused the private channels publicly of : “inciting rebellion and disrespect for legitimate institutions

and authorities”, “broadcasting false, misleading or biased news reports”, “harming the reputation and good name of
persons or institutions” and promoting “subversion of public and social order.” See Reporters Without Borders (2003).
   5 New York Times (2007).
   6 See Besley and Prat (2006) for an analysis of government capture of the media sector.
   7 RCTV International was later shut down, closing in 2010.
   8 In addition to cadenas, Chavez also hosts a public television program titled “Alo Presidente”, where he promoted

the Bolivarian revolution. The show started at 11 am every Sunday and lasted about 5 hours (Kitzberger (2010)).
Frajman (2014) argues that Alo Presidente was a “grand stage for Chavez to promote his position as revolutionary
leader and be cheered by crowds of loyal supporters”.


                                                         6
more generally, for political campaigning.


4     Theoretical Model
This section develops a simple theoretical model to provide a set of hypotheses for the empirical
analysis of ratings data. In addition, the model provides a framework for the structural analy-
sis to follow. We begin with the simple case of only two types of viewers (opposition and pro-
government), two channels (opposition and government), and two types of programming (news
and cadenas). In extensions of the model, we then introduce a third channel, which is moderate
in nature, and then separately consider how the results differ with the presence of a cable channel
that is not required to air cadenas.


4.1   Baseline case
Viewers, indexed by v, are of two types: pro-government (g) and opposition (o). Let the fraction
of each type in the population be given by πg and πo = 1 − πg , respectively.
    News stations, indexed by i, are also of two types: government (g) or opposition (o). Each
outlet offers news programming (p = n), and both outlets are also required to carry cadenas (p = c).
    Viewers differ in the degree to which they value news programming. For pro-government types,
the value of government news is θs and the value of opposition news is θd , where we assume that
viewers prefer same-ideology news over different-ideology news (i.e., θd < θs ). For opposition
types, by contrast, the value of government news is θd and the value of opposition news is θs .
Cadenas are assumed to have pro-government content and thus provide payoffs of θd to opposition
types and θs to pro-government types. Then, letting uvip ∈ {θd , θs } represent these systematic
payoffs, viewer v receives the following overall payoff from watching programming p on station i:

                                          Uvip = uvip + εvip

where εvip is assumed to be distributed type-1 extreme value.
    We next consider a scenario in which both stations are airing news and viewers have three
options: 1) watching the government station, 2) watching the opposition station, and 3) watching
neither (which yields a systematic payoff of zero). Then, letting σin be the market share on channel
i when both channels are airing news programming, we have the following market shares:

                                     exp(θs )                     exp(θd )
                   σgn = πg                           + πo
                              1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd )      1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd )



                                                  7
                                      exp(θd )                     exp(θs )
                    σon = πg                           + πo
                               1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd )      1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd )
Now, suppose that the government airs a cadena and that this is not anticipated by viewers (that
is, viewers do not account for the cadena when choosing whether or not to watch news). For
simplicity, assume that viewers who are not watching news (the third option described above) do
not come back to watch the cadena on either of the two channels. Also, assume a switching cost of
η > 0 so that viewers will not change the channel when the cadena comes on the air. That is, with
a positive switching cost and identical programming, no viewers will switch between channels.
Instead the only margin involves whether or not to watch the cadena. Then, let the fraction of
pro-government viewers who choose to watch the cadena, conditional on watching the news on
that channel, be given by pg = exp(θs )[1 + exp(θs )]−1 and the analogous fraction for opposition
viewers is given by po = exp(θd )[1 + exp(θd )]−1 , where po < pd since θd < θs .
    Then, we have that market shares for cadenas on the two stations are given by:

                                   exp(θs )                        exp(θd )
                 σgc = πg                           pg + πo                         po
                            1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd )         1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd )

                                   exp(θd )                        exp(θs )
                 σoc = πg                           pg + πo                         po
                            1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd )         1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd )
    Then, define the drop-off in viewershiph movingi     from news
                                                                h to  i cadena, for government and
                                                                 σ
opposition channels, respectively, as ∆o = ln σσon
                                                oc
                                                     and ∆g = ln σgn
                                                                   gc
                                                                       . Given the log transformation,
these measures can be interpreted as the percentage reduction in viewership on a given channel
when moving from news programming to cadenas.
    We first compare the drop-off in viewership on opposition and government channels in the
following proposition:
    Proposition 1: With positive switching costs (η > 0) and a preference for like-minded news
(θd < θs ), the drop-off in viewership moving from news to cadena is more significant for the oppo-
sition channel than for the government channel. That is, ∆o < ∆g .
    We provide proofs of all Propositions in the Appendix. The intuition for this proposition is
simply that opposition viewers, relative to pro-government viewers, are more likely to watch oppo-
sition news, relative to government news. Moreover, these opposition viewers also have a distaste
for the content of the cadena, relative to pro-government viewers. Given all of this, viewers of
opposition news are more likely to tune out when a cadena comes on the air.




                                                   8
4.2    Moderate Channel Extension
We next extend the model to allow for a third channel, which is assumed to air moderate news.
For simplicity, assume that both opposition and pro-government voters get a payoff of θm from
watching news programming on this channel, with θd < θm < θs . Then, again comparing the
drop-off in viewership across the channels, we have the following proposition:
    Proposition 2: With positive switching costs (η > 0) and a preference for like-minded news
(θd < θm < θs ), we have that drop-off in viewership for the moderate channel lies in between the
opposition and the government channel. That is, ∆o < ∆m < ∆g .
    The intuition for this proposition is simply that the moderate channel attracts a less polarized
audience for its news programming, whereas the opposition channel disproportionately attracts
opposition viewers and the government channel disproportionately attracts pro-government view-
ers. Thus, the drop-off in viewership for the moderate channel takes an intermediate value, when
compared to the government and opposition channels.


4.3    Cable Extension
To investigate the possibility of switching to other outlets in a pluralistic media environment, we
next allow for a cable channel, which is assumed to be linked to the opposition and is not required to
air cadenas. In the context of this extension, we investigate two questions. First, due to the presence
of this new opposition channel, is the drop-off in viewership, when moving from opposition news
to cadena, more significant for those viewers with cable than for those viewers without cable?
Second, consistent with switching, does cable viewership increase during cadenas?
     Given the empirical application to the cable channel RCTV International, we assume here
that cable also has opposition news, yielding a payoff of θd to pro-government viewers and θs to
opposition types. Now, suppose that the government unexpectedly decides to air a cadena. As
above, assume that viewers who are not watching do not come back to watch the cadena. Also,
as above, assume a switching cost of η > 0 so that viewers will not change the channel when the
cadena airs. Finally, for simplicity, we assume that viewers do not switch from cable to either the
opposition or the government channel when the cadena comes on the air. They can switch from one
of the broadcast stations to cable but must incur the switching cost. Then, we have the following
result with respect to the drop-off measures considered above:
     Proposition 3: With positive switching costs (η > 0) and a preference for like-minded news
(θd < θs ), the drop-off in viewership on the opposition channel, relative to the government channel,
for viewers with cable is larger than for viewers without cable. That is, ∆o − ∆g falls when cable
is introduced.
     The intuition for Proposition 3 is that, in addition to turning off the television, opposition view-


                                                   9
ers with access to cable now have another attractive outside option, switching to watch opposition
news on cable during the cadena. Given this, even fewer viewers of opposition news will watch
the cadena.
     Finally, we consider how viewership of cable changes when a cadena comes on broadcast
television, and we have the following result.
     Proposition 4: With positive switching costs (η > 0), a preference for like-minded news (θd <
θs ), and a cable option, viewership of cable rises during the cadena.
     The logic behind Proposition 4 is straightforward. Since opposition viewers value cable as an
outside option, viewership of cable programs rises during cadenas.
     To summarize, the theoretical model makes four predictions. First, the drop-off in viewership
when moving from news to cadenas should be more significant on private channels, when com-
pared to the government channel. Second, the drop-off in viewership on moderate channels should
take an intermediate value, between the opposition channel and the government channel. Third,
the drop-off in viewership for the opposition channel, relative to the government channel, should
be more significant for those with access to cable. Fourth, cable viewership should rise during
cadenas.


5      Data
Our data on television ratings were purchased from AGB Nielsen Media Research Venezuela and
include broadcast ratings of each television show aired on each channel, from January 1, 2006
to December 31, 2007, separately for the four largest metropolitan areas (Caracas, Barquisimeto,
Maracaibo and Valencia). Our analysis considers the most significant channels, those discussed
in Section 2. In particular, and as shown in Table 1, we focus on four private broadcast channels,
one of which is news only (Globovision) and three of which mix news and entertainment (Televen,
RCTV, and Venevision), one public channel, Venezolana de Television (VTV), and one cable chan-
nel, RCTV International.9 In addition to analyzing aggregate ratings for each show, channel, and
metropolitan area, we also test Proposition 3 by employing measures of ratings separately for
those with and without cable subscriptions. Likewise, our structural analysis uses gender-specific
ratings. In constructing our measure of ratings for each show we use the Average Minute Rating
(AMR) measure, and, given their very low ratings, ignore shows aired between midnight and 6am.
Finally, we also group show types into three categories: news, entertainment and cadenas.10
    9 This information is consistent with EU-EOM (2006), which shows that VTV and Globovision devoted greater
time to political information during 2006 elections and the private channels RCTV, Venevision, and Televen devoted
far less time to political information.
   10 In particular, news programs includes the categories “Information/Opinion” and “Documentaries”. Entertainment

includes “Sports”, “Entertainment”, “Children”, “Games”, “Micro-series”, “Miniseries” “ Movies” “Series” and “Soap


                                                        10
    As described in Section 2, television in Venezuela during the sample period is considered to be
highly polarized. This political polarization allows us to create three categories for the channels
based upon their ideology, as discussed above. While the main public channel (VTV) is assumed
to be pro-government, private channels are split into opposition (RCTV and Globovision) and
moderate (Venevision and Televen). During the part of the analysis focused on ratings of broadcast
channels, we focus on data from the period prior to the closing of RCTV in May 2007 in order
to have a consistent set of channels. During 2006 and 2007, a total of 229 cadenas were aired on
broadcast television.
                                         Table 1: Channels Analyzed

            Name                    Programming                  Ideology    Coverage      Period
                                                                                            Until
            RCTV               News & Entertainment             Opposition   National
                                                                                         May 27, 2007
       VENEVISION              News & Entertainment              Moderate    National    Whole period

         TELEVEN               News & Entertainment              Moderate    National    Whole period
                                                                             Caracas &
      GLOBOVISION                      News Only                Opposition               Whole period
                                                                              Valencia
             VTV               News & Entertainment             Government   National    Whole period
                                                                                            Starting
    RCTV International         News & Entertainment             Opposition    Cable
                                                                                         July 16, 2007

     Key to our identification strategy is the assumption that viewers are not aware of cadenas in
advance. The law does not require the government to pre-announce cadenas, and our understanding
is that cadenas are not pre-announced in practice. Nonetheless, it is still possible that viewers can
predict the airing of cadenas to the extent that they follow regular patterns. We investigate this
issue by analyzing the distribution of cadenas across days, their starting time, and their duration. As
shown in Figure 1, while cadenas are most commonly aired on Wednesdays, followed by Tuesdays,
Thursdays, and Fridays, cadenas may appear on any day of the week, and there is not a noticeable
spike on any particular day. Likewise, as shown in Figure 2, while cadenas are most commonly
aired during prime time (i.e. between 7pm and 10pm), cadenas can occur at nearly any hour. In
addition, as shown in Figure 3, while many cadenas start at the top of the hour, they can also begin
at any minute within the hour. Finally, the duration of cadenas is difficult to predict. As shown
in Figure 4, cadenas can be either very short in duration, less than 30 minutes, or very long in
duration, in excess of four or even five hours. To summarize, there is not a specific pattern in terms
of the timing of cadenas, and there is thus an important element of surprise for the viewer, who can
Operas”; Finally, we leave the category “cadenas” as is.

                                                           11
be exposed to these interruptions by the government at any time, without anticipating the day, the
hour, the minute, or the length of the interruption.

                                   Figure 1: Day of the week of cadenas
                 60




                                               49
                     40
          (sum) cadenas




                                                                38         38
                                     36




                                                                                               25
                          24
          20




                                                                                    19
                 0




                                              Wednesday
                          Monday



                                    Tuesday




                                                               Thursday




                                                                                   Saturday
                                                                          Friday




                                                                                              Sunday
                                                           Days




                                                          12
                                                                   Figure 2: Starting hour of cadenas

                                                                                                                                                                                                               44




          40
          30                                                                                                                                                                                                                39




                                                                                                                                                                                                        27
cadenas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23
 20




                                                                                                                                        13       13
                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                              11
          10




                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                   7                                                       7

                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                         4                                                                                   4
                                                                                                       3                                                          3
                    2                                                                2
                             1        1
          0




                    0        1        2        3           4       5        6        7        8    9               10       11          12       13      14       15       16    17           18    19        20        21         22    23
                                                                                                               hour number



                                                               Figure 3: Starting Minute of cadenas

               32
          30
          20
cadenas




                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                     11
          10




                                                                                                                                    9                                                     9                                                  9




                             5                                     5                     5                                      5                                                             5 5            5 5
                         4       4                 4       4                     4                             4                                 4       4                       4                       4
                                     3 3                                   3 3                                     3        3                3                3            3 3                      3                        3 3
                                               2                                             2 2           2            2                            2             2                                                2              2 2
                                           1           1       1       1                           1                                                                   1                                                1                1
          0




               0                                                                         20                                                                           40                                                                     60
                                                                                                                       minutes



                                                                                                                    13
                            Figure 4: Duration in Minutes of cadenas



             .008
             .006
          Density
           .004
             .002
             0




                    0               100                 200                  300
                                            duration minutes



    A key mechanism in our model is a preference for like-minded news, implying that opposi-
tion viewers are more likely to watch opposition news and that pro-government viewers are more
likely to watch news on public channels. Unfortunately, our ratings data do not have any mea-
sures of viewer ideology. Instead, to examine this issue, we have analyzed data from the Latin
American Public Opinion Project (LAPOP) Survey, conducted during 2007 for Venezuela. The
survey includes questions about political preferences and media consumption for a total of 1,510
Venezuelan citizens. In particular, LAPOP asks respondents which candidate they voted for in the
last election and the channel they watch most often for news. For the purposes of this analysis, we
group the channels into opposition (RCTV and Globovision), moderate (TVES and Venevision),
and public (VTV). As shown in Figure 5, respondents who voted for Chavez have a greater propen-
sity to choose public and moderate channels and are unlikely to watch opposition channels RCTV
and Globovision. For respondents who voted for the opposition, by contrast, the patterns are re-
versed. In particular, and, as shown in Figure 6, these respondents have a very low propensity of
watching the public channel, and a majority report watching news on either RCTV or Globovision.
To summarize, Chavez supporters are roughly 10 times more likely than opposition supporters to
watch VTV, and opposition supporters are roughly three times more likely than Chavez supporters
to watch opposition channels. This provides support for our maintained assumption of a preference


                                                14
for like-minded news.11

                                            Figure 5: Favorite News Channels for Chavez Supporters

                           60                                             61.1
           for people who vote for Chavez
                                 40




                                                                                               23.3
               20




                                                 15.6
                           0




                                              Opposition             Balanced                Public


  11 Likewise,using other measures of political preferences, not reported here, we find that people who watch news
on public channels report higher levels of trust in Chavez than people who watch private channels.




                                                                     15
                                            Figure 6: Favorite News Channels for the Opposition

                                               50.5


                          50
                                                                         47.3
                                       40
          for people who vote for Rosales
                  20      1030




                                                                                              2.2
                          0




                                            Opposition              Balanced                Public




6     Analysis of Ratings data
In this section, we test the key hypotheses of the theoretical model in an investigation of viewer
responses to political propaganda via cadenas in Venezuela during 2006 and 2007, a key period
during Chavez’s time in office.


6.1   Drop-off: News to Cadena
Our econometric analysis begins with an investigation of how ratings change when a cadena in-
terrupts news programming depending upon the political orientation of the station, under the as-
sumption that viewers prefer to watch like-minded news. Given, as shown above, that opposition
viewers have a higher probability of watching opposition news channels and under the assumption
that opposition viewers dislike cadenas, we expect viewers of opposition news to be more likely to
tune out when cadenas are aired on television, relative to viewers of pro-government news.
    As argued above, we hypothesize that viewers watching the opposition news program will
respond more strongly to cadenas when compared to viewers watching news programming on
government channels. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the following econometric model of


                                                                    16
viewer responses to cadenas:
                                                      
                                              i    sic
                                            ∆ = ln       = βi + εi                                             (1)
                                                   sin
where sic represents the measured rating for a cadena aired on channel i and sin is the ratings for
the previous news program aired on channel i. That is, consistent with the theoretical predictions,
the drop-off in viewership is measured as the log difference in the rating between cadenas and
the previous news program for each cadena aired between January 2006 and May 2007.12 On the
right-hand side, βi is a channel-specific constant. To test Proposition 1, we use a dummy variable
that takes the value of 1 for a private channel and the value of 0 for a public channel. To test the
second Proposition, we employ a set of dummy variables based on political ideology of the station
(i.e. opposition, moderate and public). Then, we estimate a more flexible specification that uses a
separate dummy variable for each channel. Finally, εi represents the unobserved determinants of
the drop-off in ratings on channel i.
     We begin with a simple comparison of private and public channels, where public channels
are the omitted category. Thus, the results are interpreted as reflecting drop-off for the private
channel relative to the public channel. As shown in the first column of Table 2, the coefficient on
private channels is negative and statistically significant, documenting that airing cadenas after news
programming on private channels, relative to the public channel, generates a decrease of around 45
percent in viewership. This provides support for Proposition 1, which predicted that the drop-off
in viewership should be more significant for private channels than for public government channels.
     Next, in the second column, we use three categories for the channels based upon their ideology:
opposition, moderate, and public, where the latter is the omitted category. The coefficients are also
large in magnitude and statistically significant for the two categories, opposition and moderate,
relative to the public channel. The coefficients in the second column demonstrate that viewers of
news on the opposition and moderate channels, relative to viewers of the public channel, are more
likely to turn off the television when a cadena is aired. That is, consistent with Hypothesis 2, which
predicted that the drop-off for moderate channels should take an intermediate value, the change in
viewership for moderate channels is 19 percentage points higher than the public channel but is
35 percentage points lower than the opposition channels. Finally, in the third column of Table 2,
we present the results separately for each channel, where the effects should again be considered
relative to the public channel VTV. As shown, and for all channels, we find a statistically significant
reduction of viewership, relative to the change in viewership of VTV, when a cadena is aired.
Consistent with the results in the second column, the effect of switching to an outside option
is most significant for Globovision and RCTV, the most extreme channels in terms of the their
  12 Forthis analysis we drop cases where the gap between the end time of the news and the start time of the cadena
exceeds 10 minutes.

                                                         17
opposition to the government.
    Overall, these results are consistent with Propositions 1 and 2, which predict that viewers of
news on private channels are more likely to turn off the television during cadenas and that the
drop-off on the moderate channels during cadenas lies between the opposition channels and the
public channel. This behavioral response of shifting to an outside option associated with unantic-
ipated exposure to ideological content that is not like-minded in nature suggests that the impact
of political propaganda may be limited. The results are in line with theories of television program
choice, which predict that people select television content in order to satisfy their preferences
(Youn (1994), Durante and Knight (2012) and Yao et al. (2014)), while, at the same time, suggest-
ing that inertia in television viewership is incomplete (see Moshkin and Shachar (2002), Goettler
and Shachar (2001) and Perretti and Esteves-Sorenson (2012)).

                                   Table 2: Drop-off in Ratings: News to cadena

            Variable            Change in Ratings                Change in Ratings                Change in Ratings
                                   -0.4456***
              Private
                                     (0.0672)
                                                                       -0.5403***
           Opposition
                                                                         (0.0732)
                                                                       -0.1858***
            Moderate
                                                                         (0.0898)
                                                                                                        -0.5902***
          Globovision
                                                                                                          (0.0807)
                                                                                                        -0.3598***
               RCTV
                                                                                                          (0.101)
                                                                                                        -0.2701***
              Televen
                                                                                                          (0.1253)
                                                                                                        -0.1125***
           Venevision
                                                                                                          (0.1083)
                                        0.195***                         0.195***                        0.195***
            Constant
                                         0.0504                          (0.0504)                        (0.0505)
          Observations                      807                              807                             807
       Public Channel VTV is the base outcome for all columns. Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




6.2    Other transitions
For comparison purposes, we next extend the analysis to investigate the effect of the reverse ex-
periment: transitioning from cadenas to news programs. While the formal model did not consider
this possibility, it is natural to conjecture that the results should go in the opposite direction, with

                                                                  18
viewership of news rising on private, relative to public, following a cadena. As shown in Table 3,
the coefficient in the first column is positive and statistically significant, documenting that private
channels do experience an increase in viewership of 23 percent, relative to the public channel,
when cadenas are followed by a news program. As shown in columns 2 and 3, the effect is driven
by opposition channels, especially Globovision, which is the only channel that has a statistically
significant coefficient, re-enforcing the idea that viewers of the opposition channel search for ideo-
logical content similar to their own ideology. Overall, these results are consistent with notion that
viewers have preferences for watching like-minded political content.


                                                  Table 3: cadena to News

             Variable           Change in Ratings                Change in Ratings                Change in Ratings
                                   0.2283***
              Private
                                    (0.0695)
                                                                        0.3029***
            Opposition
                                                                         (0.0721)
                                                                          -0.0889
             Moderate
                                                                         (0.1531)
                                                                                                        0.3606***
            Globovision
                                                                                                         (0.0751)
                                                                                                           -0.0691
               RCTV
                                                                                                          (0.1678)
                                                                                                           -0.0008
              Televen
                                                                                                          (0.2989)
                                                                                                           -0.1431
             Venevision
                                                                                                          (0.1588)
                                       -0.1495***                      -0.1495***                       -0.1495***
             Constant
                                         (0.0404)                        (0.0405)                         (0.0405)
            Observations                   1014                             1014                            1014
       Public Channel VTV is the base outcome for all columns. Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




    For comparison purposes, we also analyze the change in viewership when moving from news
to an entertainment program.13 As shown in Table 4, we find that private channels, relative to
the public channel, generate a statistically significant 45 percent increase in ratings when moving
  13 News  audiences are typically smaller than those of entertainment (Webster (1984) and Webster and Newton
(1988)), and Prior (2005) documents that many people abandon news for entertainment because they prefer enter-
tainment programming.

                                                                  19
from a news program to an entertainment program. This is similar in magnitude to the result for the
drop-off when moving from news to cadenas, suggesting that our results may be about viewership
of news on different channels per se rather than political ideology. On the other hand, it is not clear
that entertainment programming on public channels is comparable to entertainment programming
on private channels, which is very popular in Venezuela. Moreover, as shown in column 2 and
3, the effects are similar for opposition and moderate channels. The similarity of these results
for entertainment across these private channels of differing ideology suggests that our baseline
results are driven, at least in part, by channel ideology, rather than other characteristics of news
programming on different channels.


                                             Table 4: News to Entertainment

            Variable            Change in Ratings                Change in Ratings                Change in Ratings
                                   0.4519***
              Private
                                    (0.0228)
                                                                        0.4148***
           Opposition
                                                                         (0.0244)
                                                                        0.4713***
            Moderate
                                                                         (0.0237)
                                                                                                        0.1208***
          Globovision
                                                                                                         (0.0345)
                                                                                                        0.5238***
               RCTV
                                                                                                         (0.0246)
                                                                                                        0.4055***
              Televen
                                                                                                         (0.0289)
                                                                                                        0.5207***
           Venevision
                                                                                                         (0.0238)
                                       -0.2390***                      -0.2390***                       -0.2390***
            Constant
                                         (0.0214)                        (0.0214)                         (0.0214)
          Observations                    17721                            17721                           17721
       Public Channel VTV is the base outcome for all columns. Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




   Finally, in Table 5, we examine the drop-off in rating when entertainment programs are inter-
rupted by a cadena. We again find similar results to those in the analysis of a change in content from
news to cadenas. Nevertheless, as shown in column 2, the results are again similar for opposition
and moderate channels, and, as shown in column 3, the results are economically significant for all

                                                                  20
four private channels. Taken together, the results for Table 4 and Table 5 suggest that our baseline
results relating to channel ideology are not driven by other channel-specific characteristics.


                                           Table 5: Entertainment to cadena

           Variable            Change in Ratings                Change in Ratings                Change in Ratings
                                  -0.4371***
             Private
                                    (0.1604)
                                                                      -0.4160***
          Opposition
                                                                        (0.1615)
                                                                      -0.4479***
           Moderate
                                                                        (0.1609)
                                                                                                          -0.5953
         Globovision
                                                                                                         (0.5371)
                                                                                                        -0.4131**
              RCTV
                                                                                                         (0.1614)
                                                                                                       -0.4760***
             Televen
                                                                                                         (0.1632)
                                                                                                       -0.4200***
          Venevision
                                                                                                         (0.1612)
                                       0.3853**                         0.3853**                        0.3853**
           Constant
                                       (0.1596)                         (0.1597)                        (0.1598)
         Observations                     1505                             1505                            1505
      Public Channel VTV is the base outcome for all columns. Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




6.3   Cable Television
We next consider Propositions 3 and 4 in the context of cable channels, which were not required
to broadcast cadenas. Given this, Proposition 3 predicts that the disproportionate drop-off in
viewership on the private channel, relative to the public channel, should be more significant for
households with cable subscriptions, relative to households without cable subscriptions. Likewise,
Proposition 4 predicts that viewership of cable should rise during cadenas, and we test this predic-
tion using data from RCTV International, which began as a cable channel during July 2007.
    In terms of Proposition 3, we begin by estimating the following regression:

                                          ∆i (cable) − ∆i (nocable) = βi + εi                                                       (2)

                                                                 21
where the drop-off in viewership is now measured separately for cable and non-cable households,
and, according to Hypothesis 3, the coefficient for private channels, relative to public channels,
should be negative.

                                    Table 6: drop-off for Cable versus no Cable

                               Difference between                Difference between               Difference between
           Variable
                               cable and no cable                cable and no cable               cable and no cable
                                    -0.2001*
            Private
                                     (0.1099)
                                                                          -0.1385
         Opposition
                                                                         (0.1191)
                                                                        -0.3811**
          Moderate
                                                                         (0.1708)
                                                                                                           -0.1974
         Globovision
                                                                                                           (0.1345)
                                                                                                            0.0409
             RCTV
                                                                                                           (0.1660)
                                                                                                           -0.4493*
            Televen
                                                                                                           (0.2357)
                                                                                                           -0.3280
          Venevision
                                                                                                           (0.2221)
                                         -0.1218                          -0.1218                          -0.1218
           Constant
                                        (0.0775)                         (0.0776)                          (0.0777)
        Observations                       632                               632                              632
       Public Channel VTV is the base outcome for all columns. Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




    As shown in Table 6, and consistent with Proposition 3, the drop-off in ratings for those with
cable, relative to households without cable, is indeed more significant for private channels, relative
to public channels. In columns 2 and 3, we break out this effect by type of channel, finding that the
effect is somewhat larger and only statistically significant for moderate channels and is driven in
large part by Televen. Taken together, these results demonstrate that the opposition may be exposed
to political propaganda to an even lesser degree when a source of opposition programming remains
available during cadenas. This implies that viewers who are not able to afford cable, especially
those already inclined to support the government, are disproportionately exposed to propaganda.
Moreover, to the extent that cable subscribers are of higher income, this finding suggests that
political polarization may also increase according to income.

                                                                  22
    Using ratings data from RCTV International, a cable channel created following the closing of
RCTV on broadcast television, we next test Proposition 4, which predicts that RCTV cable ratings
should rise during cadenas as viewers use this channel as a source of opposition programming. In
particular, we estimate the following regression specification:

                             ∆RCTV = β1Change in cadena Overlap + ε                                  (3)

where the left-hand side variable (∆RCTV ) is the percentage change in ratings for a program airing
on RCTV International, when compared to the previous program aired on RCTV International.
To compute the key right-hand-side variable, we first compute cadena overlap for each RCTV
cable show. Cadena overlap is defined as the fraction of minutes for which the RCTV cable show
overlapped with a cadena. Thus, cadena overlap varies between zero and one, where the former
value is attained if there is no cadena aired at any point of the show, and the latter value is attained
if the show overlaps entirely with a cadena. Taking first differences of cadena overlap, we then
compute the change in cadena overlap, which ranges in value from negative one to plus one. For
this analysis, we use the sample from July 2007 to December 2007, the period in which RCTV is
aired on cable.
     As shown in Table 7, and consistent with Proposition 4, we do find that RCTV cable ratings
rise during cadenas, and the effect is positive and statistically significant. In particular, considering
moving from no overlap to complete overlap (i.e. change in cadena overlap equal to one), we
have that ratings on RCTV cable rise by an economically significant 69 percent. In the second
column, we investigate whether these results differ according to the type of programming on RCTV
cable. As shown, the results are larger for news programming on RCTV cable, when compared to
other types of programming on RCTV cable. More concretely, viewership of RCTV cable news
programming increases by 171 percent when a cadena comes on broadcast television, whereas
viewership of non-news programming increases by only 61 percent. These results provide further
support for our hypothesis of viewer choice of like-minded ideological content.




                                                   23
                                   Table 7: Cable Channel RCTV International

                            Variable                            Change in Ratings               Change in Ratings
                                                                   0.6882***                       0.6087***
               Change in cadena overlap
                                                                    (0.0945)                        (0.0986)
                                                                                                          -0.0126
                               News
                                                                                                         (0.0211)
                                                                                                       1.1047***
         News * Change in cadena overlap
                                                                                                        (0.3188)
                                                                       0.0206**                          0.0259*
                            Constant
                                                                       (0.0105)                          (0.0137)
                         Observations                                     9404                             9404
        All columns show the results for the cable channel RCTV International when a cadena is aired on the broadcast channels.
                                  Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




6.4   Content of cadenas
We next use more detailed information about individual cadenas, as provided by Nielsen in the
form of short descriptions of the content of each cadena. Using this description and supplementing
this with information found online, we create five categories of cadena content, and these are
described below:

   1. Foreign Relations: coverage of foreign policy accomplishments, such as visits of presidents,
      multilateral agreements, and international travel by Chavez.

   2. Delivery: coverage of events involving government promises of the provision of public
      goods, services, etc.

   3. Elections: broadcasts focusing on elections, especially coverage of the 2006 Presidential
      elections and the 2007 constitutional referendum.

   4. Celebrations: coverage of public events, such as the birth of Simon Bolivar, marches, etc.

   5. Information: summary of the progress of the country in several areas, such as economic and
      political

For cadenas that do not meet one of these definitions, we create a sixth category, other.
   Table 8 examines the drop-off in rating, separately, for each of these categories on the private
channels, compared to the same categories in the public channels, when transitioning from news


                                                                  24
to cadena. This specification is consistent with the baseline analysis in column 1 of Table 2. The
regression also controls for main effects of these categories, not reported in the Table. Comparing
the magnitude of the coefficients on the interactions, we have that the largest drop-off on private,
relative to public, occurs for the categories delivery and elections. The large drop-off for deliv-
ery cadenas aired on private television may reflect the fact that many of these broadcasts involve
Chavez himself delivering promises of public goods and services to his core voters. Given the
targeting of these goods and services, there may be a particular distaste among opposition viewers
for these cadenas. Likewise, cadenas about elections are, by their very nature, politically oriented
and may have created polarized responses in terms of viewership. Finally, the smaller coefficient
on the information category may reflect the fact that both opposition and pro-government view-
ers find these transmissions to be truly informative about the state of the economy or along other
dimensions.

                                        Table 8: Cadenas Content

                                   Variables                  Change in Ratings
                                                                 -0.465***
                               Foreign*Private
                                                                   (0.139)
                                                                     -1.056***
                              Delivery*Private
                                                                       (0.261)
                                                                     -0.758***
                             Elections*Private
                                                                       (0.265)
                                                                     -0.544***
                           Celebrations*Private
                                                                       (0.163)
                                                                      -0.264**
                            Information*Private
                                                                       (0.111)
                                                                        -0.482
                               Others*Private
                                                                       (0.473)
                                 Observations                             807
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




6.5   Summary
To summarize, the results of the empirical analysis are consistent with the four key predictions of
the model. First, the drop-off in ratings is more substantial for private channels, when compared
to the public channel. Second, this effect is concentrated among opposition channels, and results
for the moderate channels take an intermediate value. Third, the drop-off in viewership for the

                                                         25
private channel is more significant for households with a cable subscription. Fourth, we show that
viewership of RCTV International, an opposition cable channel opened during 2007, rises signif-
icantly during cadenas. Finally, we examine heterogeneity according to the content of cadenas,
with the largest drop-off of viewership on private channels for cadenas associated with the delivery
of public goods and services and for cadenas related to elections.


7     Structural Estimation
Building upon this evidence, we next provide estimates of a structural version of the model. We
begin by extending the model and the notation to allow for non-news programming and gender-
specific preferences over this programming. We then detail several issues in the empirical imple-
mentation and describe identification. After presenting the parameter estimates, we use the model
to conduct no-cadena counterfactual experiments. These experiments will allow us to quantify
the dynamic responses of viewership to cadenas and also to quantify the welfare consequences of
cadenas.


7.1   Approach
As in the first extension of the model, we consider three types of stations: government (i = g),
moderate (i = m), and opposition (i = o). As before let v ∈ {o, g} index viewer ideology, opposition
and pro-government. Then, viewers receive payoffs equal to θs from same-type programming
(cadenas and government news for pro-government viewers and opposition news for opposition
viewers) and payoffs equal to θd from different-type programming (cadenas and government news
for opposition viewers and opposition news for pro-government viewers). Both opposition and
pro-government viewers receive payoffs of θm from moderate news.
    To estimate switching costs, we also consider the following additional types of non-news pro-
gramming: soap operas (telenovas), sports, and other. Following Esteves-Sorenson and Perretti
(2012), we measure switching costs via gender-specific preferences over soaps and sports. In
particular, let k ∈ {m, f } index viewer gender, and let uvkip represent gender-specific systematic
payoffs for a viewer with ideology v watching programming p on station i.
    Table 9 summarizes these payoffs:




                                                26
                                   Table 9: Summary of payoff structure

                      v = o, k = male      v = o, k = f emale        v = g, k = male         v = g, k = f emale
    p = n, i = g             θd                     θd                      θs                        θs
    p = n, i = m             θm                    θm                       θm                       θm
    p = n, i = o             θs                     θs                      θd                        θd
       p=c                   θd                     θd                      θs                        θs
     p = sports          sportsm                sports f                sportsm                   sports f
     p = soaps            soapsm                soaps f                  soapsm                   soaps f
     p = other            otherm                 other f                 otherm                    other f




    As shown, payoffs from news programming and cadenas differ across viewer ideology but not
gender, and payoffs from non-news programming, such as sports and soaps, differ across gen-
der but not ideology. Likewise, while preferences for news programming vary across stations, a
simplifying assumption is that preferences for sports, soaps, and other programming vary across
viewer types but not across stations.
    In the context of this model, we next derive market shares, separately for viewers of ideology
v and gender k. We sequence shows within a day according to the time aired (t= 1, 2, 3, ...). Then,
with positive switching costs (η > 0), market shares for a viewer with ideology v and gender k
                                                  t ), as a function of market shares during the
watching programming p on station i at time t (σvkip
                      t−1
previous time slot (σvkip ), are given by:



       t       t−1
                                 exp(utvkip )                    t−1
                                                                                   exp(utvkip − η)
      σvkip = σvkip                                         + ∑ σvkl p
                      exp(utvkip ) + ∑ j6=i (utvk jp − η)     l6=i       exp(utvkl p ) + ∑ j6=l exp(utvk jp − η)

The first term represents the likelihood that a viewer is both watching channel i during the previous
time slot (t − 1) and does not switch to another channel at time t. The second term represents the
likelihood that a viewer is both watching a different channel (l 6= i) during the previous time slot
and switches to channel i at time t, incurring switching costs equal to η. This is then summed
across all other options. This includes the outside option of not watching television, which, as
above, is normalized to provide a systematic payoff of zero.
    To illustrate the intuition behind these market shares, consider two special cases. First, with
high switching costs (η → ∞), market shares do not change between time t − 1 and time t; that is,
  t        t−1
σvkip = σvkip  . In this case, inertia is complete, and viewership does not respond to the airing of
cadenas. Second, in the absence of switching costs (η = 0), market shares at time t are independent



                                                        27
of market shares at time t − 1 and collapse to the standard multinomial logit form:

                                   t
                                                       exp(utvkip )
                                  σvkip   =
                                              exp(utvkip ) + ∑ j6=i (utvk jp )

In this case, there is no inertia. While viewership does respond to the airing of cadenas, the impact
lasts for only one period, with viewership during future periods unchanged. In intermediate cases,
with moderate switching costs, inertia exists but is incomplete. In particular, a positive shock to
viewership of channel i at time t − 1 leads to higher viewership of that channel at time t. For
example, if females have a stronger preference for soaps than males, then a soap airing at time
t − 1 will, all else equal, tend to increase viewership of that channel for females, relative to males,
at time t. This is due to the presence of switching costs, resulting in inertia in viewership.
     Since our data distinguish between male and female viewers but not between pro-government
and opposition viewers, we next aggregate market shares across opposition and pro-government.
Recalling that πg represents the fraction of pro-government viewers, we have that market shares
among gender k for station i airing programming p equal:

                                    t         t                t
                                   σkip = πg σgkip + (1 − πg )σokip

                                                                  t ) are then linked to observed
For the purposes of estimation, these model-based market shares (σkip
market (stkip ) shares via the following log-odds formulation:

                                         stkip                 t
                                                              σkip           t
                                 ln(               ) = ln(              ) + εkip
                                       1 − stkip                  t
                                                             1 − σkip

        t is assumed to be normally distributed. Then, the parameters of the model (e.g. θ , θ , θ , η)
where εkip                                                                                d m s
can be estimated via maximum likelihood.


7.2    Empirical Implementation and Identification
Before presenting estimates of the parameters of this model, we first address three issues regarding
empirical implementation. We then provide an intuitive overview of identification.
   First, while the above formulation assumed that the sequence of programming (t = 1, 2, 3...)
was identical across channels, programming schedules differ across channels within a day. For
example, RCTV may air a program from 6pm to 6:30pm, whereas Globovision may air a program
from 5:30pm to 6:20pm and then another show from 6:20pm to 7pm. In this case, for a given
program, it is unclear how to define the set of competing shows, those aired on other channels.
To do so, we define, for each show, the set of competing shows on other channels as those with


                                                       28
the maximal time overlap with the focal program. In the above example, a show airing from 6pm
to 6:30pm on RCTV would compete for viewership with the show airing from 5:30pm to 6:20pm
on Globovision, which shares 20 minutes of programming, and not a show airing from 6:20pm to
7pm, which shares only 10 minutes of programming.
    Second, given the recursive formulation above, in which viewership at time t depends upon
viewership at time t − 1, one must define initial conditions for market shares. To do so, we assume
zero viewership before 6am, when most of the population is sleeping, and ratings are consequently
extremely low. That is, we assume that the entire market is consuming the outside option of no
television, which provides a systematic payoff of zero, prior to t = 1. This allows us to write
viewership during the first time slot (t = 1) as follows:

                                   1
                                                   exp(u1vkip − η)
                                  σvkip   =
                                              1 + ∑ j6=0 exp(u1vk jp − η)

where u1vkip − η is the payoff from switching from the outside option to channel i airing program-
ming p at t = 1 and j = 0 refers to the outside option. In addition to closing the model, this
assumption implies no dynamic linkages in viewership between midnight and 6am, allowing us to
treat each date as an independent observation.
    Third, since we do not observe market shares separately for opposition and government view-
ers, we must aggregate across these groups, as outlined above. Given this, one must thus measure
the fraction of pro-government viewers (πg ) in each municipality. To do so, we measure these via
municipality-specific vote shares for the opposition party and Chavez, respectively, in the 2006
Presidential election.
    The intuition for identification is explained in several steps. First, gender-specific preferences
over sports and soap operas are identified simply by comparing ratings for these types of program-
ming across male and female viewers. Then, with these estimates of gender-specific programming,
switching costs can be identified by examining gender-specific ratings for shows aired on the same
channel but after these sports and soaps programs. Finally, with estimates of these switching costs,
one can identify ideology-specific preferences over news and cadenas by examining, similarly to
the reduced form evidence presented above, changes in ratings during cadenas that interrupt news
programming across different types of stations (opposition, moderate, and pro-government). This
identifies preferences over ideological content, as given by θd , θm , and θs .
    Note that this intuition is incomplete, as the model also implies linkages between switching
costs and preferences over ideological content via the ideological mechanism. That is, in order
to observe a disproportionate drop-off in viewership when a cadena is aired on private channels,
it must be the case that switching costs are positive. Otherwise, as noted above, viewership of
cadenas is independent of previous programming, which includes the ideological content of news.

                                                     29
Thus, switching costs are identified via both gender-specific preferences over programming and
channel-specific changes in viewership when cadenas are aired.


7.3   Parameter Estimates
Our parameter estimates are provided in Table 10. Note that these coefficients should be considered
relative to programming other than news, cadenas, sports, and soaps. This includes categories such
as movies and game shows, which receive payoffs equal to the constant term, and the payoff from
not watching television is normalized to zero.
    Following the identification logic from above, we begin by discussing gender-specific prefer-
ences over news programming. As seen, and consistent with prior evidence (Esteves-Sorenson
and Perretti (2012)), we find overall high viewership for soaps but especially so among female
viewers. Likewise, we find slightly lower viewership for sports but especially so among female
viewers. These two gender-specific coefficients are both economically and statistically significant,
with females, relative to males, having 56 percent higher viewership for soaps and 18 percent lower
viewership for sports. In addition, females have 18 percent higher viewership across all categories.




                                                30
                                    Table 10: Structural estimates

                                         Variable
                                                                    -0.4812***
                                       Information
                                                                      (0.0072)
                                                                     0.2409***
                                  Information×same
                                                                      (0.0078)
                                                                    -1.6717***
                                Information×different
                                                                      (0.0078)
                                                                     0.1759***
                                           Female
                                                                      (0.0046)
                                                                     1.4439***
                                            Soaps
                                                                      (0.0091)
                                                                    -0.2854***
                                           Sports
                                                                      (0.0194)
                                                                     0.5584***
                                    Female×soaps
                                                                      (0.0122)
                                                                    -0.1839***
                                     Female×sports
                                                                       (0.0268)
                                                                     3.8089***
                                     Switching cost
                                                                       (0.0100)
                                                                    -2.5179***
                                         Constant
                                                                      (0.0059)
                                      Observations                      31081
                             Standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




    As noted above, by comparing gender-specific ratings on shows immediately following sports
and soaps, we can identify switching costs. As shown, these estimated switching costs are also
statistically significant, and evidence on their economic significance will be documented in a coun-
terfactual analysis to follow, in which we trace out the dynamic response to cadenas for viewers
and channels of differing ideology.
    Finally, using these estimates of switching costs to identify preferences over ideological con-
tent, we have that payoffs from information are associated with lower viewership overall. This
is the payoff for both pro-government and opposition viewers from consuming moderate news.
As shown, this negative effect is partially offset for same-type information, cadenas and news on
government channels for pro-government viewers and news on opposition channels for opposition

                                                         31
viewers. Conversely, payoffs are substantially lower for different-type information, cadenas and
news on government channels for opposition viewers and news on opposition channels for pro-
government viewers. Note also the asymmetry between same-type and different-type ideology,
with the benefits associated with same-type information (0.2409) smaller than the costs associated
with different-type information (1.6717). Taken together, these estimates thus provide additional
support for the hypothesis of preferences for like-minded information.


7.4   Counterfactuals and Welfare Analysis
Using these parameter estimates, we then conduct a counterfactual scenario in which cadenas
are replaced with news programming. That is, propaganda is replaced by opposition content on
opposition channels and moderate content on moderate channels, with no change in content on
government channels. We then examine the dynamic responses to viewership and also consider
the welfare consequences of propaganda for opposition and pro-government viewers.
    This analysis proceeds in the following three steps. First, we focus on the set of days on which
a single cadena was broadcast. This allows us to measure the dynamic response to a single change
in ideological content. Second, using this sample of days and normalizing the time slot of the
cadena to equal zero, we use the estimated model to predict viewership of shows aired throughout
the day. For simplicity, we focus on viewership among females and in cities with the full set of
available channels (i.e., Caracas and Valencia). Third, we use the model to predict how viewership
would have evolved during and after the airing of a cadena were it replaced by news programming,
with ideological content depending upon the channel under consideration. Only programming in
the focal time slot (t = 0) is altered, and programming during the other time slots is unchanged
under the counterfactual.




                                                32
                                      Figure 7: Counterfactual Viewership


              pro-government viewers, oppositon channel         opposition viewers, oppositon channel
    .04 .08
    0




               pro-government viewers, moderate channel         opposition viewers, moderate channel
    .04 .08
    0




              pro-government viewers, government channel    opposition viewers, government channel
    .04 .08
    0




              -2        0         2          4         6   -2          0         2          4           6
                                                 time to cadena
                                         predicted                  counterfactual


    The results from this exercise are provided in Figure 7, in which we plot viewership during
the two shows aired before the cadena, the cadena, and the six shows aired after the cadena. The
x-axis is time to cadena and is normalized to equal zero during the cadena time slot. The y-
axis is the viewership market share, separately by channel and viewer ideology. The upper panel
provides results for ratings on the opposition channel, with pro-government viewers on the left and
opposition viewers on the right. The middle and bottom panels provide corresponding results for
moderate and government channels. Finally, we consider both predicted market shares, as given
the solid line, and market shares under the no-cadena counterfactual, as given by the dashed line.
    As shown by the solid line, and consistent with the evidence provided above, there is a sharp
drop in viewership for opposition viewers when the cadena is broadcast on opposition channels.
This drop is not apparent under the counterfactual, in which the cadena is replaced by opposition
news. For pro-government viewers, by contrast, the pattern is reversed, with a slight increase in
viewership of opposition channels when a cadena is aired and a sharp decrease in viewership when
the cadena is replaced by opposition news.
    These results also shed light on the magnitude of the estimated switching costs and the associ-


                                                      33
ated dynamic responses to the airing of cadenas. As shown, due to the presence of these switching
costs, differences in viewership, depending upon whether the previous show is a cadena or oppo-
sition news, are also apparent during the subsequent time slots (i.e., t = 1), with the counterfactual
path of viewership then converging back to the predicted path of viewership several time slots fol-
lowing the cadena. Thus, cadenas have a persistent effect on viewership of opposition channels,
with a sustained increase in viewership by pro-government viewers and a sustained decrease in
viewership by opposition viewers.
     The middle panel presents results for ratings on the moderate channel. As shown, for op-
position viewers, there is again a sharp drop in viewership when the cadena airs, and this drop
largely disappears under the counterfactual scenario, when the cadena is replaced by moderate
news. For pro-government viewers, by contrast, there are essentially no differences between pre-
dicted and counterfactual viewership. The difference in the response between pro-government and
opposition viewers reflects the fact, as documented above, that the estimated cost of being exposed
to different news is larger than the estimated benefit of being exposed to same-type news (i.e.,
1.6717 > 0.2409).
     Finally, as shown in the bottom panel, there are essentially no differences in viewership be-
tween the predicted path and the counterfactual path for the government channel. This simply
reflects the fact that the ideological content of news programming on the government channel is
assumed to be the same as the ideological content of cadenas. The paths are not identical, however,
as ideological content changes on other stations when a cadena is aired, making the government
channel one of several options for pro-government viewers. Due to inertia and switching costs,
however, viewers disproportionately “stick” to the channel that they watched during the prior time
slot, leading to only small changes in viewership on public channels.
     Turning to the normative analysis of the counterfactual, we next measure the overall welfare
of opposition and pro-government viewers, respectively, when cadenas come on the air, relative
to the counterfactual in which each channel airs news programming. Welfare is measured using
the inclusive value, the standard measure in discrete choice models. This is calculated by taking
the expected value of the maximal utility over the choice set. Abstracting from gender and taking
viewership probabilities at time slot t − 1 as given, the welfare of a viewer with ideology v at time
t is given by:
                            Wvt = ∑ σvlt−1        t               t
                                        p ln[exp(uvl p ) + ∑ exp(uv jp − η)]
                                  l                      j6=l

Within the summation, the term ln[exp(utvl p ) + ∑ j6=l exp(utv jp − η)] represents the value to viewers
with ideology v watching channel l at time t − 1, where utvl p is the payoff from continuing to watch
channel l at time t and utv j p − η is the payoff associated with switching at time t from channel l to
a different channel j 6= l. These values associated with watching a given channel at time t − 1 are


                                                  34
then aggregated across channels, weighting by viewership at time t − 1.
   The results from this welfare analysis are presented in Table 11. As shown, welfare for pro-
government viewers falls under the counterfactual, in which cadenas are replaced with news pro-
gramming. This simply reflects the fact that overall ideological content is more opposition-oriented
under the counterfactual, relative to under the scenario in which pro-government cadenas are aired.
For opposition viewers, by contrast, the pattern is reversed, with an increase in welfare under the
counterfactual, again reflecting the fact that overall ideological content is more opposition-oriented
under the counterfactual.


                                    Table 11: Welfare Analysis

                               Predicted welfare      Counterfactual welfare   Difference
           Pro-government          -0.1841                  -0.2218             -0.0377
             Opposition            -0.2645                  -0.1937              0.0717
              Aggregate            -0.2206                  -0.2092              0.0114




     Using the share of pro-government viewers from Caracas, which equals 55.1 percent in the
2006 election, we have that aggregate welfare rises under the counterfactual, despite the fact that
opposition viewers comprise a minority. This simply reflects the fact that the welfare losses from
cadenas to the opposition exceeds the welfare gains to pro-government viewers.
     To better understand why these losses to the opposition exceed the gains to pro-government
viewers, consider the following simple example. Suppose there are only two stations, one pro-
government and one opposition, and an equal number of opposition and pro-government viewers
(i.e. πg = 0.5). Then, welfare for each group is given by ln[exp(θs ) + exp(θd )]. Consider next
a government takeover of the opposition channel, leading to a market with two pro-government
channels and no opposition channels. Welfare for opposition viewers is now ln[2exp(θd )] and
welfare for pro-government viewers is now ln[2exp(θs )]. One can then show that aggregate welfare
falls under this intervention due to a preference for like-minded information (θd < θs ). This simply
reflects the fact that the gain to pro-government types from a second like-minded station is less than
the loss to opposition viewers from losing their only like-minded station.


8    Conclusion
Consistent with a preference for like-minded ideological content, we find that viewers respond
to high frequency variation in the ideological slant of television programming. These responses


                                                 35
are stronger for private channels, when compared to public channels, and for the most ideological
channels. The responses are stronger for viewers with larger choice sets, as proxied via cable.
Consistent with this result, we also show that viewership of cable increases during cadenas. The
results are also stronger for the most polarizing cadenas, those involving the delivery of goods
and services and those related to elections. Building upon this evidence, we structurally estimate
the model, documenting dynamic responses to viewership following cadenas. We also conduct a
normative analysis, documenting welfare losses associated with cadenas.
    This analysis has several implications. First, to the extent that discounting of biased informa-
tion by viewers is incomplete and propaganda is thus influential, our results suggest that viewer
responses, as documented in this paper, may lead to increased political polarization. This polariza-
tion may increase according to ideology, with pro-government viewers disproportionately exposed
to propaganda, and according to income due to the fact that high-income viewers are more likely
to have access to cable, which were not required to air cadenas. Second, government propaganda
may lead to welfare losses due to the reduction in media pluralism. This follows from the fact that
the welfare losses to opposition viewers may exceed the welfare gains to pro-government viewers.




                                                36
References
Adena, M., R. Enikolopov, M. Petrova, V. Santarosa, and E. Zhuravskaya (2015).
  Radio and the rise of the nazis in pre-war germany. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics.

Besley, T. and A. Prat (2006). Handcuffs for the grabbing hand? media capture and
  government accountability. The American Economic Review, 720–736.

Bisbal, M. (2009). La comunicacion masiva como politica de gobierno de hugo
  chavez frias. In M. Bisbal (Ed.), Hegemonia y control comunicacional. Editorial
  Alfa.

Chang-Tai, H., E. Miguel, D. Ortega, and F. Rodriguez (2011). The price of political
  opposition: Evidence from venezuela’s maisanta. American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 3(2), 196–214.

Chiang, C.-F. and B. Knight (2011). Media bias and influence: Evidence from
  newspaper endorsements. The Review of Economic Studies 78(3), 795–820.

Corrales, J. and M. Penfold (2011). Dragon in the Tropics: Hugo Chavez and the
  Political Economy of Revolution in Venezuela. Washington D.C.,U.S: Brookings
  Latin America Initiative Books.

DellaVigna, S., R. Enikolopov, V. Mironova, M. Petrova, and E. Zhuravskaya (2014).
  Cross-border media and nationalism: Evidence from serbian radio in croatia.
  American Economic Journals: Applied Economics 6(3), 103–132.

DellaVigna, S. and M. Gentzkow (2010). Persuasion: Empirical evidence. Annual
  Review of Economics 2(1), 643–669.

DellaVigna, S. and E. Kaplan (2007). The fox news effect: Media bias and voting.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 1187–1234.

Dinneen, M. (2012). The chavez government and the battle over the media in
  venezuela. Asian Journal of Latin American Studies 25(2), 27–53.

DiTella, R., S. Galiani, and E. Schargrodsky. (2012). Reality versus propaganda in the
  formation of beliefs about privatization. Journal of Public Economics 96, 553–567.

                                         37
Durante, R. and B. Knight (2012). Partisan control, media bias, and viewer
  responses: Evidence from berlusconi’s italy. Journal of the European Economic
  Association 10(3), 451–481.

Enikolopov, R., M. Petrova, and E. Zhuravskaya (2011). Media and political
  persuasion: Evidence from russia. The American Economic Review 101(7),
  3253–3285.

EU-EOM (2006). Final report: Presidential elections venezuela 2006. Technical
  report, European Union Election Observation Mission.

Frajman, E. (2014). Broadcasting populist leadership: Hugo chavez and alo
  presidente. Journal of Latin American Studies 43(3), 501–526.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2010). What drives media slant? evidence from us
  daily newspapers. Econometrica 78(1), 35–71.

Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Sinkinson (2011). The effect of newspaper
  entry and exit on electoral politics. American Economic Review 101(7),
  2980–3018.

Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Sinkinson (2014). Competition and ideological
  diversity: Historical evidence from us newspapers. The American Economic
  Review 104(10), 3073–3114.

George, L. and J. Waldfogel (2003). Who affects whom in daily newspaper markets?
  Journal of Political Economy 111(4), 765–784.

Gerber, A. S., D. Karlan, and D. Bergan (2009). Does the media matter? a field
  experiment measuring the effect of newspapers on voting behavior and political
  opinions. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(2), 35Ð52.

Goettler, R. L. and R. Shachar (2001). Spatial competition in the network television
  industry. RAND Journal of Economics 32(4), 624–656.

Kitzberger, P. (2010). The media activism of latin america’s leftist governments:
  Does ideology matter? Working paper 151, GIGA.

Martin, G. and A. Yurukoglu (2015). Bias in cable news: Real effects and
 polarization. NBER Working Paper No. 20798.



                                         38
Moshkin, N. and R. Shachar (2002). The asymmetric information model of state
 dependence. Marketing Science 21(4), 435–454.

Nelson, B. A. (2009). The Silence and the Scorpion: The Coup Against Chavez and
  the Making of Modern Venezuela. New York, U.S: Nation Books.

Perretti, F. and C. Esteves-Sorenson (2012). In micro-costs: Inertia in television
  viewing. The Economic Journal 122(563), 867–902.

Prat, A. and D. Stromberg (2013). The political economy of mass media. In
  Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Volume 2, Applied Economics: Tenth
  World Congress, Volume 50, pp. 135. Cambridge University Press.

Prior, M. (2005). News v. entertainment: How increasing media choice widens gaps
  in political knowledge and turnout. American Journal of Political Science 49(3),
  594–609.

Qian, N. and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2013). Government distortion in independently
  owned media: Evidence from u.s. cold war news coverage of human rights.
  Working Paper.

Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela (2012). Memorias de un golpe de estado.
  Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela.

Snyder, J. M. and D. Stromberg (2010). Press coverage and political accountability.
  Journal of Political Economy 118(2), 355–408.

Webster, J. G. (1984). Cable television’s impact on audience for local news.
 Journalism Quarterly 61(2), 419–422.

Webster, J. G. and G. D. Newton (1988). Structural determinants of the television
 news audience. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 32(4), 381–389.

Welch, D. (1993). The Third Reich: Politics and Propaganda. London: Routledge.

Wilpert, G. (2007). Changing Venezuela by Taking Power: The History and Policies
 of the Chavez Government. London, England: Verso Books.

Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2014). Propaganda and conflict: Evidence from the rwandan
  genocide. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4).

Yao, S., W. Wang, and Y. Chen (2014). The value of sampling: The case of tv
  commercial breaks. Working Paper.

                                          39
Youn, S.-M. (1994). Program type preference and program choice in a multichannel
  situation. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 38(4), 465–475.




                                       40
A     Appendix
                                                σoc         σgc
Proof of Proposition 1: Note that the ratios    σon   and   σgn   can be re-written as follows:

                                σoc   πg exp(θd )pg + πo exp(θs )po
                                    =
                                σon     πg exp(θd ) + πo exp(θs )
                                σgc   πg exp(θs )pg + πo exp(θd )po
                                    =
                                σgn     πg exp(θs ) + πo exp(θd )

    We require that:
                                              σoc   σgc
                                                  <
                                              σon σgn
    Inserting the above expressions, cross-multiplying, and dividing through by πg πo , we require
that:

                        exp(θs )2 po + exp(θd )2 pg < exp(θs )2 pg + exp(θd )2 po

    Re-arranging, we require that:

                               exp(θd )2 (pg − po ) < exp(θs )2 (pg − po )

    Since (pg − po ) > 0, we simply require that θd < θs , which is satisfied by assumption.
    Proof of Proposition 2. With three channels, note that market shares for news and cadenas are
given by:


                                exp(θs )                                exp(θd )
        σgn = πg                                      + πo
                   1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )      1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )



                                exp(θd )                                exp(θs )
        σon = πg                                      + πo
                   1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )      1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )

                                exp(θm )                                exp(θm )
        σmn = πg                                      + πo
                   1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )      1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )


                              exp(θs )                                   exp(θd )
      σgc = πg                                      pg + πo                                    po
                 1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )         1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )




                                                      41
                              exp(θd )                                   exp(θs )
      σoc = πg                                      pg + πo                                    po
                 1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )         1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )



                              exp(θm )                                   exp(θm )
     σmc = πg                                       pg + πo                                    po
                 1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )         1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) + exp(θm )
                               σgc
    Note further that σσon
                        oc
                           and σgn are unchanged from the baseline case and that the relevant expres-
sion for the moderate channel is given by:

                                            σmc πg pg + πo po
                                                =
                                            σmn    πg + πo
   Thus, the first inequality requires that:

                             πg exp(θd )pg + πo exp(θs )po πg pg + πo po
                                                          <
                               πg exp(θd ) + πo exp(θs )      πg + πo
   Cross-multiplying and dividing through by πg πo yields:

                          exp(θd )pg + exp(θs )po < pg exp(θs ) + po exp(θd )

   Re-arranging, we have that:

                                   exp(θd )(pg − po ) < exp(θs )(pg − po )

   Since (pg − po ) > 0, we require that θd < θs , which is satisfied by assumption.
   The second inequality requires that:

                             πg pg + πo po πg exp(θs )pg + πo exp(θd )po
                                          <
                                πg + πo      πg exp(θs ) + πo exp(θd )

   Cross-multiplying and dividing through by πg πo yields:

                          exp(θd )pg + exp(θs )po < exp(θs )pg + exp(θd )po

   Re-arranging, we have that:

                                   exp(θd )(pg − po ) < exp(θs )(pg − po )

   Since (pg − po ) > 0, we require that θd < θs , which is satisfied by assumption.


                                                     42
    Proof of Proposition 3: Then, we have the following market shares for news and for cadenas
on the three channels:


                                   exp(θs )                       exp(θd )
                σgn = πg                             + πo
                           1 + exp(θs ) + 2 exp(θd )      1 + 2 exp(θs ) + exp(θd )
                                  exp(θd )                        exp(θs )
                σon   = πg                           + πo
                           1 + exp(θs ) + 2 exp(θd )      1 + 2 exp(θs ) + exp(θd )
                                  exp(θd )                        exp(θs )
                σcn   = πg                           + πo
                           1 + exp(θs ) + 2 exp(θd )      1 + 2 exp(θs ) + exp(θd )



                                  exp(θs )                          exp(θd )
             σgc = πg                              p0g + πo                          p0
                         1 + exp(θs ) + 2 exp(θd )          1 + 2 exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) o
                                 exp(θd )                           exp(θs )
             σoc    = πg                           p0g + πo                          p0
                         1 + exp(θs ) + 2 exp(θd )          1 + 2 exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) o
                                 exp(θd )                         exp(θs )
              σcc   = πg                           + πo
                         1 + exp(θs ) + 2 exp(θd )       1 + 2 exp(θs ) + exp(θd )
                                    exp(θs )                  exp(θd − η)
                      +πg
                           1 + exp(θs ) + 2 exp(θd ) 1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd − η)
                                    exp(θd )                   exp(θs − η)
                      +πo
                           1 + 2 exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) 1 + + exp(θd ) + exp(θs − η)
                                    exp(θd )                  exp(θd − η)
                      +πg
                           1 + exp(θs ) + 2 exp(θd ) 1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd − η)
                                    exp(θs )                   exp(θs − η)
                      +πo
                           1 + 2 exp(θs ) + exp(θd ) 1 + + exp(θd ) + exp(θs − η)

    where p0g = exp(θs )[1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd − η)]−1 and p0o = exp(θd )[1 + exp(θd ) + exp(θs −
η)]−1 .
    For cable viewership, the second and third lines represent the viewers that switch from the
government channel to cable during the cadena, and the fourth and fifth lines represent the viewers
that switch from the opposition channel to cable during the cadena.
    Then, with cable, we have that:


                              σoc   πg exp(θd )p0g + πo exp(θs )p0o
                                  =
                              σon     πg exp(θd ) + πo exp(θs )
                              σgc   πg exp(θs )p0g + πo exp(θd )p0o
                                  =
                              σgn     πg exp(θs ) + πo exp(θd )



                                                 43
   Then, comparing this expression to the one in the Proof of Proposition 1, we require that:

                    πg exp(θd )p0g + πo exp(θs )p0o πg exp(θd )pg + πo exp(θs )po
                                                   <
                    πg exp(θs )p0g + πo exp(θd )p0o πg exp(θs )pg + πo exp(θd )po

   Cross-multiplying and dividing through by πg πo yields:

                  exp(θd )2 p0g po + exp(θs )2 p0o pg < exp(θd )2 pg p0o + exp(θs )2 po p0g

   Re-arranging, we require that:

                               [exp(θs )2 − exp(θd )2 ](p0o pg − po p0g ) < 0

   Since the first term is positive, we require that p0o pg < po p0g .
   Substituting in the definitions for p0o , pg , po , and p0g , we require that:


                     1                  1            1                    1
                                               <
        1 + exp(θd ) + exp(θs − η) 1 + exp(θs ) 1 + exp(θd ) 1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd − η)

   Cross multiplying, we require that:



      [1 + exp(θd )][1 + exp(θs ) + exp(θd − η)] < [1 + exp(θs )][1 + exp(θd ) + exp(θs − η)]

   Canceling like terms, we require that:

                       [1 + exp(θd )] exp(θd − η) < [1 + exp(θs )] exp(θs − η)

   This is satisfied since θd < θs .
   Proof of Proposition 4: Direct inspection of the two market shares σcn and σcc in the previous
proof provides a proof.




                                                     44
