                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FIRM SIZE AND R&D INTENSITY:
                               A RE-EXAMINATION




                               Wesley M. Cohen

                               Richard C. Levin

                               David C. Mowery




                            Working Paper No. 2205




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 April 1987




The research reported in this paper was supported by the Division of Policy
Research and Analysis of the National Science Foundation. We wish to thank
Joe Cholka, George Pascoe, and Mike Dodman of the Federa Trade Commission for
their assistance in computing, and we thank Tim Bresnahan, Zvi Griliches,
Vassisis Hajivassiliou, Mark Kamlet, Steve Kiepper, Ariel Pakes, Peter Reiss,
Richard Schmalensee, Andrea Shepard and Larry White for valuable suggestions.
The representations and conclusions presented herein are those of the authors.
They have not been adopted in whole or in part by the Federal Trade Commission,
its Bureau of Economics, or any other entity within the Commission. The FTC's
Disclosure Avoidance Officer has certified that the data included in this paper
do not identify individual company line of business data. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2205
                                                  April 1987




                Firm Size and R&D Intensity: A Re-Examination



                                   ABSTRACT




 Using data from the Federal Trade Commission's Line of Business Program and
 survey measures of technological opportunity and appropriability conditions,
 this paper finds that overall firm size has a very small, statistically in-
 significant effect on business unit R & D intensity when either fixed industry
 effects or measured industry characteristics are taken into account. Business
 unit size has no effect on the R & D intensity of business units that perform
 R & D, but it affects the probability of conducting R & D. Business unit and
 firm size jointly explain less than one per cent of the variance in R & D
 intensity; industry effects explain nearly half the variance.




Wesley M. Cohen                  Richard C. Levin           David C. Mowery
Carnegie-Mellon University       Department of Economics    Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213             Yale University            Pittsburgh, PA 15213
                                 37 Hilihouse Avenue
                                 New Haven, CT 06520
                                                       1



       I. Introduction

       Two sets of well-known hypotheses are associated with the later work of Joseph Schumpeter. The

 first concerns the effects of market concentration on research and development investment and on
 innovative performance. The second bears on the effects of firm size on R & D and innovation. In a
 recent paper (Levin, Cohen, and Mowery [1985]), we re-examined the first set of hypotheses. Simple
regressions at the line of business level replicated the established findings that both A & D intensity and
innovative performance first increase and then decrease as industrial concentration rises. The effect of
concentration, however, was sharply attenuated when we controlled for interindustry differences in
technological opportunity and in the appropriability of returns from new technology. Our results
suggested that it is probably unwarranted to conclude that market concentration favors R & D investment
and innovation.


       In this paper we investigate the Schumpeterian hypothesis that large size is conducive to R & D
investment. This relationship has been studied at least as intensively as the link between concentration
and R & D, but our approach is novel in two respects. First, using data collected by the Federal Trade
Commission's Line of Business Program, we are able to distinguish scale effects associated with the
business unit from those associated with the size of the firm as a whole. Second, survey data collected
by Levin, Klevorick, Nelson, and Winter [1984] and used in our previous paper allow us to control for
previously unmeasured differences in technological opportunity and appropriability across lines of
business.


      We find little support for Schumpeter. Without close attention to the data it would appear that the
size of the firm as a whole, though not the size of the business unit, has a significant but small positive
effect on the A & D intensity of business units. When a mere handful of outliers is removed from the
sample, we find that controlling for interindustry differences eliminates the apparent influence of firm size.

Business unit and firm size jointly explain only a negligible fraction of the variance in A & 0 intensity
among business units that perform A & D. Fixed industry effects, however, explain nearly half the
variance in A & D intensity, and, in turn, measured industry characteristics explain about half the variance

explained by these industry effects. Only one size-related effect withstands scrutiny. Although neither
measure of size influences the behavior of A & D performers, business unit size does affect the
probability of conducting R & D.
                                                     2


      II. Motivation

      The hypothesis set forth rather imprecisely by Schumpeter [1950] and more sharply by Galbraith
[1957] is that in a mature capitalist economy large firms generate a disproportionately large share of
society's technological advances. Several arguments have been offered in support of this hypothesis.
One claim is that capital market imperfections confer an advantage on large firms in securing finance for
risky R & D projects, because size is correlated with the availability and stability of internally-generated
funds. A second claim is that there are scale economies in the technology of R & D. Another is that the
returns from process A & D are higher where the innovator has a large volume of sales over which to
spread the fixed costs of innovation. Finally, A & D is alleged to be more productive in large firms as a
result of complementarities between R & D and other nonmanufacturing activities (e.g. marketing and
financial planning) that may be better developed within large firms.


      Each of these claims depends on assumptions about the nature and magnitude of transaction and
adjustment costs that are rarely tested. Two other objections, however, are more germane to an
assessment of the validity of the empirical evidence.


      First, the arguments supporting Schumpeter's hypothesis are usually offered without adequate
attention to the appropriate unit of analysis. The argument about capital market imperfections, for
example, predicts a relationship between innovation and overall        size. The fixed cost argument, by
contrast, concerns the volume of a particular product or product line and hence predicts a relationship
more likely to be observed at the level of the business            The R & D scale economies and the
complementarity arguments may be applicable at either the firm or the business unit level, or both,
depending on the nature of the relevant economies of scale and scope.


      Second, the relationship between size and innovation may vary across industries with different

technologies and market conditions, a possibility largely ignored by the arguments advanced in support of
Schumpeter. Interindustry differences in technological opportunities and in the appropriability of returns
from A & D investment may, for example, influence the degree to which size confers advantages or
disadvantages, Indeed, a spurious statistical connection between R & D and size may arise as a
consequence of failure to take adequate account of interindustry differences.


      These two shortcomings — inadequate attention to the unit of analysis and to industry effects --
                                                         3


 pervade the extensive empirical literature on the relationship of size and R & D investment. In nearly all
 the studies reviewed by Scherer 11980] and Kamien and Schwartz [1982], both size and R & D have been
 measured at the firm level. When industry characteristics have been studied, the muttiproduct character

 of large firms has been commonly ignored. Typically each firm is assigned to a "primary industry and
 assumed to face conditions in all product markets identical to those prevailing in its primary industry.


        Despite these methodological problems, there existed until recently a tentative "consensus" on the
 stylized facts concerning size and R & D. As summarized by Scherer and by Kamien and Schwartz, this
consensus view held that firm size is associated with increasing A & D intensity up to some threshold

 (near the bottom of the Fortune 500). Among larger firms, A & D intensity does not increase, and it may
even decline, with the possible exception of firms assigned to the chemical industry.


       Recent work has cast doubt on the basis for this consensus. Employing data from the Federal

Trade Commission's Line of Business Program for 1974, Scherer [1984] found "mild support" (p. 233) for
the position that business unit A & D intensity increases with business unit size. A different dissenting
note was sounded by Bound et at. [1984]. Using a larger and more comprehensive sample of American
firms than any previously employed to study the size R & 0 relationship at the firm level, and implicitly
assuming firms to be single product entities, they found that R & D intensity first falls and then rises with
firm size. Thus, both very small and very large firms appeared to be more R & D intensive than those
intermediate in size.1


       This paper does not provide a definitive test of Schumpeter's hypothesis concerning innovative
performance and size. We have data on R & 0 investment only and no adequate measure of innovative

output (see Fisher and Temin [1973]). Our primary purpose is descriptive; we seek to establish more
clearly whether size is systematically related to R & D intensity by examining the effects of both business
unit size and firm size, and by controlling for interindustry differences in market structure, demand
conditions, technological opportunity, and appropriability. An ancillary purpose is to assess whether
available measures of industry conditions -- recently augmented by the survey research of Levin j. --
explain a substantial fraction of interindustry variation in R & D intensity.2

      III. The Data


      Data on R & 0 expenditures, business unit size, and firm size were obtained from the Federal
                                                    4


Trade Commission's Line of Business program. Our sample includes 2,494 business units in 244
manufacturing lines of business operated by 345 firms. We excluded all firms in the FTC database that
operate mainly in regulated industries, and we excluded firms with obvious intertemporal inconsistencies

in reporting methods or other obvious reporting errors.3       All business units operating outside the
manufactunng sector, and those that were not continuously active during the period 1974-1977, were
excluded as well.


      The FTC data have certain limitations. Foreign activities of the sample firms are not reported,
distorting our measure of R & D intensity for business units that do disproportionate amounts of their
worldwide R & 0 in the United States. The FTC sample is drawn almost entirely from the 1000 largest
firms in the economy, as measured by domestic sales of manufactured products. Nonetheless, the data

have overwhelming advantages for our purposes.            They represent the only available, reliable,
disaggregated data on A & D expenditures,4 and they allow us to distinguish between business unit size

and firm size. Afthough large firms are overrepresented, the sample contains business units of all sizes.5


      The three variables of primary interest were taken from the FTC data: (1) company-financed R & D
expenditures (RDI) expressed as a percentage of business unit sales and transfers over the period 1975

through 1977, (2) business unit sales and transfers (BUSALES), measured in billions of dollars and
averaged across 1974-1976, and (3) firm sales (FIRMSALES), also measured in billions of dollars and
averaged across 1974-1976. Averages were employed to control for differences in the impact and timing

of business cycles across industries. The size variables were lagged one year to reflect the fact that R &

D funds are usually budgeted many months before they are spent.


      Data on industry conditions were drawn from several sources. As in our 1985 paper, we use
variables intended to capture three dimensions of technological opportunity: closeness to science, the
importance of external sources of technical knowledge, and industry maturity. Using the Levin et
[1984] survey, we measure closeness to science with responses to questions concerning the relevance of
eleven fields of basic and applied science.6 We calculate for each line of business the mean of the
responses (on a seven-point Likert scale) for each field of science.7 We summarize this information with
the variable, SCIENCEBASE, which represents for each line of business the maximum of the mean
scores received (on a seven-point Likert scale) by a field of science. The survey also asked respondents
to evaluate the irrortance (on a seven-point scale) of the contributions of various external sources to
technical progress within each line of business. We consider four such sources here: upstream suppliers
                                                     5


 of raw material and equipment (MATERIALTECH and EQUIPTECH, respectively), downstream users of
 the industry's products (USERTECH), and government agencies and research laboratories (GOVTECH).

 Industry maturity may also affect opportunity conditions. A variable intended to reflect the relative
 maturity of an industry's technology, NEWPLANT, measures the percentage of an industry's property,
 plant, and equipment installed within the five years preceding 1977, as reported to the FTC's Line of
 Business Program.


       Appropriability conditions are measured with two indices derived from the Levin .t j. Survey.
 Respondents were asked to rate (on a seven-point scale) the effectiveness of six mechanisms used by
firms to capture and protect the competitive advantages of new processes and new products.8
APPROPRIABILITY is the maximum of industry mean scores received by any one of these mechanisms
for either process or product innovations. The survey also asked respondents to report for their line of
business the range of imitation costs and time lags for major and minor, process and product, and
patented and unpatented innovations. These measures tend to be highly correlated with one another,
though they are not highly correlated with APPROPRIABILITY. We use here the average number of
months required to duplicate a patented, major product innovation (IMLAG).


      In the absence of an explicit structural model, prior expectations about the effects of the opportunity

and appropriability variables are ambiguous. Greater opportunity should increase innovative output. To
the extent that the contributions of external science, upstream suppliers, downstream users, and the
government substitute for a firm's own R & D effort, however, these opportunity variables may be
inversely related to A & D intensity. Appropriability may also have ambiguous effects, on R & D
incentives, as recent theoretical work has emphasized (Cohen and Levinthal [1986]).


      Many previous studies of R & D have attempted to control for demand conditions, on the
assumption that market growth increases the returns to investment in R & D. Typically, sales growth is
used as an unsatisfactory proxy for growth in demand. We represent industry demand conditions with

estimates developed by Levin [1981] of price elasticity (PELAS), income elasticity (INCELAS), and a time
shift parameter (DGROWTH). These estimates were derived from consumer demand functions estimated

by Almon et al. [1974] and the input-output tables.9 We expect demand growth and income elasticity to

be positively associated with A & D intensity, but the expected impact of price elasticity is ambiguous.
Elastic demand should provide a positive incentive to investment in cost-reducing process R & D, since
the returns from lowering cost are greater if demand is elastic. On the other hand, inelastic demand
                                                     6


should encourage product R & D by magnifying the returns to a righward shift in the demand curve.


      Market structure is measured with four-firm concentration ratios at the four-digit SIC level taken
from the 1977 Census of Manufactures. When necessary, these concentration ratios are aggregated to

the LB level using the value of shipments as weights.


      Our effort to control for measurable interindustry differences in opportunity, appropriability, demand,

and market structure restricts the size of our sample. The Levin et al. survey data are available for only a
subset of the lines of business included in the FTC database. For much of the work reported in this
paper, therefore, our sample is reduced from 2,494 business units, representing 345 companies in 244
lines of business, to 1.719 business units, representing 318 companies in 151 lines of business.


      Within both of these samples, a significant minority of business units reported no R & D
expenditures in at least one year from 1975 through 1977. As explained in the next section, for some
purposes we employ samples containing only business units that performed R & 0 over the entire period.

Table I indicates the composition of each of the samples that we used, and Table II presents descriptive
statistics on the size and A & D variables for each sample. Firms and business units tend to be
somewhat larger, and R & D intensity somewhat higher in the lines of business covered in the Levin

survey. Also, business units performing R & D are on average larger than those that do none, and tend

to be operated by larger parent firms.

      IV. Specification and Estimation

      We begin by estimating simple regressions of R & 0 intensity on size. We then proceed to control

for interindustry differences using fixed industry effects and, subsequently, measured industry
characteristics.


      Since business unit sales are a component of the sales of the firm, our benchmark specification is:



(1)                RDI = a.1 + a2 BUSALES + a3 OTHERSALES + e,


where OTHERSALES is defined as the difference between FIRMSALES and BUSALES. With this
specification we can test all hypotheses of interest. If business unit size alone affects A & D intensity,
then we should be able to reject the hypothesis that a2 = 0, but should not reject a3 = 0. If the size of the
                                                        7

 firm as a whole is all that matters, then a2 = a3, but we should be able to reject the hypothesis that these

 coefficients are jointly equal to zero. If business unit and firm size have independent effects on R & D, we
 should be able to reject the hypotheses that a2 = 0, that a.3 = 0, and that cx2 = a3. If neither business unit

 nor firm size affects R & D intensity, then a2 = a3 = 0. Finally, if the scale of a firm's activities outside the

 business unit influences R & D intensity, but business unit size does not, then we should be able to reject
 both a.,3 = 0 and    = a.3, but not a2=0.     By a straightforward extension, we can estimate the quadratic

 variant of specification (1) by squaring each variable and adding an interaction term. We can then test all
 hypotheses concerning the possible nonlinearity of size effects.


       Two statistical issues required attention: the boundedness of the dependent variable and the
 possible heteroscedasticity of the disturbances.


       As Table II indicates, only 72 per cent of the business units in our unrestricted sample and 76 per

cent of those in our restricted sample performed A & D throughout the period 1975-77. If we follow the
prevailing practice in the literature on Schumpeter's hypothesis and estimate specification (1) and its
variants on samples that include only performers of A & D,11 the truncation of the error term will bias the
resulting parameter estimates. The Tobit model (Tobin [1958]) avoids this problem at the cost of
restricting the way in which the explanatory variables simultaneously determine the probability of
engaging in R & D and the amount of A & 0 spending. We thus present Tobit estimates of (1) using all
available observations in each of our samples. To permit comparison of our results with prior studies, we
also report OLS results for R & D performers only.


       Reported Tobit and OLS coefficient estimates are not directly comparable. As McDonald and
Moffitt [1980] demonstrate, a Tobit coefficient can be interpreted as a weighted average of two effects:
(1) the effect of an increase in an independent variable on the probability that the dependent variable
exceeds the limit (in our case, that R & D is greater than zero) and (2) the effect on the expected value of

the dependent variable, given that it is above the limit. The magnitude of these effects depend on the
values of the independent variables; as they grow large, the second effect converges to the value of the
Tobft coefficent and the first effect goes to zero. OLS regression on a sample restricted to observations
above the limit provides an estimate of the second effect, but OLS imposes a constant slope where the

Tobit model implies a nonlinear response. Moreover, the OLS estimate is biased because the expected
value of the truncated error term is positive. We can, nonetheless, assess the extent of this bias by using
the decomposition of the Tobit coefficients proposed by McDonald and Moffitt.
                                                     8


      A problem arises when we wish to control for industry effects using the Tobit estimator. We have
2,494 observations distributed over 244 industries. The average number of observations per industry is
small, reflecting in many cases a characteristic of the population as well as a characteristic of the sample.

In principle, we would like to obtain estimates of the coefficients on the size variables that are consistent

as the number of industries tends to infinity, holding the number of observations per industry fixed. In the

linear regression framework, least squares estimates of the fixed effects model have this consistency
property. As Chamberlain [1980] has shown, however, in a nonlinear probability framework (such as the
Tobit model), maximum likelihood estimates of the fixed effects model are inconsistent.


      This problem could potentially undermine our efforts to explore the robustness of the size-R & D
relationship to the inclusion of industry effects, as well as our efforts to compare the performance of
measured industry characteristics against fixed effects. We can, however, use the Tobit model to obtain

consistent estimates for specifications including measured industry characteristics, although it remains to

determine whether measured industry characteristics are a reasonable substitute for fixed industry
effects. Decomposing the Tobit coefficients, we can assess the direction and magnitude of bias in least
squares estimates obtained from the sample of A & D performers. This information should yield insight
concerning the validity of inferences drawn from comparing the performance of fixed effects and
measured characteristics in the least squares framework.


      Breusch-Pagan tests revealed no heteroscedasticity in specifications that included only size
measures. When measured industry characteristics were included among the explanatory variables,
however, we typically rejected the hypothesis of homoscedasticity. After some experimentation, we found
the error structure in these specifications to be best described by the model of "multiplicative
heteroscedasticity," in which the logarithm of the error variance is a linear function of the exogenous
variables and the number of respondents to the Levin et al survey questions in the relevant industry. We

thus followed the procedure suggested by Harvey [1976] to obtain asymptotically efficient GLS estimates
of the parameters.12 Breusch-Pagan statistics were calculated for each specification estimated by GLS,
and in no case could we reject homoscedasticity at the .05 level.


      V. Results: The Effects of Size on R & D Intensity

      For comparability with previous findings, we first report results obtained using two samples of R &
D-performing business units. The first sample contains all R & D performers in our full set of 244
                                                     9


manufacturing lines of business; the second sample is limited to A & 0 performers in the 151 lines of
business covered by the Levin et al. survey. Columns (1) and (3) of Table Ill display the results of simple

regressions of R & D intensity on our two size variables. Columns (2) and (4) present the results of
regressions of A & D intensity on the two size variables and industry fixed effects. Comparing columns
(1) to (3), and (2) to (4), we see that the two samples produce very similar ordinary least squares
estimates for comparable specifications.


      The results in columns (1) and (3) support rejection of the hypothesis that a2 and a.3 are jointly
zero, but the hypothesis of equality of these two coefficients cannot be rejected. This pair of tests
indicates that the size of the firm as a whole, but not business unit size, affects R & D intensity. Although

the joint effect of both size measures is statistically significant, only one per cent of the variance in
business unit A & D intensity is explained. Moreover, the magnitude of the firm size effect is small. The
coefficient of OTHERSALES reported in column (1) implies that firm size must increase by 17 billion
dollars to increase R & D intensity by one per cent of sales. Alternatively, doubling the size of the mean
firm in our sample would produce an increase in A & D intensity of less than two-tenths of one per cent.
There is no evidence of a nonlinear size-A & 0 relationship.13


      The hypothesis that firm size alone influences business unit A & D intensity is further supported in
the fixed effects regressions reported in columns (2) and (4) of Table Ill.             The coefficient of
OTHERSALES falls somewhat when fixed industry effects are included, but it remains statistically
significant in both samples. The coefficient of BUSALES remains insignificant, but it becomes positive
and moves much closer to the OTHERSALES coefficient, strengthening the conclusion that the size of
the firm as a whole (BUSALES plus OTHERSALES) affects R & 0 intensity. Nevertheless, industry
effects appear to be far more important than firm size; they explain nearly half the remaining variance in
business unit A & D intensity.


      To test the sensitivity of the results in Table Ill to outliers, we excluded those observations with
large absolute residuals. Over a wide range of cutoff values, this procedure produced no change in our
qualitative conclusions and only small changes in the estimated coefficients.


      We also tested for systematic differences in the size-R & D relationship across industries. Since
many lines of business contain few observations, estimation of separate slopes for each industry at the
FTC line of business (LB) level was infeasible. Instead, while retaining LB-level fixed effects, we
                                                       10


 estimated separate size-related slopes for each two-digit idistry.14 The hypothesis of the homogeneity
of the slopes across two-digit industries could not be rejedad in either sample. In only six industries,
 however, was the influence cf OTHERSALES on R & D ilensity statistically significant in one or both

 samples. These six industrie '.vere printing and publishing (SIC 27), stone, clay, glass and cement (SIC

 32), fabricated metal product3 (3C 34), machinery (SIC 35), electrical equipment (SIC 36), and motor
vehicles (SIC 37). The apparent absence of significant size cts in two-thirds of the two-digit industries
 suggested that our new "stylized fact" was fragile.


       To probe further we looked carefully for outliers wtin each of these two-digit industries. A
distinctive pattern appeared. Five of the six industries contaid a total of seven outlier observations with
 a common characteristic. In each case a very large firm, ni.di larger than typical for the particular line of
business, had an uncharacteristically high R & D intensity. These firms were among the very largest in
the manufacturing sector, and although the specific business isiits involved were not especially large for
the relevant lines of business, the value of OTHERSALES was in each instance at least $2.78 billion
above the mean for the line of business. There were three such observations in fabricated metals (SIC

34), and one each in SICs 27, 32, 35, and 36. Although the rticular reasons for the exceptionally high
A & D intensity differed, some form of measurement en-or suggested in each instance. Two of the
outliers appear to be the artifact of an excessively broad four-digit industry definition; these two business

units manufacture products that are quite distinct from those supplied by others in the same line of
business. Two other outlying business units produce inputs to downstream products manufactured by
their parent companies. Their atypically high R & D intensies may result from understated transfer
prices or from the method of allocating R & D between irennediate and final product. A similar case
seems to involve the allocation of R & D among complemeray final products. Finally, the two remaining

outliers represent business units that sell military products. Their atypically high company-financed R & D

expenditures may reflect the common practice of including "iidependent A & 0" (lR&D) funds reimbursed
by the Pentagon, or they may, alternatively, result from the behavior described by Lichtenberg [1986],
where government contractors signal their ability to perform by pnvately financing A & D.


      Deleting these seven observations from our sample of 1,797 (and deleting the five of these that
appear in our restricted sample of 1,302 observations) drammicalty altered the results. The statistical
significance of OTHERSALES vanished within each of the bye two-digit industries from which outliers
were omitted, despite the fact that only one observation w deleted from four of these industries.
                                                       11


 Furthermore, across all two-digit industries, tests of the joint significance of the size-related coefficients
 produced F-statistics below 1.0, as did tests on the homogeneity of the slopes across all two-digit
 industries.15


        Table IV displays the results of deleting these few outliers and re-estimating the specifications
 reported in Table Ill. In each case the coefficient of OTHERSALES is approximately halved, and it

 remains significant at the .05 level only in the larger sample prior to the inclusion of industry effects. Even
 in this last instance, however, the hypotheses that a2 and a3 are jointly zero cannot be rejected at the .05

 level. Moreover, the modest share of the variance in A & D intensity that is explained by the two size
 variables falls to less than one-third of one per cent when the outliers are removed.16


       Table V displays maximum likelihood estimates of the Tobit specification of our simple benchmark

 equation with the outliers removed. Using a Tobit estimator, and adding nearly 700 observations on
 business units with no reported A & D, does not alter the qualitative results. Though insignificant, the
 coefficient of BUSALES turns positive, presumably reflecting fact that R & D - performing business units

 within this sample are slightly larger on average than nonperforrners. The coefficient of OTHERSALES
 remains statistically significant in the more inclusive sample and insignificant in the smaller sample.


       From a decomposition of the Tobit coefficient estimates, we find that, at the sample means of
BUSALES and OTHERSALES, less than one-half of the total response of A & D to an increase in
OTHERSALES is attributable to an increase of A & D by business units above the threshhold; the
remainder is attributable to an increased probability of performing R & D. To be more precise, at the
means of both size variables in our more inclusive sample, the A & D intensity of performers rises by .018

per cent per billion dollars of OTHERSALES. The OLS estimate from column (1) of Table IV of this same

response is .032. Thus, there appears a modest upward bias in our OLS estimates of the effect of firm
size on A & 0 intensity within the sample of A & D-performing business units. The robustness of this last
inference is confirmed when we calculate the Tobit estimate of the A & 0 response of business units
above the threshhold at values of OTHERSALES that bracket the vast majority of observations in our

sample. Maintaining BUSALES at its sample mean and allowing OTHERSALES to vary from one per
cent of its sample mean to ten times its mean, we find that estimates of the R & 0 response of performers

range from .0175 to .0215. We conclude that over the relevant size range our OLS results overstate the
effect of firm size on A & 0 intensity among R & D performers.
                                                       12


       We next consider how the use of measured industry characteristics affects our conclusions about
the size-A & D relationship. We defer discussion of the performance of these industry characteristics to
the next section and focus here on the coefficients of the two size variables. Table VI presents Tobit,
OLS, and GLS results for the smaller of our two samples. In this sample, once outliers were removed,
size effects were absent in both the simple and fixed effects specifications.


      The OLS estimates in column (2) of Table VI contain no evidence of size effects in the sample of R
& D performers. Indeed, the coefficients of BUSALES and OTHERSALES are almost identical to the
fixed effects estimates reported in column (4) of Table IV. The coefficient of OTHERSALES, however, is
sensitive to the heteroscedasticity correction in the sample of A & D performers, as shown in column (3)
of Table VI. The coefficient of OTHERSALES more than doubles, and it becomes significant at the .01
level. This anomaly results from the heteroscedasticity correction. The size variables receive little weight

in the auxiliary equation. Instead, the survey variables reflecting technological opportunity, notably
SCIENCEBASE, receive the greatest weight because the largest residuals occur disproportionately in
industries with very high technological opportunity. Observations from high opportunity industries thus
receive less weight in the GLS equation, and firm size becomes significant. The result hints that if firm
size matters at all, it matters in low opportunity industries.17


      The Tobit results in column (1) of Table VI reinforce the conclusion that the effect of OTHERSALES

is insignificant. At the sample means of all variables, just over half of the reported Tobit coefficients
represents the effect of the independent variables on the R & D intensity of performers. Thus, the
insignificant OLS coefficient once again overestimates the effect of firm size on A & D intensity.


      Contrary to all previously reported results, BUSALES has a significant positive effect in column (1)
of Table VI. At the means of the independent variables, the estimated response of A & D performers to
BUSALES is, however, identical to the comparable OLS coefficient estimate in column (2).18 This
suggests that the significance of BUSALES in the Tobit specification may be attributable to its influence
on the probability of conducting A & D. To explore this possibility, we estimated probit equations using the

explanatory variables from both our simple specification and the specification including the measured
industry characteristics.19 The effect of business unit size on the probability of conducting R & D was
positive and significant at the .01 confidence level in both specifications.           The coefficient of
OTHERSALES was insignificant.
                                                         13


       VI. Further Results: Fixed Effects vs. Measured Industry Characteristics


       Table VI reveals that measured industry char'acteristics perform well as substitutes for industry
 fixed effects. In the OLS specification estimated on the restricted sample of R & 0 performers, industry
 characteristics explain 23.4% of the variance in business Unit R & 0 intensity beyond that explainedby

 size alone. This represents 48% of the incremental varnce explained by industry fixed effects, with
 great economy in the use of parameters (11 instead of 151). In addition, about 50% more variance is
 explained by measured industry characteristics than by fixed two-digit industry effects.


       Most of the industry characteristics are individually significant at conventional levels. In the OLS
version, only the contribution of raw material suppliers (MATERIALTECH) is insignificant. The remaining

opportunity variables are significant at the .01 level in all three equations, with the exception of
SCIENCEBASE in the Tobit variant. The appropriability variables have a substantial impact on R & 0
intensity. Our demand growth measure performs rather poorly, but the price and income elasticity terms
are significant in all three equations. WaId tests of the joint significance of the vectors of opportunity,
appropriability, and demand variables, each compel rejection of the null hypothesis by all three methods
of estimation.20


      One widely employed industry characteristic, seller concentration, is excluded from the specification
estimated in Table VI. As in Levin et at [1985], the coefficient of this variable is statistically insignificant in

nearly all specifications reported in this paper. It is always insignificant when concentration appears along
with our size measures as the only industry characteristic. All principal results concerning the the
significance and importance of size and industry characteristics hold whether or not concentration is
included in the specification.


      There are insufficient degrees of freedom to test the homogeneity of the coefficients of the industry

characteristics across two-digit industry groups, since there are not enough lines of business in most
two-digit industries.     Nonetheless, we investigated the performance of the measured industry
characteristics within those two-digit groups with enough lines of business to support the specification.

These include food (SIC 20), chemicals (SIC 28), machinery (SIC 35), and electrical equipment (SIC 36).
These four two-digit industries respectively contain 21, 16, 24, and 16 lines of business. Together, they
account for 77 of the 151 lines of business and 728 of the 1,297 R & D-performing business units in the

restricted sample. The groups differ markedly in their opportunity and appropriability conditions. Food
                                                      14


processing industries tend to score relatively low on survey measures of both opportunity and
appropriability. Chemical industries score relatively high on both.           Electrical equipment has high
opportunity, but appropriabiRty is average or below average. The machinery industries are more difficult

to summarize; there is considerable heterogeneity within the two-digit group.


      As noted previously, fixed effects regressions within each of these industrial groups produced no
evidence of size effects after outliers were removed. Substituting measured industry characteristics for
fixed effects, we estimated a Tobit equation for all business units within each two-digit group, and OLS
and GLS equations on the A & D performing business units. With the exceptions noted below, the
qualitative results on the influence of the two size variables were insensitive to the estimation technique.

The Tobit estimates of the coefficients of the measured industry characteristics were generally less
significant than the GLS or OLS estimates, but tests of the joint significance of each category of industry
characteristics were largely identical.21 Thus, we confine attention to the GLS estimates presented in

Table VII.


      Table VII indicates that firm size is insignificant in all four two-digit industries. Business unit size is
however, negatively related to R & 0 intensity in the food processing industries. This result, however, is
not robust; BUSALES is insignificant in the OLS and Tobit equations for food processing. Business unit
size appears to be positively related to R & D intensity in the machinery industries (although not in the
OLS estimates), but this result is driven by the historical anomaly of classifying electronic computing
equipment as nonelectrical machinery.           When a dummy variable is substituted for measured
characteristics in the computer industry alone, the coefficient on BUSALES becomes insignificant.


      The measured industry characteristics perform best in the chemical industries, where the vectors of

opportunity, appropriability, and demand variables are each jointly significant at the .05 level or better.
The opportunity variables do reasonably well in machinery and electrical equipment, but most of the
appropriability and demand variables fare poorly outside the chemical industries. One exception is
electrical equipment where short imitation lags appear to spur R & D investment.


      Table VIII summarizes our results concerning the explanatory power of size, fixed industry effects,
and measured characteristics. Both within and across two-digit industries, firm and business unit size
explain very little of the variance in business unit R & D intensity. In chemicals, machinery, and electrical

equipment, as well as across industries, both measured industry characteristics and fixed effects explain
                                                      15


 a substantial fraction of additional variance.        Across all industries, the 11 measured industry
 characteristics capture nearly half the variance explained by 151 fixed effects, and capture between 78
 and 86 per cent of the variance explained by fixed LB-level industry effects within the two-digit chemical,
 machinery and electrical equipment sectors.


       The performance of measured industry characteristics may also be judged by how well they explain

 the between-industry variation in business unit A & D intensity. By regressing the LB-level means of A &
 0 intensity against measured industry characteristics, we explain about one-third of this between-industry
 variation, whether or not we control for the effects of size. If we restrict attention to the 80 lines of
 business in which there were at least three responses to the Levin et at. survey questionnaire, thus
 reducing the likely magnitude of measurement error in the survey variables, industry characteristics
account for 56 per cent of the between-industry variation in business unit R & D intensity.

      VU. Conclusions


      Our investigations of the FTC Line of Business data reveal that, among business units that perform

R & D, there is no significant relationship between size and A & D intensity once care is taken to separate
the influence of business unit and firm size, to control for interindustry differences in the A & D investment

environment, and to remove outliers from the data. Once outliers are removed, a simple regression of R
& D intensity on size measures alone suggests that the size of the firm is positively associated with
business unit A & 0 intensity, although the effect is quite small. This resutt, however, appears only in the

larger of our two samples, and it vanishes entirely once we control for industry effects. Moreover, the
magnitude of the effect of either firm size or business unit size upon the R & D intensity of R & D
performing business units is always minute, regardless of the associated significance level, or the sample

or estimation technique employed. We also find that although business unit size exercises no influence
on the R & 0 conducted by R & D performers, it does influence the probability of engaging in R & D.


      Our results also suggest that previous findings supporting the connection between overall firm size
and A & 0 intensity in samples of R & D performers may have resulted from inadequate attention to
outliers and industry effects, and not from inappropriate estimation technique. Tobit regressions produce
conclusions concerning the effect of size on R & D performers that are qualitatively identical to those
based on OLS estimates derived from censored samples of the type used in most prior literature. On the
other hand, we find that least squares results were somewhat sensitive to corrections for
                                                     16


heteroscedasticity.

      Taken together, the research reported in this and a previous paper provides little support for the
much-tested Schumpeterian hypotheses that firm size and market concentration influence A & D
intensity. Our inquiry also yields constructive results, however, suggesting that industry effects have a
very important influence on R & D, and that industry effects can be reasonably well represented by
measures of demand conditions, and by survey-based measures of technological opportunity and

appropriability.

      These findings do not, of course, rule out the possibility, supported in the work of Scott [1984], that
there are characteristics of firms that influence A & D intensity. Our results suggest that firm size is not
one such characteristic, at least not within the size range we observe. In this connection, it is important to

recall that though our data include many small business units, all are drawn from firms that are among the

largest in the U.S. manufacturing sector.
                                                      17



     Notes
       1Cremer and Sirbu [1978], and Pavitt [1985] have obtained results similar to those of Bound et al.
Cremer and Sirbu used data on French firms; Pavitt studied British firms.


       2Atthough we attempt to control for industry effects, we do not consider the influence on R & D
intensity of firm-specific variables other than size. These may be important; an analysis of covariance
done by Scott [1984] indicates that firm effects explain roughly as much variance in business unit R & D

intensity as do two-digit industry effects. In a related effort, Cohen and Mowery are exploring this issue.


      3See Cohen and Mowery [1984, Appendix V] for a detailed discussion of the screening procedures
used to check the validity of the FTC's Line of Business Program R&D data.


      4Cohen and Mowery [1984, Appendix VI] compare the coverage and representativeness of the
FTC's R & D data with the NSF's A & D data, which is reported at a higher level of aggregation. The
coverage of the FTC data is just over 60% of that of the NSF, and the representativeness of the FTC
data, judging from the similarity of overall and industry mean A & D intesities, is excellent.


      5Afthough firms had the option of consolidating all business units with revenues below ten million
dollars, many did not exercise it.


      6The basic sciences listed in the survey questionnaire are biology, chemistry, geology,
mathematics, and physics. The applied sciences are agricultural science, applied math/operations
research, computer science, materials science, medical science, and metallurgy.


      7lhere are numerous statistical problems associated with the use of Likert-scale survey responses

as independent variables in regressions. The most fundamental is whether responses along a semantic
continuum can be treated as if they were interval data. In the absence of adequate alternative measures

of technological opportunity and appropriability, we assume that such treatment is reasonable. Given this

assumption, there remain several potential sources of measurement error. One is that individual
respondents may differ in their use of the seven-point scale. In related work Levin is exploring the
importance of interrater differences in mean responses and in the variance of responses. Preliminary
results indicate that the ranking of industry mean responses to particular questions is reasonably
insensitive to correction for these individual effects. Another form of measurement error is introduced by
using industry means instead of individual responses. We attempt to control for this type of error by
                                                        18



  including the number of survey responses per industry among the variables used to correct regression
  results for heteroscedasticity.


        8lhese mechanisms are patents to prevent duplication, patents to secure royalty income, secrecy,

 lead time, moving quickly down the learning curve, and complementary sales and service efforts.


        9Almon et al. estimated demand functions for 56 input-output sectors in which the predominant
 share of output goes to personal consumption expenditures. For each sector a constantprice elasticity, a

 constant income elasticity, and a parameter representing the annual percentage shift in the demand
 curve were estimated using time series data from 1947 to 1970. Using these parameters and the 1972
 Input-Output Tables for the United States, Levin [1981] calculated demand elasticities for each of the
 remaining disaggregated input-output sectors in manufacturing. For the handful of consumer goods
 sectors for which Almon J. found zero price elasticitics, alternative estimates were found by a search
 of the empirical literature. Where necessary, these derived elasticities were aggregated to the line of
 business level using sales-weighted averages.


       The procedure requires some very strong, and obviously counterfactual, assumptions: a fixed
coefficient technology and an input-output structure that can be partitioned into intermediate and final
goods sectors. Nonetheless, the procedure produced only a few anomalies, and the relative magnitudes
of the elasticities across industries accord reasonably well with intuition.


       10Although the reader may be concerned with possible collinearity between BUSALES and
OTHERSALES, the correlation between these variables is only .13. The large number of observations in
our sample further mitigates concern over the effect of mutticollinearity.


       11A notable exception to this common practice is the work of Bound             [19841. They find that
estimates of the effect of firm size on R & 0 obtained on a sample of firms reporting A & D areessentially

unchanged by correcting for selectivity bias in reporting.


       12Specifically, where Breusch-Pagan test revealed the presence of heteroscedasticity, the
logarithm of the squared residuals from OLS estimation was regressed against first and second order size

terms. For specifications involving industry characteristics, the industry variables were also included at
this stage, along with the number of respondents from the industry to the Levin et al survey. The primary

specification was then weighted by the square root of the antilog of the predicted values from this auxiliary
                                                        19


 equation. The number of survey respondents per industry (NRESP) was included in the auxiliary
 equation to control for possible measurement error in the survey variables. In no instance, however, did
 NRESP have a statistically significant effect on the size of the residuals from the R & D equations.


       13When second order terms were added to our benchmark specifications in columns (1) and (3),

 the coefficients were individually and jointly insignificant, and their magnitude implied that R & D intensity
 rises almost linearly throughout the range of firm sizes in our sample. The second order terms
 contributed virtually no explanatory power, and the qualitative inferences about the significance of size
were unaffected. These conclusions hold for all least squares estimates reported in this paper.


       140ur more inclusive sample contains observations from 19 two-digit industries; the lines of
business covered by the Levin j. survey are drawn from only 16 two-digit industries.

       15Dropping one observation alone was sufficient to render the coefficient on OTHERSALES
insignificant in the restricted sample.


       16Although the degree to which our results are sensitive to a mere handful of observations in a
large sample is surprising, the deleted observations are, after all, precisely those which might be
expected to have the largest effect on the coefficient of OTHERSALES. We therefore proceeded to
check the robustness of the results reported in Table IV by deleting all observations for which the value of

OTHERSALES exceeded its LB-level industry mean by at least $2.78 billion, the smallest deviation
among our seven outliers. In this way, we selected on the independent variable alone. This required us
to drop 169 observations from our larger sample and 126 observations from our restricted sample. The
results were qualitatively identical and quantitatively very similar to those reported for each of the four
equations in Table IV.


      17We explored this possibility by restricting our sample to lines of business with values of
SCIENCEBASE below its sample mean of 6.2 (on a scale of 7.0) and, alternatively, below 6.0. The
results were sensitive to the cutoff level. In the first case firm size had a significant but small effect on R
& D intensity. In the second case, it did not.


      18Whether or not it is significant, the quantitative effect of BUSALES, given R & D performance, is
minute. An eleven billion dollar increase in business unit sales is required to increase A & D intensity by
one percent.
                                                        20


       19We estimated the probit specifications with two forms of our dependent variable. We defined the

dependent variable to equal one if the business unit conducted A & D in any one of the three years,
1975-1 977, and, alternatively, to equal one if A & D was conducted in all three years, 1975-1977. The
qualitative results were insensitive to this variation in the dependent variable.


       201t should be noted that tests on the joint significance of the technological opportunity variables
include only the five opportunity measures drawn from the Levin etal. survey and exclude NEWPLANT,

a measure of the age of the industry's physical plant and equipment. We adopt this approach because
we are particularly interested in assessing the value of the survey data. Dropping NEWPLANT from the
estimating equation, here and in Table VII, produces virtually no change in the remaining coefficients, and
alters none of our qualitative conclusions.


      210f the twelve joint significance tests (three categories of industry characteristics by fourindustry
groups) the only two exceptions were the appropriability variables in SIC 28, which were insignificant in
the Tobit specification, and the demand variables in SIC 35, which were significant in the Tobit
specification.
                                                     21




                                              References



ALMON, C., eta!, 1974,1985: Interindustry Forecasts of the American Economy (Lexington Books,
  Lexington, Mass.).

BOUND, J., CUMMINS, C., GRILICHES, Z., HALL, B., and JAFFE, A., 1984, "Who Does R & D and Who
  Patents?" in Zvi Griliches (ed.), A & D, Patents, and Productivity (University of
  Chicago Press, Chicago).

CHAMBERLAIN, G., 1980, "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data", Review of Economics Studies,
  47, 1 (January), pp. 225-238.

COHEN, W.M., and LEVINTHAL, D., 1986, "The Endogeneity of Appropriability and R & 0 Investment",
  Mimeo, Carnegie-Mellon University.

COHEN, W.M., and MOWERY, D.C., 1984, "The Internal Characteristics of the Firm and the
  Level and Composition of Research & Development Spending: Interim Report NSF grant
  PRA 83-10664", Mimeo, Carnegie-Mellon University.

CREMER, J., and SIRBU, M., 1978, "Une analyse econometrique de l'effort de recherche et
  developpement de l'industrie Francaise",Revue Economigue, 29, 5 (September),
  pp. 940-954.

FISHER, F.M., and TEMIN, P., 1973, "Returns to Scale in Research and Development: What
   Does the Schumpeterian Hypothesis Imply?", Journal of Political Economy, 81, 1
   (January/February), pp. 56-70.

GALBRAITH, J.K., 1957, American Capitalism: The Concept of CountervailinQ Power (M.E.
   Sharpe, White Plains, N.Y.).

HARVEY, A.C., 1976, "Estimating Regression Models with Multiplicative Heterosceclasticity",
   Econometrica, 44, 3 (May), pp.461 -465.

JUDGE, G.G., GRIFFITHS, W.E., HILL, R.C., LUTKEPOHL, H., and LEE, T., 1985, The Theory and
  Practice of Econometrics, 2nd ed. (John Wiley and Sons, New York).

KAMIEN, M.l., and SCHWARTZ, N.L., 1982, Market Structure and Innovation (Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge).

LEVIN, R.C., 1981, "Toward an Empirical Model of Schumpeterian Competition", Working
   Paper, Yale School of Organization and Management, Series A, No.43.

LEVIN, R.C., COHEN, W.M., and MOWERY, D.C., 1985, "A & 0 Appropriability, Opportunity, and Market
   Structure: New Evidence on Some Schumpeterian Hypotheses", American Economic Review,
   75, 2 (May), pp. 20-24.

LEVIN, R.C., KLEVORICK, A.K., NELSON, R.R., and WINTER, S.G., 1984, "Survey Research on R & D
   Appropriability and Technological Opportunity : Part 1", Mimeo, Yale University.

LICHTENBERG, F., 1986, "Private Investment in R and 0 to Signal Ability to Perform Government
    Contracts", National Bureau of Economic Reserach, Working paper No. 1974.
                                                     22




MCDONALD, J., and MOFFITT, R., 1980, "The Uses of Tobit Analysis", Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 62, 2 (May), pp. 318-321.

PAVITT, K., ROBSON, M., and TOWNSEND, J., 1985, "The Size Distribution of Innovating Firms
   in the UK: 1945-1983", Mimeo, Social Policy Research Unft, Universfty of Sussex.

SCHERER, F.M., 1980, Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 2nd ed.
   (Houghton Mitflin, Boston).

SCHERER, F.M., 1984, Innovation and Growth: Schumpeterian Perspectives (MIT Press,
   Cambridge, Mass.).

SCHUMPETER, J.A., 1950, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, 3rd ed. (Harper &
   Row, New York).

SCOTT, J.T., 1984, "Firm versus Industry Variability in R & D Intensity", in Zvi
   Griliches (ed.), R & D, Patents, and Productivity (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).

TOBIN, J., 1958, "Estimation of Relationships for Limited Dependent Variables", Econometrica,
    26, 1 (January), pp. 24-36.
                                        TABLE I

                    Number of Firms and Business Units by Sample




                             All                  R&D
                       Business Units       Performers Only

                      All    Survey          All    Survey
                      LBs     LBs            LBs     LBs

Business Units       2494    1719            1797   1302

         F i rrns     345     318            317     297
                                                           TABLE II

                       Descriptive Statistics on R&D Intensity, Business Unit Sales and Finn Sales
                                                        by Sample




                        R&D Intensity*                     Business    Unit    Sales                         Finn Sales
                         (percent)                            ($    billion)                                 ($   billion)
                   All                  R&D                All                       R&D                All                  R&D
                 Business            Performers          Business               Performers            Business            Performers
                  Units                Only               Units                      Only              Units                  Only

              All     Survey      All     Survey   All       Survey           All       Survey     All                  i)l      Survey
              LBs      LBs        LBs      LBs     LBs        LBs             LBs        LBs       LBs      LBs         LBs       LBs

Mean          1.59     1.81        2.12     2.31   0.20       0.25            0.25          0.30    2.31     2.46      2.44          2.57

NedIan         .68      .81        1.16     1.30   006        0.07            0.07          0.08    1.14     1.23      1.23          1.31
      **
              0.00     0.00        0.00     0.00   0.00       0.00            0.00          0.01    0.11     0.11      O12           0.12
Minimum
      **     22.35    22.35       22.35    22.35   16.04      16.04       16.04         16.04      34.13   34.13      34.13      34.13
Maximum




 *Business unit R&D spending as a percentage of business unit sales and transfers.
**To preserve the confidentiality of responding firms, we report the mean values of the four smallest and largest
  business units or firms, respectively.
                                       TABLE III

                       The Effects of Size on R&D Intensity
                              R&D Performers Only


               Variable!              Regression Coefficient (standard error)
Parameter      Hypothesis               All LBs                     Survey LBs

                                     (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
                                           **                         **
               Intercept           1.957             a           2.165           a
                                  (0.076)                       (0.096)

               BUSALES            —0.024          0.049         —0.043         0.054
   a2
                                  (0.067)        (0.073)        (0.072)       (0.076)
                                         **                **            **            **
               OTHERSALES          0.058           0.045         0.052         0.043
   a3
                                  (0.013)        (0.011)        (0.016)       (0.013)




               H: cx2,cx3—0       F(2,1794)     F(2,l55)        F(2,l299)     F(2,1149)
                                   9.86**          9.13*          5.21**        5.90**

               H : cx2=a3         F(1,l794)     F(1,1551)       F(l,1299)     F(l,l149)
                   °
                                  1.39            0.002           1.59          0.02

               R2                 0.011            0.473          0.008         0.480

               n                  1797             1797           1302          1302




  aLB level fixed effects suppressed
 **Significant at the .01 level

  *Significant at the .05 level
                                        TABLE IV

                       The Effects of Size on R&D Intensity
                               R&D Performers Only
                                 Outliers           Removed


                Variable!               Regression Coefficient (standard error)
Parameter       Hypothesis               All LBs                      Survey LBs

                                         (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)
                                               **                            **
                Intercept             1.999               a           2.206           a
                                      (0.075)                        (0.095)

                BUSALES           —0.002                 0.074       —0.024          0.077
   a2
                                      (0.065)           (0.070)      (0.071)        (0.074)

                OTHERSALES             0.032*            0.016        0.027          0.017
   a3                                                                               (0.013)
                                      (0.013)           (0.011)      (0.016)




                                 F(2,1787)              F(2,1544)   F(2,l294)     F(2,1144)
                H0.2,3             2.90                  1.85          1.45           1.54

                H0:c2=c3         F(l,1787)              F(l,1544)   F(1,1294)     F(l,ll44)
                                      0.25               0.63         0.48            0.61

                R2                    0.003              0.484        0.002           0.492

                n                     1790               1790        1297             1297



 aLB level fixed effects suppressed
**Significant at the .01 level
 *Significant at the .05 level
                                      TABLE V

                     Tobit Regressions of R&D Intensity on Size



                 Variable!         Regression Coefficient (standard error)
 Parameter       Hypothesis           All LBs           Survey LBs

                                           (1)              (2)
                                                 **               **
                 Intercept            1.141               1.451
                                     (0.091)             (0.118)

    a            BUSALES              0.126               0.083
     2
                                     (0.076)             (0.104)
                                            **
    a            OTHERSALES           0.038               0.026
                                     (0.014)             (0.017)


                Ho :a,cz=O             x2(2)
                                     11.62**              353
                                           2                2
                H .cxfa3               x       (1)         x (1)
                                      1.21                0.28

                 a                    2.778               2.955

                Log—likelihood       -5440               —3938

                n                     2487                1714



B level fixed effects suppressed
**Significant at the .01 level
 *Significant at the .05 level
                                             TABLE VI

              The Effects of Size and Industry Characteristics on R & D Intensity




                                                      Regression Coefficient
                      Variabi e/                          (Standard Error)
Parameter             Hypothesis                  Tobit          OLS            GLS
                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)


   a                  INTERCEPT                  7572**
        1
                                                 (1.264)       (1.362)         (0.980)

                      BUSALES                     0.163*        0.074      —0.024
   a
        2                                                      (0.063)     (0.049)
                                                 (0.071)

                      OTHERSALES                  0.017         0.018           0.041**
   a
        3                                        (0.014)       (0.014)         (0.012)

                      SCIENCEBASE                 0.267         0.358**         0.232**
                                                 (0.139)       (0.126)         (0.071)

                      GOVTECH                     0.309**      0.363**         O.182**
   a
                                                 (0.068)       (0.071)     (0.055)

                      MATERIALTECH               -0.110        -0.077          0.087
   a
        6                                                      (0.094)     (0.066)
                                                 (.0.089)

                      EQUIPTECH
        7                                        (0.103)       (0.104)     (0.066)

                      USERTECH                    0.571**      0.455**         0.279**
        8                                        (0.093)       (0.090)     (0.064)

                      APPROPRIABILITY             0.535**      O.540**         0.338**
        9                                        (0.160)       (0.154)         (0.116)

                      IMLAG                       0.100*        0.102*      0.060*
   a
                                                 (0.041)       (0.042)     (0.031)

   a                  PELAS              ,


                                                 (0.080)       (0.059)     (0.036)

                      INCELAS                     1.471*        1.450**     0.794**
   ci
                                                 (0.158)       (0.149)     (0.121)

                      DGROWTH                     0.171         0.198*         0.074
   a
                                                 (0.096)       (0.084)     (0.046)

                      NEWPLANT                    0.051**      0.059**      0.030**
   a
        1'.                                      (0.007)       (0.008)     (0.006)
                                                       TABLE VI CONTINUED




                                                                    Regression Coefficient
          Variable!                                                     (Standard Error)
          Hypothesis                                            Tobit         OLS            GLS
                                                                  (1)         (2)            (3)

          H!                                                      x(2)         F(2,1283)      x(2)
                               2'3
                                                                 7.62*        1.73           5.67*

          H : a = a                                               (1)         F(1,1283)       x(l)
              O                2             3
                                                                 395*         0.70           1.56

          H: OpportunityO                                         (5)         F(5,1283)       (5)
                                                                99.76**     18.12**          22.51**
          icz ,a ,cz ,a a
                  II       5        6        7    8


          H: Appropriability=0                                    x(2)        F(2,1283)       x(2)

                  a ,a =0)
                                                                18.79**      977**            6.45**
          (
                       9       10


          H :              Demand = 0                             (3)         F(3,1283)      x(3)
                               a        ci                      93.85**     35.90**          15.55**
          (                                      =0)

                                                                             0.236


          n                                                      1714         1297             1297




 *Significant at the .05 confidence level.
**Sjgnjfjcant at the .01 confidence level.
                                           TABLE VII
The Effects of Size and Industry Characteristics on R&D Intensity in Selected 2-Digit Industries
                                 R&D Performers Only
                            (Adjustedfor Heteroscedasticity)

                                         Regression Coefficient (standard error)

            Variable/                    SIC 20 SIC 28       SIC 35      SIC 36
  Parateter Hypothesis                   (Food) (Cheniicals) (Machinery) (Electrical)

              Intercept                  1.145    _24.436** _17.293**     —5.135
                                        (3.536)    (6.461)     (5.037)     (7.469)

      a2
             BTJSALES                   _0.430*    -0.033       0.738**     1.374
                                        (0.179)    (0.293)     (0.280)     (0.911)

             OTHERSALES                  0.019         0.013    0.024      0.029
     a3
                                        (0.029)    (0.007)     (0.019)     (0.017)

             SCIENCEBASE                —0.261     0.637        l.183**    0.672
                                        (0.239)    (0.704)     (0.453)     (0.755)

     a5      GOVTECH                     0.020      1.226**     O.959**   —0.234
                                        (0.114)    (0.324)     (0.316)    (0.226)
             MATERIALTECH                0.136     1.OlO**      0.987**   _1.144*
                                        (0.131)    (0.363)     (0.284)    (0.494)
             EQUIPTECH                   0.097    _0.821*      _0.896**    1.467*
                                        (0.091)   (0.394)      (0.241)    (0.650)
             IJSERTECH                  —0.091     l.958**      0.120      1.098**
                                        (0.129)    (0.384)     (0.253)    (0.324)
             APPROPRIABILITY            —0.107     0.199        0.786     —0.086
     a9
                                        (0.368)   (1.277)      (0.529)    (0.576)
             IMLAG                       0.053     0.371**     —0.182     _0.533**
     a10
                                        (0.043)   (0.120)      (0.145)    (0.148)

     a11     PELAS                  —0.191         1.978       —0.511     —1.176
                                        (0.257)   (1.101)      (0.385)    (0.910)

     a12     INCELAS                     0.678     2.643**      2.197**     1.110
                                        (0.426)   (0.878)      (0.523)    (1.236)

     a13     ROWTH                      0.113     _2.453**     —0.316      0.767
                                        (0.084)   (0.834)      (0.342)    (0.771)

     a14     NEWPLANT                0.012         0.156**      0.096**   —0.003
                                    (0.009)       (0.042)      (0.023)    (0.043)

             H:a2,u3—0                  2(2)       x2(2)       x2(2)
                                        3.59       1.88        5.73        2.21
                                    TABLE VII
                                    continued

                                                          2(1)     2(1)
                                    6.52*       0.025     6.21*   2.19

         110:Opportunity=o          x2(S)       x2(5)     2(5)
           (a4,cz5,c&5,cx7,cz8=0)
                                    1.02        12.02*    7.96*   14.46*

         110:Appropriability=o                  2(2)      2(2)
            (91o0)                  0.79        8.70*     1.62    6.51*

         N:Detnand=O                x2(3)                 x2(3)
           (a11P12130)              2.90        12.45**   6.33    0.68
            (OLs)                   0.076       0.369     0.440   0.309
                                    142         254       217     115



**Significant at the .01 confidence level
 *Signifjcant at the .05 confidence level
                                     TABLE VIII

  Comparison of Percent Contributions to p1ained Variance in R&D Intensity
        Measurec Industry Characteristics v. Fixed Industry Effects


                                             Sample

                            All
                             Industries      SIC 20   SIC 28   SIC 35   SIC 36

(1) Percent of
variance explained by
size measures                0.2             1.5      0.4      6.6      0.2


(2) Additional
variance explained
by measured
industry                     23.4            6.1      36.5     37.4     30.7
characteristics (d.f.)       (11)             (11)    (11)     (11)     (11)



(3) Additional
variance
explained by
fixed industry               49.0            12.1     46.9     44.8     35.8
effects (d.f.)               (151)            (21)    (16)     (24)     (16)



(4)(2)*(3)                  0.48             0.50     0.78     0.83     0.86
