                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE MARKET FOR FINANCIAL ADVISER MISCONDUCT

                                         Mark Egan
                                        Gregor Matvos
                                          Amit Seru

                                      Working Paper 22050
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22050


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 2016, Revised September 2017




We thank Sumit Agarwal, Ulf Axelson, Jonathan Berk, Jörn Boehnke, Douglas Diamond, Steve
Dimmock, Alexander Dyck, Michael Fishman, Mark Flannery, Will Gerken, Erik Hurst, Anil
Kashyap, Brigitte Madrian, Robert MacDonald, Lasse Pedersen, Jonathan Sokobin, Amir Sufi,
Vikrant Vig, Rob Vishny, Luigi Zingales, and the seminar participants at the Becker Friedman
Institute Industrial Organization of the Financial Sector Conference, the NBER Corporate
Finance, NBER Summer Institute, NBER Household Finance, NBER Risk of Financial
Institutions, CSEF-EIEF-SITE Conference on Finance and Labor, Mitsui Michigan Conference,
LBS Summer Symposium, Society for Economic Dynamics Meetings, the University of
California Berkeley, Boston College, Columbia University, the University of Chicago, Harvard
Business School, London School of Economics, London Business School, the University of
North Carolina, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University of Minnesota, New
York FED, New York University, FINRA, Oxford University, SEC DERA, SEC Enforcement,
Stanford University, University of Virginia, Wharton, and Yale. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Mark Egan, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Market for Financial Adviser Misconduct
Mark Egan, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 22050
February 2016, Revised September 2017
JEL No. D14,D18,G24,G28

                                         ABSTRACT

We construct a novel database containing the universe of financial advisers in the United States
from 2005 to 2015, representing approximately 10% of employment of the finance and insurance
sector. We provide the first large-scale study that documents the economy-wide extent of
misconduct among financial advisers and the associated labor market consequences of
misconduct. Seven percent of advisers have misconduct records, and this share reaches more than
15% at some of the largest advisory firms. Roughly one third of advisers with misconduct are
repeat offenders. Prior offenders are five times as likely to engage in new misconduct as the
average financial adviser. Firms discipline misconduct: approximately half of financial advisers
lose their jobs after misconduct. The labor market partially undoes firm-level discipline by
rehiring such advisers. Firms that hire these advisers also have higher rates of prior misconduct
themselves, suggesting “matching on misconduct.” These firms are less desirable and offer lower
compensation. We argue that heterogeneity in consumer sophistication could explain the
prevalence and persistence of misconduct at such firms. Misconduct is concentrated at firms with
retail customers and in counties with low education, elderly populations, and high incomes. Our
findings are consistent with some firms “specializing” in misconduct and catering to
unsophisticated consumers, while others use their clean reputation to attract sophisticated
consumers.


Mark Egan                                            Amit Seru
Harvard Business School                              Stanford Graduate School of Business
Baker Library 365                                    Stanford University
Boston, MA 02163                                     655 Knight Way
eganmarkl@gmail.com                                  ¸˛Stanford, CA 94305
                                                       and NBER
Gregor Matvos                                          aseru@stanford.edu
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
2110 Speedway, Stop B6600
CBA 6.724
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
Gregor.Matvos@mccombs.utexas.edu
1      Introduction
American households rely on nancial advisers for nancial planning and transaction services. Over 650,000

registered nancial advisers in the United States help manage over $30 trillion of investible assets, and

represent approximately 10% of total employment of the nance and insurance sector (NAICS 52; Coen

2015).
       1 As of 2010, 56% of all American households sought advice from a nancial professional (Survey of

Consumer Finances, 2010). Despite their prevalence and importance, nancial advisers are often perceived as

dishonest and consistently rank among the least trustworthy professionals (e.g., Edelman Trust Barometer

2015, Prior 2015, Zingales 2015).            This perception has been largely shaped by highly publicized scandals

that have rocked the industry over the past decade.                   While it is clear that egregious fraud does occur in

the nancial industry, the extent of misconduct in the industry as a whole has not been systematically

documented. Moreover, given that every industry may have some bad apples, it is important to know how

the nancial industry deals with misconduct. In this paper we attempt to provide the rst large-scale study

that documents the economy-wide extent of misconduct among nancial advisers and nancial advisory

rms. We examine the labor market consequences of misconduct for nancial advisers and study adviser

allocation across rms following misconduct. Lastly, we provide an explanation that is consistent with the

facts we document.

    To study misconduct by nancial advisers, we construct a panel database of all nancial advisers (about

1.2 million) registered in the United States from 2005 to 2015, representing approximately 10% of total

employment of the nance and insurance sector.                  The data set contains the employment history of each

adviser. We observe all customer disputes, disciplinary events, and nancial matters reported by FINRA

from advisers' disclosure statements during that period.                  The disciplinary events include civil, criminal,

and regulatory events, and disclosed investigations, which FINRA classies into twenty-three disclosure

categories. Because disclosures are not always indicative of wrongdoing, we conservatively isolate six of the

twenty-three categories as misconduct including regulatory oenses, criminal oenses, and customer disputes

that were resolved in favor of the customer.

    In the rst part of the paper, we document the extent of nancial misconduct among nancial advisers and

nancial advisory rms. We nd that nancial adviser misconduct is broader than a few heavily publicized

scandals. One in thirteen nancial advisers have a misconduct-related disclosure on their record. Adviser

misconduct results in substantial costs; the median settlement paid to consumers is $40,000, and the mean

is $550,000. These settlements have cost the nancial industry almost half a billion dollars per year.
                                                                                                                        2

    Relative to misconduct frequency, misconduct is too concentrated among advisers to be driven by random

    1 We   will use the term nancial adviser throughout the paper to refer to representatives registered with the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA). FINRA is the largest self-regulatory organization that is authorized by Congress with
protecting investors in the U.S. Our denition, similar to FINRA's, includes all brokers and the set of investment advisers
on BrokerCheck who are also registered as brokers.        FINRA reports that the term nancial advisor is a generic term that
typically refers to a broker (or to use the technical term, a registered representative). [http://www.nra.org/investors/brokers
and http://www.nra.org/investors/investment-advisers].
    2 We   calculate the total cost to the industry as the sum of all settlements granted per year in our data.




                                                                  2
mistakes. Approximately one-quarter of advisers with misconduct records are repeat oenders. Past oenders

are ve times more likely to engage in misconduct than the average adviser, even compared with other

advisers in the same rm, at the same location, and at the same point in time. The large presence of repeat

oenders suggests that consumers could avoid a substantial amount of misconduct by avoiding advisers with

misconduct records. Furthermore, this result implies that neither market forces nor regulators fully prevent

such advisers from providing services in the future.

   We nd large dierences in misconduct across nancial advisory rms.        Some rms employ substan-

tially more advisers with records of misconduct than others. More than one in seven nancial advisers at

Oppenheimer & Co., Wells Fargo Advisors Financial Network, and First Allied Securities have a record of

misconduct. At USAA Financial Advisors on the other hand, the ratio is roughly one in thirty-six. We nd

that advisers working for rms whose executives and ocers have records of misconduct are more than twice

as likely to engage in misconduct. Dierences across rms are persistent and survive after conditioning on

a rm's business model, such as whether advisers are client facing or not, rm structure, and regulatory su-

pervision. Therefore, rms and advisers with clean records coexist with rms and advisers that persistently

engage in misconduct.

   After documenting basic dierences in the prevalence of misconduct across nancial advisers and nancial

advisory rms, we explore the labor market consequences of nancial adviser misconduct. What punishment

should we expect for misconduct? One benchmark is extreme punishment of misconduct at the rm and

industry levels. Firms, wanting to protect their reputation for honest dealing, would re advisers who engage

in misconduct. Other rms would have the same reputation concerns and would not hire such advisers. Then

advisers would be purged from the industry immediately following misconduct, and only advisers with clean

records would survive in equilibrium. The alternative benchmark is extreme tolerance of misconduct. Firms

would not re advisers who engage in misconduct, and employees with misconduct would not be penalized

when looking for new jobs. Of course, we expect reality to fall somewhere between these benchmarks. We

use the panel structure of our data to investigate how rms punish misconduct and how advisers' misconduct

records aect their employment dynamics. We then show that dierences between rms play an important

role in how the market for misconduct operates.

   The substantial presence of repeat oenders in the pool of nancial advisers implies that misconduct does

not automatically result in removal of an adviser from the industry. Therefore, it is perhaps surprising that

rms are quite strict in disciplining employees' misconduct. Almost half of nancial advisers who engage in

misconduct in a given year do not keep their jobs into the subsequent year. The job turnover rate among

advisers with recent misconduct is roughly 31 percentage points (pp) higher than the job turnover rate among

advisers without recent misconduct (19%). We conrm our results do not arise because of dierences between

rms, regulations, customer bases, or labor market conditions by comparing employees from the same rm,

in the same county, and at the same time. Firms do not discipline randomly, but seem to deliberately assess

the severity of misconduct before making a termination decision.    We nd that larger monetary damages




                                                       3
from misconduct result in a higher job separation probability.

    If individual rms are strict in disciplining bad employees, why are there so many repeat oenders in

the population of nancial advisers? We nd that 44% of advisers who lost their jobs after misconduct nd

employment in the industry within a year. The hiring of employees with misconduct records undoes some of

the discipline practiced by rms. However, reemployment does not imply that discipline related to misconduct

is completely absent at the industry level. Even accounting for reemployment, advisers experience elevated

probabilities of industry exit following misconduct. They experience longer gaps between employment spells

in the industry. Conditional on nding new employment, they move to rms with lower compensation and

that are less desirable, as measured by followers to a rm on a social networking website for professionals.

Again, we nd these patterns even when we compare advisers with misconduct to other employees from the

same rm, at the same location, and at the same point in time.

    In the last part of the paper we provide a potential interpretation that is consistent with these facts.

Why are some rms willing to hire advisers who were red following misconduct?                          If rms had identical

tolerance toward misconduct, such rehiring would not take place. We nd that advisers with misconduct

switch to rms that employ more advisers with past misconduct records. These results suggest that there

is matching between advisers and rms on the dimension of misconduct. We nd further evidence of such

matching when examining the composition of new hires across rms. The rms that hire more advisers with

misconduct records are also less likely to re advisers for new misconduct.                   This inclination should make

these rms especially attractive to advisers who might engage in future misconduct.                        Thus the matching

between rms and advisers on misconduct partially undermines the disciplining mechanism in the industry,

lessening the punishment for misconduct in the market for nancial advisers.

    The disciplinary records of nancial advisers are public record. Therefore, one might ask why competition

among advisers and reputation does not drive out bad advisers and rms. One potential reason is that some

customers may not be very sophisticated.
                                                   3 Such customers do not know either that such disclosures even

exist, or how to interpret them. If there are dierences in consumer sophistication, then the market can be

segmented. Some rms specialize in misconduct and attract unsophisticated customers, and others cater

to more sophisticated customers and specialize in honesty, in the spirit of Stahl (1989) and Carlin (2009).

    To shed more light on this mechanism, we collect additional data on nancial advisory rms' customer

base from the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Form ADV. Retail investors, who are not high net

worth individuals, are generally considered less sophisticated.
                                                                           4 We nd that misconduct is more common

among rms that advise retail investors.            The geographic distribution of advisory rms is also consistent

with market segmentation along the lines of investor sophistication. We document substantial geographic

dierences in nancial misconduct. In many counties in Florida and California, roughly one in ve nancial

   3 For   other examples of work on consumer sophistication and household nancial decisions, see, for example, Gabaix and
Laibson 2006; Hastings and Tejeda-Ashton 2008; Carlin and Manso 2011; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011; Duarte and Hastings
2012.
   4 This   denition is also used for regulatory purposes.   The Investment Company Act of 1940 considers high net worth
individuals to be more sophisticated than smaller retail investors, allowing them substantially more latitude in their investments.




                                                                4
advisers have engaged in misconduct in the past.              Misconduct is more common in wealthy, elderly, and

less educated counties. The latter two categories have generally been associated with low levels of nancial

sophistication (Gurun et al. 2015). Rates of misconduct are 19% higher, on average, in regions with the

most vulnerable populations; those counties that rank below the national averages in terms of household

incomes and college education rates.
                                           5 Misconduct among these vulnerable populations may be particularly

costly, as these populations likely have the highest marginal propensity to consume. These results, while

not conclusive, suggest that misconduct may be targeted at customers who are potentially less nancially

sophisticated.

   We conduct several tests to ensure the patterns we document are robust.                    First, we examine alterna-

tive classications when constructing our measures of misconduct. In particular, the facts we uncover are

qualitatively similar when we use a severe measure of misconduct. To measure severe misconduct, we

restrict our denition of misconduct disclosures to include only disclosures that are denitive cases of ad-

viser dishonesty, such as fraud and unauthorized activity.             Moreover, we also experiment with alternative

specications and nd similar results.         When studying recidivism and labor market outcomes of advisers

following misconduct, we compare nancial advisers within a rm, in the same county, and in the same year.

Therefore, the conclusions from this analysis are not the result of rm dierences, including dierent business

models. In our baseline labor market analysis, the control group comprises advisers who were employed at

the same rm, in the same location, at the same time,and who also switched jobs. One might be concerned

that this control group selects on advisers who switch jobs and therefore does not accurately represent

the average adviser at the rm. To address this concern, we examine outcomes of advisers from dissolved

rms. In such rms, all advisers, independent of past misconduct, are forced to nd new employment. The

results mirror those from our baseline specication qualitatively as well as quantitatively. Finally, we nd

our facts for nancial advisers registered with FINRA, those registered as investment advisers with the SEC,

and those dually registered with both the SEC and FINRA. Unlike those nancial advisers solely registered

with FINRA, advisers registered as investment advisers are held to a duciary standard. Although other

research, such as Egan (2016), has shown that holding all nancial advisers to a duciary standard could

improve investment outcomes, doing so may not be adequate in dealing with misconduct.

   Our paper relates to the literature on fraud and misconduct in nance.                   The economics literature on

misconduct dates back to the seminal work of Becker (1968) on crime and punishment. More recently, there

has been a growing literature on misconduct among nancial advisers. Qureshi and Sokobin (2015) examine

the characteristics of those nancial advisers who cause investor harm and the predictability of investor

harm. Dimmock et al. (2015) study the transmission of brokerage fraud through peer (career) networks and

nd that fraud is contagious across rms. This conclusion is consistent with our nding that the incidence of

fraud varies systematically across rms.
                                               6 Previous research has documented misconduct in other industries.

  5 Over    the period 2009-2013, the average incidence of misconduct in counties below both the median level of household
income and college education rates was 1.07% per annum. Conversely, the average incidence of misconduct in all other counties
above both the median level of household income and college educations rates was 0.90% per annum.
  6 There   is also a related literature which has argued that nancial advisers steer clients towards worse nancial products




                                                              5
For example, Piskorski et al. (2013) and Grin and Maturana (2014) document evidence of misconduct in

the mortgage industry, and numerous papers have documented similar evidence of corporate fraud including:

Povel et al. (2007), Dyck et al. (2010; 2014), Wang et al. (2010), Khanna et al. (2015), and Parsons et al.

(2015).

     Our paper also relates to the broad literature on how labor markets punish corporate misconduct (Fama

1980, Fama and Jensen 1983). Previous work shows that directors lose board seats if their rms restate their

earnings (Srinivasan, 2005), are involved in class action lawsuits (Helland 2006), engage in nancial fraud

(Fich and Shivdasani 2007), or are involved in proxy contests (Fos and Tsoutsoura 2014). CEOs face similar

career punishments if their rms engage in nancial misconduct (e.g., Agrawal, Jae, and Karpo 1999). For

example, Karpo et al. (2008) nd that CEOs who lose their jobs following regulatory enforcement actions

also do worse in the labor market in the future.

     A recent literature documents the importance of nancial advisers and other intermediaries in shaping

the investment decisions of households.
                                                 7   Trust and consumer sophistication are believed to be critically

important in these markets (see, Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny 2015; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2008;

and Garleanu and Pedersen 2016).               We build on this literature by documenting the roles of consumer

sophistication and misconduct, both of which of which have important implications for trust (Gurun et al.

2017). Our ndings suggest that a natural policy response to lowering misconduct is an increase in market

transparency and in policies targeting unsophisticated consumers. In doing so, our paper connects to the

literature that has evaluated various policy responses in regulating consumer nancial products (Campbell

2006; Campbell et al. 2011; Agarwal et al. 2009 and Agarwal et al. 2014).




2      Data and Descriptive Statistics
We construct a novel data set containing all nancial advisers in the United States from 2005 to 2015. We

collect the data from Financial Industry Regulatory Authority's (FINRA) BrokerCheck database. FINRA

is the largest self-regulatory organization tasked by Congress with ensuring that the securities industry

operates fairly and honestly. The data includes all nancial advisers registered with FINRA. Throughout

the paper we refer to a nancial adviser as any individual who is registered with FINRA but are careful to

make distinctions about additional registrations or qualications a nancial adviser may hold, such as being

a registered investment adviser or a general securities principal. Brokers (or stockbrokers) are registered with

FINRA and the SEC and are dened in the Securities and Exchange Act 1934 as any person engaged in

the business of eecting transactions in securities for the account of other. An investment adviser provides

nancial advice rather than transaction services. Although both are often considered nancial advisers,

without engaging in misconduct (e.g., Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano, 2009; Mullainathan, Noeth, and Schoar, 2012;
Christoersen, Evans and Musto 2013; Chalmers and Reuter, 2015; Egan 2016).
    7 For   example, Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar (2013) in the insurance industry; Gurun, Matvos and Seru (2015) in the mortgage
industry; Hastings, Hortaçsu and Syverson (2015) in the fund industry; and Barwick, Pathak and Wong (2015) in the real
estate industry.




                                                               6
brokers and investment advisers dier in terms of their registration, duties, and legal requirements. Two of

the main dierences are that brokers are regulated by FINRA and are held to a suitability standard while

investment advisers are regulated by the SEC and are held to a duciary standard. Roughly 84% of active

SEC registered investment advisers are also dually registered with FINRA as brokers. Thus, the BrokerCheck

data includes all brokers and the vast majority of investment advisers. Throughout the paper, we will use

terminology consistent with FINRA and refer to both investment advisers and brokers as nancial advisers.

We present results for the two groups separately in Section 6.

   For each adviser, the data set includes the adviser's employment history, qualications, and disclosure

information.   In total, the data set contains 1.2 million nancial advisers and includes roughly 8 million

adviser year observations over the period. We also collect information on the universe of nancial advisory

rms from the BrokerCheck database. We supplement our FINRA data set with additional rm-level data.

For a small subset of the rms, we observe rm assets, revenues, and compensation structure data from a

private industry survey. We acquire data on the popularity of a rm using CVs in the database of a leading

social networking website for professionals.   We hand-match the names of the rms to the FINRA data.

We also utilize county-level data from the 2010 Census and the 2010-2013 American Community Survey to

obtain country-level employment and demographic information. Lastly, we collect data on rms' customer

bases and fee structures from Form ADV lings, which investment advisory rms le with the SEC. We

match this data to BrokerCheck data exactly, using the unique numerical identier, CRD#.




2.1 Financial Adviser-Level Summary Statistics
The data set contains a monthly panel of all registered advisers from 2005 to 2015.        This panel includes

644,277 currently registered advisers and 638,528 previously registered advisers who have since left the

industry. For each of the 1.2 million advisers in the data set, we observe the following information:


   •   The adviser's registrations, licenses, and industry exams he or she has passed.


   •   The adviser's employment history in the nancial services industry.     For many advisers we observe

       employment history dating back substantially further than the past ten years.


   •   Any disclosures led, including information about customer disputes, whether these are successful or

       not, disciplinary events, and other nancial matters (i.e., personal bankruptcy).


Table 1a displays the average characteristics of nancial advisers. The average adviser in our sample has

11 years experience, dened as the number of years since the adviser passed her rst qualication exam.

Approximately half of active advisers are registered as both brokers and investment advisers. The advisers

in our data set account for roughly 0.50% of all employed individuals in the United States and approximately

10% of employment of the Finance and Insurance sector (NAICS 52). Central to our purposes, over 12% of




                                                       7
active nancial advisers' records contain disclosures.
                                                                8 A disclosure indicates any sort of dispute, disciplinary

action, or other nancial matters concerning the adviser.                   Not all disclosures are indicative of fraud or

wrongdoing.       We construct our measure of misconduct-related disclosures based on FINRA's disclosure

classications in Section 3. FINRA classies disclosures into 23 categories as described in the Appendix.

    Table 1a reports the share of advisers who have passed any of the six most popular qualication exams

taken by investment professionals.
                                          9   Most states require that a registered nancial representative, at a

minimum, pass the Series 63 exam, which covers state security regulations. The Series 7 exam is a general

securities exam that is required by any individual who wishes to sell and trade any type of general securities

products. The Series 65 and 66 examinations qualify individuals to operate as investment advisers. Although

not required by all states, most investment advisers hold either a 65 or 66 examination. A Series 6 exam

qualies an investment adviser to sell open-end mutual funds and variable annuities. Finally, the Series 24

exam qualies an individual to operate in an ocer or supervisory capacity at general securities rms. While

about one-fourth of active advisers operate in only one state, 10% are registered to operate in all fty states.

    In the Online Appendix we examine the distribution of nancial advisers across the US and across

rms. Not surprisingly, given the nature and size of the regions, the New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago

metropolitan areas rank among the highest in terms of the number of nancial advisers.                       The number of

advisers per capita tends to be greater in more educated, more populous areas, and actually slightly less

wealthy areas.




2.2 Firm-Level Summary Statistics
From our adviser level data set, we observe the full adviser and branch history for the universe of nancial

advisory rms over the period 2005-2015. The FINRA BrokerCheck database also contains summary details

for the set active rms (as of 2015) the advisers represent. Active rms are identied by the corresponding

CRD identication number.           Firms with distinct CRD numbers can share a same parent company.                        For

instance, Wells Fargo operates several nancial services businesses under separate numbers. In particular,

Wells Fargo has several operations such as Wells Fargo Advisors Financial Network (CRD# 11025), Wells

Fargo Advisors (CRD# 19616), and Wells Fargo Securities (CRD# 126292). The dierent CRD numbers

reect dierent operations and business lines. For example, Wells Fargo Advisors Financial Network is an

arm of Wells Fargo comprised of independent advisers that are aliated but not technically employed by

Wells Fargo (https://www.wfanet.com/). Wells Fargo Advisors reects Wells Fargo's in-house network of

advisers. Similarly, Morgan Stanley has several operations such as Morgan Stanley & Co. (CRD# 8209)

and Morgan Stanley (CRD# 149777).
                                              10 The active advisers in our data work for one of over 4,178 dierent

   8 As   indicated by Ed Beeson at Law360.com, our share of advisers with disclosures over the 2005 to 2015 period, 12.7%,
closely matches that of FINRA, 12.6%, estimated for currently registered advisers in March of 2016.
   9 FINRA        provides    detailed     descriptions    of        each     qualication   exam      on     their     website
[http://www.nra.org/industry/qualication-exams?bc=1].
  10 We   decided not to merge rms with dierent CRD#s for several reasons. First, any merging would be arbitrary and would
reect our choice rather than the actual rm choices in regulatory ling. Second, the dierent CRD numbers frequently reect
dierent operations and business lines, and we are interested in assessing how various business lines correlate with misconduct.




                                                                 8
rms. Figure 1 displays the distribution of these rms. The average rm employs just over 155 advisers.

Firms range from one employee to over 30,000 advisers. For each active rm we observe the rm's business

operations, including its size, number of businesses/operations, and referral arrangements as of 2015. We

also observe registration information, such as the number of states the rm is currently registered in and the

number of regulatory memberships. Finally, we observe the type of incorporation for active rms. We use

several of these rm characteristics in our analysis.

    Table 1b displays the average rm characteristics. Roughly one in four rms is registered as an investment

advisory rm. Recall that just under half of nancial advisers are also registered as investment advisers.

Roughly half of nancial advisory rms are aliated with a nancial or investment institution. For example,

Wells Fargo Advisers is aliated with Wells Fargo Bank.        Lastly, the average rm operates in roughly

six distinct types of business operations. Such operations could include trading various types of securities

(equities, corporate bonds, municipal bonds), underwriting corporate securities, retailing mutual funds, or

soliciting time deposits.

    We use additional rm level data from the SEC's Form ADV lings.           The SEC requires investment

advisory rms to disclose information on the rm's clientele and business practices in the Form ADV. We

match the rms in our FINRA data to the SEC form ADV lings based on the rm's CRD#. Since not all

nancial advisory/brokerage rms le Form ADV, we only observe the Form ADV lings for 405 unique rms

in our data set over the period 2011-2014. The second panel of Table 1b displays the average characteristics

of these rms. The vast majority (86%) of rms report having retail clients. Most rms report charging

based on assets under management, a xed fee, and/or an hourly fee.

    We also supplement our data set with additional information from a private industry survey and from

a popular social networking site. The industry survey provides details on the assets, revenue, and average

adviser payout/salary for a subset of the rms in our FINRA data as of 2014.        We are able to manually

match 75 of the rms in our FINRA data set to the private industry survey based on the rm's name.

Although we observe survey information for a subset of the rms, these rms are generally the largest such

that we observe average payout estimates for 20% of advisers. The average rm operates 23bn in assets and

generates 261mm in revenue. Lastly, we measure the popularity of each rm as the number of individuals

who follow a rm on a popular social media website as of May 2015. We are able to manually match 40%

of the rms in our FINRA data set to the social media website based on the rm name. The average rm

has 2,365 followers.




3     Misconduct
In this section we document the extent of misconduct in the nancial advisory industry. We rst construct

our measure of misconduct based on the disclosures reported to FINRA. Next, we examine the characteristics

of nancial advisers that are disciplined for misconduct. We then document the high incidence of repeat




                                                        9
oenders. Lastly, we examine how misconduct varies across nancial advisory rms.




3.1 Classifying Misconduct
FINRA requires that all individuals registered to sell securities or provide investment advice are required

to disclose customer complaints and arbitrations, regulatory actions, employment terminations, bankruptcy

lings, and criminal or judicial proceedings. We observe the full set of such disclosures for each nancial

adviser across the time period of our data.

   As noted earlier, disclosures are categorized into twenty-three categories ranging from criminal oenses

to customer disputes. Table 2 displays the share of nancial advisers that have disclosures in each category.

Each type of disclosure is described in the Appendix. As we also noted  given that the nature of disclosure

varies substantially and is not always indicative of wrongdoing  we restrict our classication of disclo-

sures indicating misconduct to include only six of the twenty-three categories: Customer Dispute-Settled,

Regulatory-Final, Employment Separation After Allegations, Customer Dispute - Award/Judgment, Crim-

inal - Final Disposition, Civil-Final. We classify the other seventeen categories as Other Disclosures. By

using FINRA's disclosure categories, we take a relatively agnostic approach to classifying misconduct. Our

denition of misconduct resolves around criminal, regulatory, internal investigations, and customer events

that were resolved against the adviser.

   A few comments on this classication, which we believe is conservative in dening misconduct, are worth

mentioning. First, we do not classify categories such as Financial-Final as misconduct. Such categories,

for instance, could pertain to the nancial adviser's personal bankruptcy. Although a consumer may have

reason to be leery of a nancial adviser that frequently declares bankruptcy, it is not necessarily indicative

of misconduct. Second, a consumer dispute that was resolved in favor of the nancial adviser, categorized

as Customer Dispute - Denied, is not included in our measure of misconduct. Nor are claims, which were

withdrawn. Third, we also exclude categories from our classication of misconduct in which the fault of the

adviser is still to be determined, such as those disclosures designated as Customer Dispute - Pending.

   Even though we classify Other Disclosures separately from misconduct, these categories could also

be indicative of misconduct.   For example, statistically, we nd that an adviser engaged in a consumer

dispute that is pending is more likely to have engaged in misconduct than an adviser who has not been

involved in any dispute. However, because the basic description in these categories is less clearly indicative

of misconduct, we are conservative and do not classify these categories as misconduct. We demonstrate the

robustness of our classication scheme extensively when we revisit this issue in Section 6.

   We measure misconduct in the economy in two ways.          The rst approach measures the ow of new

misconduct.   We measure the ow of misconduct as a binary variable that captures whether or not a

nancial adviser received a misconduct-related disclosure in a given year. We date each disclosure with the

date at which the claim was initiated, reecting reporting in BrokerCheck. Therefore, under our measure

of misconduct, advisers with several records of misconduct initiated in a given year are recorded as having




                                                     10
one instance of misconduct. This ow measure captures the unconditional probability that an investor will

encounter misconduct in their dealings with a nancial adviser in a given year.       Column (1) of Table 2

shows that the probability that an adviser engages in misconduct during a year is 0.60%. Approximately

half of these misconduct-related disclosures arise from consumer disputes that were resolved in favor of the

consumer. The third largest category, which captures approximately one in six disclosures, relates to actions

taken by a regulator.

   The second approach to measuring misconduct captures the prevalence of advisers in the population who

have a record of past misconduct; i.e., it measures the stock of past misconduct at a given point of time.

We measure the stock of misconduct as a binary variable that captures whether a nancial adviser has a

past record of misconduct. This measure broadly captures the unconditional probability that an investor will

encounter an adviser with a past record of misconduct. Again, advisers with several records of misconduct in

the past are recorded as having one instance of past misconduct. Column (2) of Table 2 indicates that 7.28%

of nancial advisers have at least one disclosure that is indicative of misconduct during their career. We

calculate this stock measure of misconduct as the number of advisers with at least one misconduct disclosure

during their career divided by the total number of advisers. Notably, because many nancial advisers have

multiple disclosures across multiple subcategories pertaining to misconduct, the subcategories of disclosure

that we classify as misconduct in Table 2 add up to more than 7.28%.

   One in thirteen advisers have a record of misconduct, suggesting that misconduct is relatively common-

place. To better understand the underlying reasons for customer and regulatory disputes, which represent

the bulk of the disclosures, we analyze the text from descriptions of 116,826 disclosures from these categories

across our sample period. Table 3a displays the eleven most common allegations cited. One in four disputes

list unsuitable investments as an underlying cause of the dispute. This is not surprising. By law, brokers

are required to only sell suitable investments to their clients.   Misrepresentation or the omission of key

facts together account for a third of disputes. Approximately 7% of allegations fall under the category of

fraudulent behavior, which carries more severe penalties. The typical penalties associated with misconduct

include nes, probation, and restitution.   If convicted of criminal fraud, a nancial adviser could face a

prison sentence in addition to nes and probation. In Section 6 we revisit the classication of misconduct

and analyze several dierent measures of misconduct. In particular, we construct an alternative measure of

severe misconduct and nd that our results are robust to this more restrictive classication as well.

   We report the most common product categories involved in misconduct in Table 3b. The most popular

investment products held by households - insurance, annuities, stocks, and mutual funds - are the products

most commonly engaged in disputes (Campbell et al. 2010). Many of the misconduct disclosures pertain to

variable rate annuities. Variable rate annuities have often been criticized in the public for having high fees

and hidden charges (Kaplan 2010).

   We examine the severity of misconduct by collecting the damages advisers pay to clients following mis-

conduct.   Figure 2 and Table 3c summarize the distribution of settlements.       The median settlement for




                                                      11
misconduct is $40,000, and the mean settlement is approximately $550,000. Therefore, misconduct is costly

for the advisory rm and suggests substantial damages to the household. To put these numbers in perspec-

tive, the median household net worth in the United States in 2011 was $68,828. These gures suggest that

the costs of adviser misconduct are substantial, with the median settlement equal to over half of the median

household net worth.          Overall, these facts suggest that the misconduct we measure is directly related to

nancial advisers' wrongdoing and fraud rather than simply clerical errors, mistakes, or ignorance on behalf

of advisers.

    Finally, we examine the amount of misconduct over time. Figure 3 shows that misconduct is not just a

feature of the recent nancial crisis. The incidence of misconduct is pervasive across the years in our sample.

There is an increase in misconduct being disclosed in the aftermath of the recent nancial crisis, but the

incidence remains non-trivial across years.




3.2 Repeat Oenders
We start our analysis by exploring whether we can predict which advisers engage in misconduct. In partic-

ular, we are interested in repeat oenders, advisers who engage in misconduct more than once. Figure 4a

displays the share of repeat oenders. Almost 8% of currently registered advisers engaged in misconduct

at least once during their career.       Of those, 27% are repeat oenders, having two or more disclosures of

misconduct. This simple summary statistic strongly suggests that misconduct does not arise due to bad luck

or random complaints by dissatised customers. If misconduct were random and/or the result of bad luck,

the probability an average adviser would be a repeat oender is 2%, which is less than a tenth of the share

in the data.
               11

    At this stage, it is informative to contrast these statistics with those of physicians and public employ-

ees (Glaeser and Saks 2006). The annual incidence of misconduct among nancial advisers is an order of

magnitude larger than the incidence of corruption among public employees (less than 0.01%). The annual

incidence of medical malpractice is similar to that of nancial adviser misconduct, at roughly 1%. Medical

malpractice, however, is substantially less concentrated among physicians, aecting more than half of physi-

cians in the United States (Krupa 2010). This suggests that medical malpractice is quite random; sooner

or later, most doctors are entangled one way or another. This is in contrast to nancial advisers, in which

misconduct is concentrated in around        8%   of the active population.

    The high incidence of repeat oenders suggests that past misconduct should predict future misconduct.

Figure 4b investigates this claim by plotting the observed probability that an adviser is reprimanded for

misconduct at time      t   conditional on whether he or she was reprimanded for misconduct at time 0.              The

gure illustrates that past oenders have an elevated probability of misconduct throughout their career.

 11 Among   those advisers who have a record of misconduct, we observe those advisers working for 3.60 additional years
after their rst misconduct disclosure in our data set.   The baseline annual rate of misconduct in the data set is 0.60%
(Table 2). If misconduct were completely random, we would expect the proportion of repeat oenders in the data set to be
1 − (1 − 0.006)3.6 = 2.14%.




                                                             12
Conditional on receiving a misconduct disclosure at time 0, the probability the adviser receives a misconduct

disclosure in year one is 11%, roughly 4% in year ve, and 1.50% in year nine. To put these numbers in

perspective, the unconditional probability of receiving a misconduct disclosure in any one year is roughly

0.60%. Past misconduct not only predicts future misconduct in the short run but also the long run.

    We now document which adviser characteristics, including past misconduct, predict new misconduct.

Consider the probability that adviser         i,   at rm   j,   in county        l   is reprimanded for misconduct at time   t.   We

estimate the following linear probability model:



                         M isconductijlt = β0 + β1 P riorM isconductijlt + βXijlt + µjlt + εijlt                                   (1)



The dependent variable         M isconductijlt     measures the ow of new misconduct over a one year period and

is a dummy variable indicating that the adviser received one or more misconduct disclosures at time                                 t.
P riorM isconductijlt      is the main independent variable of interest. It measures the stock of misconduct and

is a dummy variable indicating if the adviser has a record of misconduct prior to time                        t.
    To ensure that the correlation between past and future misconduct is robust, in some specications

we also control for rm- year-county xed eects                 µjlt .12   In such a specication, we only exploit variation

within the same rm, implying that we account for dierences in rms' tolerance for misconduct as well as

dierent business models rms may follow.
                                                     13 Moreover, since only within year variation is being exploited,

any aggregate shocks to misconduct, such as the nancial crisis, are also absorbed by this xed eect. In

addition, since we exploit variation within a location, these xed eects also control for variation in regulatory

conditions (subsuming any state- or county-level regulatory variation). Finally, these xed eects also control

for dierences in demographics and labor market conditions in a given county at a point in time.

    We also control for the adviser's characteristics in                Xijlt .       Here we include several aspects of a nancial

adviser's registration: whether or not he or she has passed a qualifying exam to be registered as an investment

adviser (Series 65 or 66) and the number of states he or she is registered in.                           We also control for other

qualications (Series 7, Series 63, etc.) and experience. Many of the requirements are at the state level and

give nancial advisers the exibility to manage dierent types of accounts and assets. These proxy for the

type of advising the adviser engages in.

    Table 4 displays the estimates. The main coecient of interest measures how likely an adviser with a

record of past misconduct will engage in new misconduct relative to other advisers in his or her rm, in

the same county, and at the same point in time. The coecient of 2.40 percentage points suggests that the

propensity for repeat misconduct is large. Given that the baseline rate of misconduct is 0.60%, the results

suggest that nancial advisers with prior misconduct are ve times as likely to engage in new misconduct

  12 We    dene the rm xed eect based on the underlying rm name and rm CRD# reported in BrokerCheck. If an adviser
is registered with multiple rms in a year, we use the rst rm listed at the start of the year. Roughly 1.5% of active advisers
are registered with multiple rms. The county is determined based on the adviser's reported work address.
  13 For   example, previous research by Qureshi and Sokobin (2015) nds that coworker misconduct is predictive of misconduct.
The inclusion of rm by year by county xed eects absorbs such rm level variation.




                                                                   13
as the average nancial adviser. We nd that this relationship is very robust. In Section 6 we show this

relationship holds under alternative denitions of misconduct, among investment advisers, and when we

control for adviser productivity and quality.

    One concern with our analysis above is that one oense, or a series of related events, could be recorded

as multiple misconduct disclosures that span more than one calendar year. Consequently, the relationship

between current and past misconduct we estimate in eq.                   (1) could be mechanical.         Several observations

suggest that this concern is not driving our estimate.
                                                                 14 In particular, if the related misconduct disclosures

are all reported within a year, then the issue does not arise.               This is because we treat multiple instances

as one event of misconduct. However, if reporting occurs across multiple years, then this could potentially

impact our inferences.        Figure 4b shows that past misconduct predicts future misconduct not only in the

short run but also the long run, suggesting that this issue is not driving our estimate. More specically, the

gure suggests that an adviser who was reprimanded in the previous year is roughly 10pp more likely to

engage in misconduct, but an adviser who was disciplined nine years earlier is also 1pp more likely to do so.

It is possible that a series of related oenses that span more than one calendar year could potentially help

drive the elevated probability of a repeat oense in years one and two observed in Figure 4b.
                                                                                                                   15 However,

the longevity of the eect suggests that these are indeed separate oenses and not one isolated oense in

an adviser's career, which unfolds over the next few years. The coecient on                  P riorM isconductijlt      in Table

4 reects a weighted average of the marginal eects reported in Figure 4b. The coecient measures how

likely an adviser with previous misconduct is to be reprimanded for misconduct in a given year relative to

an adviser who has not been previously reprimanded, averaging across all prior misconduct.                           The overall

incidence of repeated misconduct for an individual who has been previously reprimanded for misconduct is

therefore greater than 2.40pp.

    One interesting result in Table 4 is the relationship between the adviser qualications and the proba-

bility of misconduct. Financial advisers who hold a Series 66 or 65 exam are more likely to be investment

advisers. Relative to baseline rate of misconduct of 0.60%, the estimated coecient of 0.31pp indicates that

nancial advisers that hold a Series 66 or 65 exam are 50% more likely to be reprimanded for misconduct

relative to an average nancial adviser. We also nd a positive relationship between misconduct and adviser

experience. However, the economic signicance is small: a one year increase in experience is associated with

a 0.0078pp increase in the probability of misconduct in a given year (Table 4 column 2).
                                                                                                             16 We also nd a

  14 We    nd some evidence suggesting that the nature of the allegations are similar across repeat oenses.      In untabulated
results we nd that among repeat oenders, advisers are 8-19pp more likely to engage in particular type of oense (in terms of
the reported allegations) if they have previously done so.
  15 According   to Qureshi and Sokobin (2015), 75% of the complaints that led to an award or settled above the CRD threshold
reached a resolution within a year. Approximately 20% of the complaints resolved in the second year, whereas the resolution
of the remaining 5% took more than 2 years.
  16 One   potential reason why we nd a positive relationship between experience and misconduct may be that advisers with
more experience have more opportunities to engage in misconduct, or that advisers early on in their careers are more risk
averse. In untabulated results we investigated the role of experience further by including a dummy variable indicating whether
an adviser has less than ve years' experience.    When we include this dummy, we no longer nd a statistically signicant
relationship between experience and misconduct; the estimated eect of experience is smaller at 0.0024pp.            These results
suggest advisers with little or no experience are driving the economically small but statistically signicant positive relationship
between experience and misconduct in the data.




                                                                14
negative relationship between the total number of other qualications an adviser holds and the probability of

misconduct. The estimated coecient of -0.28pp, indicates that an adviser with one additional qualication

is roughly 5% less likely to receive a misconduct disclosure in a given year. One potential explanation for

this result is that those advisers with more qualications may have more to lose if they are caught engaging

in misconduct.




3.3 Misconduct Across Firms
Do rms dier in the amount of misconduct they generate? If rms are similar on the misconduct dimension,

then an adviser red by one rm for misconduct is unlikely a good match for other rms. If rms dier,

however, then there is scope for reallocation of advisers.            We rst describe rms' adviser composition by

measuring the percentage of employees who have a record of past misconduct. Figures 5a and 5b display

the distribution of misconduct among rms with at least 100 and 1,000 advisers. In the average rm with at

least 100 advisers, 8% of its nancial advisers have records of past misconduct. The distribution is skewed

strongly to the right. The median share of advisers disciplined for misconduct is 5%, and among rms in the

top quartile, more than one in ten advisers have a record of past misconduct. This simple cut of the data

shows that rms with clean records coexist with rms that engage in a substantial amount of misconduct.

    Dierences in the number of nancial advisers with records of misconduct rms employ could arise

because of dierentiated business models.           For example, some nancial advisory rms could specialize in

taking advantage of uninformed customers, while others use their clean image to attract more sophisticated

customers.     Another reason for heterogeneity could be dierences in owners' risk tolerance of regulatory

scrutiny.

    Table 5 displays the twenty rms (80th percentile) with at least 1,000 advisers with the highest incidence

of misconduct as of 2015. Misconduct is frequent at some of the largest nancial rms in the United States.

For instance, almost one in ve nancial advisers at Oppenheimer & Co.                    (CRD #249) have a record of

past misconduct.
                    17 The misconduct rate is dened here simply as the percentage of advisers working for

a rm that have been reprimanded for misconduct in the past. The misconduct rate reported in Table 5

may actually understate the true incidence of misconduct. When computing these numbers we include all

nancial advisers. However, not all nancial advisers are in client-facing positions. A subset of the advisers

in our data set may be in a non-client-facing position and would not be in a position to engage in misconduct.

Thus, Table 5 reects a lower bound on the probability a client would interact with an adviser with a past

record of misconduct among one of these rms. We replicate Table 5 where we restrict our analysis to the set

of client-facing nancial advisers as discussed further in Section 6.5.1. The results suggest that the incidence

of misconduct at rms such as Oppenheimer & Co could be closer to 25-28% rather than 19% reported here.

  17 When   asked about the results from this study, Oppenheimer & Co. had conrmed that they had made signicant invest-
ments to proactively tackle risk and compliance issues in our private client division. We've made changes in senior leadership,
branch managers, and signicant changes in our advisor ranks. (http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-01/it-just-
got-even-harder-to-trust-nancial-advisers) [accessed on March 1, 2016]




                                                              15
     We systematically explore whether observable rm characteristics are correlated with new misconduct

using the following specication:



F irm_Employee_M isconductjt               = β0 + β1 F irm_Employee_M isconductjt−1                                          (2)
                                                                                                        50
                                                                                                        X
                                                    +β2 Executive_M isconductjt−1 + βXjt + µt +               µs Statejs + εjt
                                                                                                        s=1


Observations are at the rm by year level over the period 2005-2015. Because we only observe registration

details for active rms, we restrict our analysis to the set of rms still active as of 2015. The dependent

variable    F irm_Employee_M isconductjt              measures the share of nancial advisers working at rm            j   that

were reprimanded for misconduct at time               t.   We include two variables that might shed light on the rm's

tolerance toward misconduct.          First,    F irm_Employee_M isconductjt−1               measures the share of nancial

advisers that were working at rm          j   at    t−1   that were reprimanded for misconduct in the previous year.

Second,    Executive_M isconductjt−1           is a dummy variable indicating that one or more of the rm's owners

or executives has a record of misconduct as of              t − 1.18   We lag the variable   Executive_M isconduct     by one

year to avoid any mechanical correlation between executive misconduct and                    F irm_Employee_M isconduct.
We control for other dimensions of the rm such as its ownership structure, size, and quality. Our primary

specication includes time xed eects          µt   to absorb aggregate variation in misconduct, and state xed eects

µs   for each state a rm operates in to control for dierences in regulation and demographics.

     The results reported in Table 6 show that observable rm characteristics predict rm-level misconduct.

The estimates in column (4) indicate that misconduct is 40% more likely in rms in which an owner or

executive has a record of misconduct.
                                                19    We acquire data on the desirability of a rm using CVs in the

database of a leading social networking website for professionals, assuming that rms with fewer followers

are less desirable.     More desirable or popular rms have lower incidence of misconduct on average.                       It is

intuitive that more desirable, established rms that are run by executives with clean records are less likely

to be associated with misconduct. It is important to keep in mind that in this section we use correlations

to merely describe the data, and that the causality may be reversed. For example, we would expect that a

rm that employs better nancial advisers is more popular and long lived.

     As with adviser-level misconduct, past rm misconduct predicts future misconduct. The coecient of

0.33 suggests that a 1pp increase in the share of advisers who received misconduct disclosures in the previous

year is correlated with a 0.33pp increase in new misconduct. Given that past oenses predict misconduct

at the adviser level, it should not be surprising that they do so at the rm level as well. If advisers switch

between rms rapidly, then misconduct may not be persistent at the rm level. Our results suggest that this

  18 We   observe the owners and executives for a rm as of 2015. Hence the variable   Executive_M isconductjt−1    is a dummy
variable indicating that one or more of the rm's owners or executives as of 2015 had a prior record of misconduct as of time
t. − 1
  19 We   nd that rms in which an owner/ocer has been disciplined for misconduct have 0.22pp higher misconduct rates
(column 4 of Table 6 ). On average, 0.60% of nancial advisers receive misconduct disclosures in a given year. The rate of
misconduct is 0.22/0.6= 37% higher among those rms whose owner/executives have records of misconduct.




                                                                 16
is not the case. Dierences in misconduct across rms are predictable based on past misconduct and do not

vanish in the span of a year.




4       Labor Market Consequences of Misconduct
In this section we examine the labor market consequences of misconduct for nancial advisers. What pun-

ishment should we expect for misconduct?            One benchmark is extreme punishment of misconduct where

advisers who engage in misconduct are purged from the industry. Firms would re advisers who engage in

misconduct and would refuse to rehire advisers with a past record of misconduct. The alternative benchmark

is extreme tolerance of misconduct.        Of course, we expect reality to fall somewhere between these bench-

marks. We now use the panel structure of our data to investigate how rms punish misconduct, and how

advisers' misconduct records aect their employment dynamics.




4.1 Firm and Industry Discipline
The substantial presence of repeat oenders implies that the industry does not immediately purge advisers

who have engaged in misconduct. Advisers may be forced out of the industry by rms or regulators. As

a point of reference, FINRA either suspended or barred roughly 700 advisers in 2015 (2015 Monthly and

Quarterly Disciplinary Actions 2015). We begin our analysis with a simple cut of the data. We examine

average turnover rates among advisers with and without instances of misconduct in a given year in Table 7a.

Misconduct is strongly correlated with job separation at the rm level. In the year following a misconduct

disclosure, 48% of advisers leave their current jobs.            This is substantially higher than the 19% rate for

advisers with no instances of misconduct. Among advisers who leave their rm following misconduct, 44%

are able to nd employment within the same year.
                                                          20 Their reemployment prospects are only slightly worse

than the 52% reemployment rate of advisers who left their rms with no instances of misconduct. These

preliminary results are consistent with the notion that rms are relatively strict: roughly half of the advisers

leave their rms in the year following misconduct. However, the industry undoes some of these eects. In

particular, only about one-quarter of advisers leave the industry in the year following misconduct. The other

three-quarters stay in the industry. Below, we examine these patterns in more detail and then document

which rms hire advisers with misconduct records in Section 4.2.



4.1.1      Firm Discipline

In this section we explore the relationship between job separation and misconduct at the rm-level in more

detail. To evaluate rm level discipline, we would ideally compare employment outcomes of an adviser who

engaged in misconduct to those of an otherwise identical adviser at the same rm at the same time. We

 20 Most   advisers who nd new employment following misconduct are reemployed within the same year. Of those advisers who
leave their rm following misconduct and nd new employment within ve years, 92% are reemployed within one year.




                                                            17
approximate this comparison as closely as possible by estimating the following linear probability model:




                                 Separationijlt+1 = β0 + β1 M isconductijlt + βXit + µjlt + εijlt                                               (3)



Observations are at the adviser by year level;           i   indexes an adviser who worked for rm                     j   at time   t   in county

l.   The dependent variable          Separationijlt+1   is a dummy variable indicating that the adviser is not employed

at rm    j   in year   t + 1.   The independent variable of interest,            M isconductijlt ,       is a dummy variable indicating

that adviser     i   received a misconduct disclosure in year          t.
      We control for adviser characteristics such as experience and qualications in                           Xit .   To control for dier-

ences in products or clients across rms, we include rm by year by county xed eects                                     µjlt .   For example,

if employees of rms that are associated with more misconduct are more likely to switch jobs in a given

year, then this correlation will be absorbed by the xed eect. This xed eect also absorbs any aggregate

variation in the amount of misconduct and job separations. In addition, these xed eects also capture any

variation in regulatory conditions (subsuming any state-level regulatory variation), demographics, and local

labor market conditions. In eect, we compare the outcomes of nancial advisers who were employed at the

same rm at the same time in the same county, but either did or did not engage in misconduct.

      We present the estimates in columns (1)-(3) of Table 7b.                       In each specication we estimate a positive

and statistically signicant relationship between misconduct in year                         t   and job separation in year              t+1.   The

coecient ranges from 24pp to 31pp across specications with dierent controls and xed eects.                                                 The

coecient of 31pp implies that, all else equal, misconduct is associated with a 31pp-higher chance of a job

separation. These estimates are consistent with the simple summary statistics presented in Table 7a that

suggested that advisers who are reprimanded for misconduct have a 29pp (48-19pp) higher probability of

separation. To put these numbers in perspective, the baseline job separation rate in the population of advisers

is 19%. This increase in job separation due to misconduct is two and a half times the mean separation rate

in the data and is consistent with the idea that, on average, rms discipline misconduct quite heavily.

      In Figure 2 we showed substantial dierences in damages advisory rms pay as compensation for mis-

conduct, ranging from tens to hundreds of thousands of dollars. One might expect more severe misconduct

to be punished more severely. We restrict our attention to instances of misconduct for which we observe

damages paid and estimate the following linear probability model:



                         Separationijlt+1 = β0 + β1 ln Damagesijlt + βXit + µj + µl + µt + εijlt                                                (4)



Damagesijlt       measures the total sum paid out by adviser                i's   rm   j   in year   t   and in county      l   to the client as

the result of settlements and awards due to misconduct.

      Columns (4)-(6) of Table 7b display the results. We nd a positive relationship between damages and

the probability of a job separation in each specication.                     A coecient of 0.99 indicates that doubling of

the awards paid to a client increases the probability that the adviser loses his or her job by approximately




                                                                  18
1pp.    Moving from the         25th   to the     75th   percentile of the distribution of settlements is associated with a

10pp-increase in job separations. This is a substantial increase relative to the unconditional mean separation

rate of 19pp. These results are consistent with rms deliberately assessing the extent of misconduct before

making a termination decision, rather than doing so randomly.



4.1.2     Industry Discipline

Based on separation rates following misconduct, the average advisory rm seems to discipline employee

misconduct quite severely. If individual rms are strict in disciplining bad employees, why are there so many

repeat oenders in the population of nancial advisers? To eliminate all repeat oenses, advisers would have

to be red following misconduct and not be reemployed in the industry. Instead, we nd that 44% of advisers

who lost their job after misconduct nd employment in the industry within a year as shown in Table 7a.

Following misconduct, 52% of advisers remain with their current rm, 21% (48%                                 × 44%)   join a new rm,

and 27% leave the industry. Given that 9%                  (19% × 48%)       of nancial advisers leave the industry every year

anyway, the disciplining mechanism at the industry level seems to be substantially less severe than suggested

by the 48% separation rate at the rm level.

   As the summary statistics suggest, using job separation alone to evaluate the success of market discipline

is not sucient, because a signicant share of advisers who leave their rm upon misconduct nd employment

with a new rm. To understand the dierences in reemployment prospects of advisers with misconduct, we

estimate the following specication:



                       N ew_Employmentij 0 lt+1 = β0 + β1 M isconductijlt + βXit + µjlt + εijlt                                     (5)



in which we restrict the sample to nancial advisers who were separated from their rm in the previous

year.   N ew_Employmentij 0 lt+1               is equal to one if adviser         i   in county   l   remains in the industry but has

switched employers from          j   to   j0   between time    t   and   t + 1.       Columns (1)-(3) of Table 7c show a negative

and signicant relationship between misconduct and the probability an adviser nds new employment. Our

results imply that, relative to other advisers looking for jobs, advisers who are reprimanded for misconduct

at time   t   are   8 − 10pp   less likely to nd a new job in the next year. Given that the average probability an

adviser will be reemployed is 52%, the results suggest that roughly 44% of advisers with recent misconduct

are reemployed in the industry.                Overall, nancial advisers' reemployment prospects are somewhat worse

following misconduct, but the high reemployment rate allows approximately three-quarters of them to stay

in the industry in the year following misconduct.
                                                                   21

   As we show previously, advisers whose misconduct results in higher damages have an elevated probability

 21 One   potential concern is that some advisers may voluntarily leave the industry because of retirement.              As a robustness
check, we separately reexamine eq (5) where we restrict the data set to those advisers with less than 5, 10, 15, and 20 years
of experience. In untabulated results we nd that the eect of misconduct on new employment is the greatest for the least
experienced advisers. These results suggest that more experienced nancial advisers may be voluntarily retiring, but they are
not the ones who drive the relationship between industry separation and misconduct in the data.




                                                                        19
of losing their job.     Does the labor market recognize the extent of cases of misconduct that lead to job

separation?     We examine whether larger damages lead to worse reemployment prospects of advisers.                      We

estimate the following linear probability model:



                N ew_Employmentij 0 lt+1 = β0 + β1 ln Damagesijlt + βXit + µj + µl + µt + εijlt                          (6)



Columns (4)-(6) of Table 7c displays the results. The reemployment prospects of advisers whose misconduct

resulted in larger damages are worse, even when comparing advisers who engaged in misconduct at the

same rm, at the same time, in the same county, and with the same observable characteristics. They are

more likely to exit the industry and less likely to nd employment with another rm. These results suggest

that the labor market for nancial advisers is somewhat discerning when it comes to employing nancial

advisers with a history of misconduct; the labor market accounts for the severity of misconduct to some

degree. Overall, the industry eliminates some advisers following misconduct, but is substantially less strict

than rms individually.       The reallocation of nancial advisers to new rms partially blunts the rm-level

response to misconduct. One puzzle that remains is why some rms are willing to hire advisers who were

red by other rms for misconduct. We examine this issue in Section 5.




4.2 New Employment
We document a relatively high rate of reemployment among advisers who lost their job following misconduct.

One may argue that this evidence suggests that the cost of misconduct in the industry as a whole is low. On

the other hand, just because an adviser is reemployed does not mean that misconduct is costless. Advisers

lose income during temporary unemployment, and it may take eort to nd jobs. Moreover, it is possible that

when such advisers do nd a job, the job is worse (i.e., at a less prestigious and/or worse-paying rm). Here

we examine the duration an adviser is out of the industry following misconduct, as well as the characteristics

of rms that hire advisers following misconduct. The reallocation of advisers across rms will help us better

understand the costs of misconduct for nancial advisers, as well as why some nancial advisory rms are

willing to hire advisers who were red elsewhere for misconduct.



4.2.1     Duration Out of the Industry

We rst examine the time it takes an adviser to nd reemployment in the nancial advisory industry by

studying the 1,350,000 out of industry spells in our data set.
                                                                      22 Figures 6a and 6b display the out of industry

survival function for nancial advisers who were and were not reprimanded for misconduct in the year

preceding their out of the industry spell. Among those advisers who nd new employment in the advisory

industry, the vast majority nd new employment within one year.                   Figure 6a indicates 47% of advisers

 22 We   have 1.35mm separate observations where we observe a nancial adviser leaving his/her rm over the period 2005-2015.
Of those 1.35mm out of the industry spells, we observe 760k complete out of the industry spells where we observe a nancial
adviser leave his/her rm and nd a position at a new nancial advisory rm.




                                                             20
who were reprimanded for misconduct remain out of the industry after twenty-four months.                                In contrast,

45% of advisers who were not reprimanded remain out of the industry for the same duration.                                 Overall,

those advisers who were separated from their rms following misconduct remain out of the industry for

longer periods relative to those advisers who were simply separated from their rms. A back-of-the-envelope

calculation suggests that the costs amount to more than one month's worth of wages.
                                                                                                        23

    The simple non-parametric survival analysis in Figures 6a and 6b does not account for other dierences

among nancial advisers, such as their experience or qualications.                  We formally analyze the impact of

misconduct on an adviser's duration out of the industry by estimating the following Cox proportional hazards

model:

                                     λit (τ ) = λ0 (τ )exp (γM isconductit−1 + βXit + µt )                                         (7)



where     λi (τ )   is the hazard rate of nding new employment in the industry for adviser         i   at time    t,   conditional

on being out of the industry for         τ   months. The hazard rate is a function of the baseline hazard                λ0 (τ )   and

changes proportionally depending on whether the nancial adviser was reprimanded for misconduct in the

year preceding the out of the industry spell,          M isconductit−1 ,   and the characteristics       Xit .   We also include

time xed eects         µt   to account for aggregate uctuations in the employment market.

    The results presented in Table 8 conrm the raw data displayed in Figures 6a and 6b. The estimates in

the table are reported in terms of hazard ratios. Any reported hazard ratio less than one suggests that the

covariate is correlated with a longer duration out of the industry. The estimates in our main specications

(columns 1 and 2) suggest that an unemployed adviser who had engaged in misconduct in the year prior

to the start of his or her out of the industry spell has a 17%-smaller chance of nding new employment in

the industry at any given moment in time relative to an adviser without recent misconduct.                              In columns

(3) and (4) we restrict our data to those spells of advisers who ultimately found a new job in the industry.

Conditional on nding a job, advisers recently reprimanded for misconduct nd these jobs at a marginally

faster rate relative to those advisers without recent misconduct. Economically, the dierence in hazards is

relatively small: advisers who have recently been reprimanded for misconduct are 2.5% more likely to nd

a job in the industry at any given point in time relative to those who were not recently reprimanded for

misconduct. There are several potential reasons for this result. For example, advisers who ultimately nd

reemployment following misconduct face scarcer employment opportunities in the industry, so they cannot

aord to be as choosy. If they are oered a job, they are more likely to take it. Alternatively, conditional on

nding the job, they have to be slightly better than candidates without misconduct to compensate for a worse

disciplinary record. The results also suggest that the observed result that advisers with recent misconduct

remain out of the industry for longer periods is driven by advisers who are not rehired in the industry after

losing their previous employment. This nding is consistent with the simple summary statistics displayed in

  23 We   calculate the value of lost wages using the empirical survival functions that are reported in Figure 6a. The expected
duration out of the industry is 29.21 months for those advisers without recent misconduct and is 30.23 for those adviser with
recent misconduct. We calculate the expected duration out of the industry under the assumption that no adviser remains out
of the industry after ve years.




                                                               21
Figures 6a and 6b.



4.2.2     Who Hires Oenders?

Approximately 44% of advisers who engage in misconduct and are separated from their jobs nd new jobs as

nancial advisers within a year. We are broadly interested in two issues. First, we want to better understand

the change in job quality that follows misconduct. If misconduct leads to a substantially worse job, then it

is costlier than suggested by the reemployment statistics. Second, we are interested in why misconduct can

persist in this market, and seeing who hires advisers with misconduct may oer a window into the mechanism

at work.

    We compare advisers who switched jobs following misconduct to other advisers who switched jobs from

the same rm at the same time. Therefore, the advisers from the control group face the same labor market,

are under the same regulatory rules, and are exposed to the same shocks as the adviser who engaged in

misconduct.       Further, because they were employed at the same rm, any rm-specic shocks or adviser

characteristics which selected them into these rms are also accounted for.                     We estimate the following

specication:




                        N ew_F irm_Characteristicij 0 t+1 = β0 + β1 M isconductijt + µjt + εij                              (8)



The dependent variable           N ew_F irm_Characteristicij 0 t+1       measures the size, payout, rm desirability, rev-

enue, and the amount of misconduct of the rm              j0   joined by adviser   i   who joined rm   j0   after leaving rm

j .24 The independent variable of interest is         M isconductijt ,   which is an indicator variable equal to one if the

adviser was disciplined for misconduct in the year t, which is the year prior to leaving rm              j.   Here we include

the previous rm by time xed eects            µjt   in our main specications, and we nd similar results when we

include previous rm by time by county xed eects as a robustness check. We also restrict the data set to

only those initial rms      j   in which we observe both advisers with and without recent misconduct that switch

rms.

    Table 9 displays the results.         Relative to other advisers who left the same rm at the same point in

time, advisers with misconduct are hired in rms that pay almost $15,000 less per year. We acquire data on

the desirability of a rm using CVs in the database of a leading social networking website for professionals,

assuming that rms with fewer followers/links are less desirable. Advisers move to substantially less popular

rms following misconduct. Misconduct is costly even for advisers with new jobs, both in monetary terms

as well as in compensating dierentials.

    These results also help us understand why rms employ advisers who were red from other rms following

misconduct. As we have shown, these rms dier from rms that would otherwise employ these advisers, in

terms of compensation as well as prestige. Importantly, these rms are also more willing to employ advisers

  24 Asset,   revenue, and average payout/salary data comes from a private industry survey as of 2014. Data on social network
followers/links comes from a leading social networking website for professionals and is as of 2015.




                                                                 22
with misconduct records. We observe that, relative to other advisers who left the same rm at the same

time, advisers who engaged in misconduct are hired by rms that employ a greater percentage of other

advisers with past misconduct records (Table 9 column 3). In other words, after losing their jobs following

misconduct, advisers are rematched with rms that are less concerned with misconduct.                        Notably, these

rms are on average substantially smaller in dimensions of advisers, revenues, and assets under management

(Table 9 columns 4-6). For example, advisers with recent misconduct move to rms that are 25% smaller

in terms of the number of nancial advisers the rm employs.
                                                                            25 If rms were identical, some would not

hire advisers who were red from other rms following misconduct. Thus, matching on misconduct can

rationalize why discipline is severe at the rm level, but substantially blunter at the industry level.




5     Why Is Misconduct Heterogeneous in Equilibrium?
The results in Section 3 indicate that rms and advisers with clean records coexist with rms and advisers

who persistently engage in misconduct. Section 4 illustrates that engaging in misconduct is costly for advisers

but not suciently for it to eliminate repeat oenders. Part of the reason is that advisers who lose their

jobs following misconduct are reemployed by rms that match with these advisers and, in general, engage

in more misconduct than an average rm. A natural question that arises is that given that the disciplinary

record of every nancial adviser in the United States is public record, why does reputation not drive out bad

advisers or rms that employ them?

    In this section we provide an interpretation for the descriptive statistics presented in Sections 3 and 4.

We pursue two lines of inquiry. We rst focus on dierences in rms' tolerance of misconduct. The previous

section shows that advisers with misconduct sort to dierent rms than advisers without misconduct. We

examine whether rms' tolerance of misconduct diers when it comes to their hiring and ring decisions.

Dierences in hiring policies can help address how rms maintain dierent adviser pools over time. However,

they do not explain why consumers keep coming back to rms with substantial misconduct. One potential

reason why such rms can survive is if some customers are unsophisticated. Such customers do not know

where to access nancial adviser disclosures, how to interpret them, or that such disclosures even exist. It is

well known that if there are dierences in consumer sophistication, the market can be segmented. In such

a scenario, some rms specialize in misconduct and attract unsophisticated customers, and others cater

to more sophisticated customers and specialize in honesty, in the spirit of Stahl (1989) and Carlin (2009).

The second part of our analysis examines this possibility by relating nancial adviser misconduct to the

sophistication of their potential customers.

 25 Advisers   with recent records of misconduct move to rms that have 1,898 fewer nancial advisers (9 column 4). On average,
advisers move to rms that employ 7,720 nancial advisers.




                                                               23
5.1 Tolerance for Misconduct
5.1.1   Dierences in Separation

The summary statistics presented in Section 3 suggest that some rms employ substantially more employees

with past records of misconduct than other rms: the standard deviation of the rm share of employees

with prior misconduct is    17pp     (Table 1b). One possible reason is that some rms may be more tolerant of

misconduct than others and are less likely to re such employees. We investigate this hypothesis by exploring

whether rms with a larger share of advisers with misconduct are more tolerant toward new misconduct using

the following specication:



   Separationijlt+1      = β0 + β1 M isconductijlt + β2 F irm_Employee_M isconductjt × M isconductijlt (9)

                                +β3 Xit + µjlt + εijlt


We build on the specication eq. (3) in Section 4.1.1. The variable of interest is    F irm_Employee_M isconductjt ×
M isconductijlt .   Recall that the variable     F irm_Employee_M isconductjt        measures the percentage of ad-

visers employed by rm      j   that received misconduct disclosures at time   t.   The coecient   β2   measures how

misconduct punishment at the rm level varies with the share of misconduct across rms.                  As in Section

4.1.1, we employ rm by year by county xed eects, which absorb, among other confounds, the dierences

in rm level misconduct,    F irm_Employee_M isconductjt .
   We present the estimates corresponding to the above specication in column (1) of Table 10a.                   We

estimate a negative and signicant coecient on the interaction term           F irm_Employee_M isconductjt ×
M isconductijlt .   The coecient estimate of -3.10 suggests that rms that employ more employees with records

of misconduct are also less likely to punish additional misconduct. Advisers who engage in misconduct at

a rm, which is one standard deviation (3%3) above the mean in misconduct (0.5%), have only a 24pp

higher probability of being separated from their jobs than advisers who did not engage in misconduct. This

sensitivity is almost one-third (9pp) lower than that of an average rm. These results suggest that rms that

employ advisers with prior oenses are also less likely to re advisers for new oenses. A greater tolerance for

misconduct should make these rms more attractive to advisers with a propensity to engage in misconduct,

such as advisers with past misconduct records.



5.1.2   Dierences in Hiring

We now explore if rms also dier in their tolerance for misconduct in hiring decisions. In particular, we ask

if some rms are more likely to hire advisers that have been previously disciplined for misconduct. We do

so by investigating the composition of newly hired advisers using the following specication:




 Share_of _N ew_Hires_Disciplinedjt+1 = β0 + β1 F irm_Employee_M isconductjt + µs + µt + εjt                      (10)



                                                          24
The dependent variable reects the share of new employees that were hired by rm                           j   at time   t+1   that

were disciplined at time        t.   The corresponding estimates are reported in Table 10b.               Firms with a higher

proportion of advisers with incidences of misconduct at time                 t   hire a larger share of advisers at time       t+1
who were disciplined for misconduct at time              t.   The coecient estimate in column (1) indicates that a one-

percentage-point increase in a rm's share of advisers with misconduct at time                  t   is associated with a 0.72pp

higher incidence of hiring advisers with misconduct. Overall, the results presented in Tables 10a and 10b

suggest that rms with a higher proportion of advisers with misconduct are more tolerant of misconduct in

their hiring and ring decisions.
                                          26



5.2 Customer Base and Incentives
In this section we explore whether rms that specialize in market segments with less sophisticated investors

also engage in more misconduct. As mentioned earlier, such segmentation would provide one possible reason

why rms that persistently engage in misconduct can survive in the market next to rms that have relatively

clean records.



5.2.1       Retail Clients, Fee Structure, and Misconduct

The Investment Company Act of 1940 considers high net worth individual or qualied purchasers, to be

more sophisticated than smaller retail investors, allowing them substantially more latitude in their invest-

ments.
          27   One might expect misconduct to be directed at less sophisticated investors, who are easier to

ensnare.       Alternatively, defrauding large investors may be more protable, since they have more wealth.

In this section we use additional information on the client base as well as fee structures across investment

advisory rms and relate them to misconduct across rms. To do this analysis, we gather data from the

SEC's Form ADV lings. In these lings, investment advisory rms disclose information on their clientele

and business practices. As discussed in detail when presenting our data in Section 2, investment advisers

are registered with the SEC and face dierent regulatory requirements than brokers. Since not all nancial

advisory/brokerage rms are registered as investment advisory rms, we only observe the Form ADV lings

for 441 unique rms in our data set over the period 2011-2014.

    We formally examine how the client base and fee structure of nancial advisory rms correlate with

misconduct. We estimate the following specication:

  26 As   an extension, in the Online Appendix we also nd that rms that punish misconduct more severely are also less likely to
hire advisers with past misconduct records. We construct a new variable  F irm_Disciplinejt , which measures the percentage of
nancial advisers working for rm    j                                        t + 1 among those advisers working for rm j who
                                         who experienced job separations at time
engaged in misconduct at time t. We interpret that rms with higher measures of F irm_Disciplinejt discipline misconduct
more severely. Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the distribution of F irm_Disciplinejt is associated with a 58bp
lower incidence of misconduct among new hires.
  27 Section   2(a)(51)(A) of the Investment Company Act of 1940.




                                                                  25
                                                                              K
                                                                              X
 F irm_Employee_M isconductjt = β0 +β1 Retail_F irmjt +                             βk Compensation_Structurekjt +εjt        (11)
                                                                              k=1


The key independent variable of interest is a dummy variable,                   Retail_F irmjt ,   that indicates whether or

not rm        j   serviced retail clients (non-high net worth individuals, families, and households) in year           t.   We

also control for a set of dummy variables,          Compensation_Structurekjt , that measure how the advisory rm
charges for its dierent services in a given year             t.   The various compensation structures      k   include hourly

fees, xed fees, fees based on assets under management, commissions, and performance. The compensation

structures are not mutually exclusive, and many rms use a variety of methods to charge for services.

       We present two dierent measures of          F irm_Employee_M isconductjt .           First, we measure it as the ow

of new misconduct: the share of advisers working for rm                  j   that received misconduct disclosures in year

t.   The second measure is the stock of misconduct: the share of advisers working for rm                  j    that have been

ever been disciplined at or prior to time           t.   Table 11 column (4) shows that rms that advise retail clients

are 0.2pp more likely to engage in new misconduct. Relative to the mean rate of new misconduct of 0.6pp,

this is a substantial increase. Similarly, column (1) of Table 11 indicates that rms that advise retail clients

are 3.4pp more likely to employ an adviser who has a record of misconduct.                       We also nd evidence that

rms that charge hourly are more likely to engage in new misconduct, and have a higher stock of advisers

who have engaged in misconduct in the past. Similarly, rms that charge a commission have a higher stock

of advisers who have engaged in misconduct in the past. These results suggest that there is some market

segmentation on misconduct, which is more likely targeted at unsophisticated retail investors.



5.2.2          Firm Location and Customer Base

An alternative way to measure the sophistication of rms' customer base is to study the population char-

acteristics of markets in which the rm is located. Tables 12a and 12b report the counties with the highest

and lowest rates of misconduct among those counties with at least one hundred registered advisers. Almost

one in three advisers in Madison County, New York, have a record of past misconduct, relative to only

one in thirty-eight advisers in Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
                                                                              28 Figure 7 supports the idea of substantial

geographic dierences in misconduct: Florida, Arizona, and California have some of the highest rates of

nancial misconduct, while the rates are lowest in the Midwest. We next examine whether misconduct is

more prevalent in markets with a larger share of individuals who are often deemed less nancially sophis-

ticated, such as older, less educated individuals (see Hall and Woodward 2012; Gurun et al. 2015). To do

so, we investigate whether the variation in misconduct rate in a region is explained by observable county

     28 Following   the release of the working paper, New York Times journalist Ron Lieber examined advisers in Madison County,
New York, and found evidence consistent with our facts.
     Lieber,   Ron.     2016.   Should Trump Undo Investor Protections?        Meet the Brokers of Madison County.         New
York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/your-money/brokerage-and-bank-accounts/trump-repeal-retirement-rules-
brokers-madison-county.html?smid=tw-share&_r=0 [Accessed on 1/11/2017]




                                                                   26
characteristics using the following specication:



                                     County _M isconductlst = βXlst + µt + µs + εlst                                           (12)



The unit of observation is at the county by year level over the period 2010-2013.
                                                                                                  29 We use two denitions of

the dependent variable        County _M isconductlst .      The rst is dened as the ow of new misconduct, measured

as the percentage of advisers living in county         l and state s that received misconduct disclosures at time t.           The

second measures the stock of misconduct, dened as the percentage of advisers living in county                       l   and state   s
who ever received one or misconduct disclosures at or prior to time                 t.   The independent variables of interest

are measures of nancial sophistication, such as education and the share of retirees in the population. We

also control for other county demographic characteristics that may be correlated with demand for nancial

advice, such as income (log median household income) and population size. We control for time xed eects

µt   to absorb aggregate variation in misconduct, and include state xed eects                  µs   to account for regulatory

dierences across states, which may lead to dierent amounts of misconduct.

     The results are reported in Table 12c. We nd that counties with a smaller share of college graduates

and a larger share of retirees experience more misconduct and employ more advisers with past misconduct

records. The estimates in column (3) indicate that a 10pp increase in the number of individuals older than

65 is correlated with an approximately 0.34pp increase in the percentage of advisers who are reprimanded

for misconduct in a given year.             Similarly, a 10pp increase in the share of college-educated individuals

decreases the percentage of advisers who are reprimanded for misconduct in a given year by 0.19pp. These

estimates are substantial relative to the mean misconduct rate of 0.6pp. These results suggest that nancial

misconduct is more prevalent in areas with less nancially sophisticated, older populations and less educated

individuals.      We also nd a correlation between other demographics, which would proxy for demand for

nancial advice, and misconduct. Higher-income counties, for example, experience more misconduct. The

estimates in column (3) suggest that a 10% increase in income is associated with a 0.06pp increase in the

percentage of advisers who are reprimanded for misconduct in a given year.                          Misconduct may be more

protable in high-income counties. Our analysis thus focuses on reported/detected misconduct which is a

function of both the incidence of misconduct and the detection technology. It's possible that misconduct

is higher in areas with more elderly, less educated, and wealthier populations because these populations

are better at detecting misconduct. We examine the role of misconduct detection in Section 6.2 and show

that these ndings are not driven by dierences in misconduct detection. Overall, our results support the

notion that the presence of nancially unsophisticated investors allows misconduct to persist in the market

for nancial advice.
  29 To   help rule out potential outliers, we restrict the data set to counties with at least 50 advisers. The results presented in
the table are not sensitive to this criterion. Due to the availability of data, we estimate our specication at the county by year
level using an unbalanced panel of 667 counties over the period 2010-2013.




                                                                 27
6       Robustness and Extensions
We now discuss the robustness and several extensions of our ndings. For brevity, we relegate some additional

robustness checks to the Online Appendix.




6.1 Measurement Error in Measuring Misconduct
We dene our measure of misconduct based on the twenty-three disclosures categories reported by FINRA.

Here we examine the robustness of our ndings to alternative denitions of misconduct and address potential

measurement error issues. In this section we construct several alternative severe measures of misconduct

that are more denitive cases of adviser dishonesty. We also separately analyze each of the 23 disclosure

categories reported by FINRA. Our main ndings are robust to these alternative denitions of misconduct.



6.1.1    Alternative Misconduct Denition - Restricting our Analysis to Severe Misconduct

We construct two additional measures of misconduct that are more denitive cases of adviser dishonesty.

Specically, we analyze the reported client allegations pertaining to misconduct related disclosures to con-

struct two alternative measures of misconduct, Severe Misconduct-1  and Severe Misconduct-2 . We de-

ne the new category Severe Misconduct-1 as any settled regulatory, civil, or customer dispute involving:

unauthorized activity, fraud and forgery, churning, selling unregistered securities, misrepresentation, and/or

omission of material/key facts.   In our Severe Misconduct-1 category we also include nalized criminal

cases involving: investment (including checking account) related activities and fraud and forgery. We dene

a new more restrictive category Severe Misconduct-2 using the same denition as Severe Misconduct-1,

except we exclude settled regulatory, civil, or customer disputes involving misrepresentation and/or omission

of material/key facts. As before, we are conservative in how we dene Severe Misconduct-1  and Severe

Misconduct-2. Just because a misconduct related disclosure (under our baseline denition) is not classied

as either Severe Misconduct-1  and/or Severe Misconduct-2 does not necessarily the mean the misconduct

event was less severe. Rather, it potentially means that the reported allegations were too vague to denitively

classify the disclosure event as being severe and/or dishonest misconduct. As a point of reference, the median

settlement amount is $40,000 for our baseline denition of misconduct, $47,036 for Severe Misconduct-1,

and $50,000 for Severe Misconduct-2.

    We examine our baseline analysis, the probability of recidivism, job separation, and industry separation

using our two alternative denitions of misconduct. Regardless of how we dene misconduct, we nd that

past misconduct is highly predictive of future misconduct. The labor market consequences of our measures

of severe misconduct are also comparable to our baseline denition of misconduct. Firms appear to discipline

severe misconduct relatively harshly; 44-50%, of advisers experience job separations after being reprimanded

for misconduct. However, the industry undoes some of the rm discipline. Of those advisers who experience a

job separation following severe misconduct, 41-45% are able to nd new employment in the nancial advisory




                                                      28
industry within a year.



6.1.2   Other Types of Disclosures Besides Misconduct

As noted earlier in Section 3, our classication scheme is conservative since we categorize only six of twenty-

three categories of disclosure as misconduct, focusing on categories for which misconduct is clear. However,

statistically one would expect other disclosures to also be somewhat indicative of misconduct. For example,

an adviser engaged in a pending consumer dispute is more likely to have engaged in misconduct than an

adviser who was not involved in a dispute in the rst place.

   We separately examine each disclosure category and whether or not it predicts future misconduct and

the associated labor market consequences. We nd that each one of the six misconduct disclosure categories

is correlated with a higher incidence of misconduct in the future. Interestingly, several Other Disclosures

categories also predict future misconduct to some extent, such as customer disputes that were withdrawn or

denied, suggesting that disclosing these categories may be valuable to potential consumers trying to avoid

advisers who are more likely to engage in misconduct in the future.

   We also explore whether advisers experience employment separations following dierent types of disclo-

sure. We nd that ve of the six disclosure categories that we classify as misconduct are associated with

higher rates of job separation and the relationships are statistically signicant at the 1% level.    The one

exception is misconduct disclosures classied as Customer Dispute - Award/Judgment. On the other hand,

the other disclosures that we do not classify as misconduct are in general not associated with higher job

separation rates.   We do nd that disclosures in which a customer dispute was denied or closed do lead

to increased job separation rates.   These results suggest that perhaps our categorization of misconduct is

conservative.   Overall, some of the non-misconduct/other disclosures also predict future misconduct, and

advisory rms seem to partially account for that in their employment decisions.

   Lastly, we reestimate the Cox proportional hazard model to assess the length of time it takes for advisers

to nd new employment in the industry for those advisers who lost their jobs following a disclosure (eq. 7).

For each category of disclosure we categorize as misconduct, the coecient is statistically dierent from 1.

Interestingly, while most of these categories imply longer out of the industry spells, some categories  in

particular, criminal case and customer dispute settlement  do see faster employment outcomes. This might

be the case since in situations like these, the adviser might have started looking for a job well in advance,

once it was clear that he or she might have to leave his or her existing rm consequent to the discovery of

the misconduct. Also the dierences in spell lengths across categories could reect dierences in resolution

times. An adviser's current employer and potential new employers may wait for certain disclosures to be

resolved before making hiring and ring decisions.




                                                      29
6.2 Dierences in Detection
What we observe in the data is misconduct that was reprimanded. In other words, we only observe miscon-

duct that was both detected and resulted in a settlement/judgment against the nancial adviser. Thus, our

measure of misconduct does not capture all misconduct occurring in the nancial advisory industry but only

the misconduct that was detected. To the extent that misconduct goes undetected, we likely underestimate

the total amount misconduct in the nancial advisory industry.     The variation in detected misconduct is

a function of both the total level of misconduct and detection intensity. For the purposes of our data de-

scriptive analysis presented in Sections 3 and 4, the measure of interest is detected misconduct rather than

total misconduct. Distinguishing between detected and total misconduct becomes relevant when discussing

the results reported in Section 5, where we develop a framework for understanding and interpreting why

misconduct varies across advisers and rms.

   In particular, some of the observed heterogeneity in our measure of rm employee misconduct may not

only be driven by a rm's tolerance towards misconduct but also variation in misconduct detection.       For

instance, our nding that rms that service retail clients have higher rates of misconduct could be driven by

retail consumers simply being better at detecting misconduct. To explore this alternative explanation, we

separately examine misconduct based on who detected the misconduct. In the data we observe whether or

not the misconduct disclosure was initiated by a customer, rm, or regulator. In particular, we estimate eq.

(11) where we separately calculate the rm misconduct rate based on whether the misconduct proceedings

were initiated by a customer or a non-customer (i.e., rm or a regulator).

   We nd that rms that target retail clients are more likely to employ an adviser with a record of

misconduct, regardless of whether the claims faced by advisers of the rm were initiated by a customer

or non-customer.   This analysis suggest that our previous result that misconduct is higher among rms

that service retail clients is not purely driven by customers' dierences in misconduct detection; rather,

it is driven by certain rms engaging in misconduct and targeting retail investors.Similarly, the issue of

total versus detected misconduct could also drive some of our previous ndings in which we explored what

regional characteristics were related to misconduct by rms operating in these regions.    For instance, our

nding that misconduct is higher in areas with less educated and more elderly populations could be driven

by less educated and elderly individuals being better at detecting misconduct. As a robustness check, we

reestimate eq. (12) where we again separately examine those misconduct disclosures that were initiated by

customers and non-customers. We nd that the level of misconduct, regardless of whether a customer or

non-customer initiated the claim, is higher in areas with less educated and more elderly individuals. These

results provide further evidence suggesting that our ndings are more consistent with rms targeting less

educated and elderly individuals.




                                                     30
6.3 Accounting for Endogenous Separation
In Section 4.2 we compare the new employment outcomes of those advisers who were and were not recently

reprimanded for misconduct.     In particular, we compare the employment outcomes of advisers who were

reprimanded for misconduct and switched jobs with a control group. The control group consists of advisers

who were employed at the same rm at the same time who also switched jobs. One might be concerned that

the control group does not accurately represent the average adviser at the rm. Advisers who switch jobs

with clean misconduct records could do so because better employment opportunities came along. Then they

would be better than the average employee at the rm. Alternatively, it may be that, on average, worse

advisers leave the rm.

   In order to address this concern, we focus on rms in which all advisers were forced to look for new

employment because the rm was dissolved - for example, because it was going out of business. We compare

employment outcomes of advisers from the same rm with and without misconduct after the rm dissolves.

The dierence from our previous test is that all advisers in this sample have to nd new jobs, regardless

of their past misconduct or quality. Therefore, we are comparing the employment outcomes of the average

employee with misconduct to the average employee without misconduct. We have 124,696 adviser by year

observations that were preceded by a rm dissolution. Roughly 75% of the observations are triggered by

the dissolution of rms with at least 100 employees. Firm dissolutions are the result of rms going out of

business, being shut down by regulators, mergers, acquisitions, reorganizations, etc.

   We rst examine the probability that advisers nd new jobs in the industry after their rms dissolve,

following our previous specication(eq. 5). We nd that advisers with recent misconduct are 16-23pp less

likely to nd new employment within the industry. We also examine the dierences in jobs that advisers with

and without misconduct obtain following rm dissolution (eq. 8). We again nd that advisers with recent

misconduct tend to move to rms with higher rates of misconduct (0.34pp higher) and move to smaller rms

(830 fewer advisers).   Overall, these results conrm that the choice of control group does not seem to be

driving our results that advisers with recent misconduct face longer spells out of the industry and tend to

sort to smaller rms with higher rates of misconduct.




6.4 Investment Advisers versus Non-Investment Advisers (Brokers)
We examine how our main results regarding the incidence and consequences of misconduct may vary across

investment advisers and non-investment advisers. We nd that, in general, similar patterns emerge across

the groups but to diering degrees. As we discuss in Section 2, the dierences between the two groups are

important and could arise for several reasons since investment advisers face dierent legal and regulatory

requirements from non-investment advisers, such as brokers, and provide dierent services to potentially

dierent clientele. A key dierence between the two groups is that investment advisers are held to a duciary

standard while brokers are held to a lower suitability standard.




                                                     31
    A nancial adviser can be solely registered as a broker with FINRA, solely registered as an investment

adviser with the SEC, or dually registered as a broker with FINRA and as an investment adviser with the

SEC. Recall that the BrokerCheck data set only includes those nancial advisers who are registered with

FINRA. As of 2015, there are 644k nancial advisers registered with FINRA, and 271k of those advisers are

also registered as investment advisers with the SEC. There are an additional 51k investment advisers that

are solely registered with the SEC. These solely registered investment advisers are not part of our original

data set. To examine these additional investment advisers, we supplement our BrokerCheck data set with

additional data from the SEC's Investment Adviser Public Disclosures (IAPD) database. The SEC IAPD

classies disclosures into nine categories: customer disputes, bankruptcy, criminal, regulatory, termination,

judgment, civil, bond, and investigation. We construct the corresponding categories from the 23 disclosure

categories specied in FINRA's BrokerCheck database. We separately examine the disclosure patterns for

those advisers that are solely registered with the FINRA, solely registered with the SEC, and those dually

registered. In general, dually registered nancial advisers are more likely to have disclosures on their records

than those advisers who are solely registered with either FINRA or the SEC. Roughly 22% of dual registered

advisers have disclosures on their records, while 11% of advisers solely registered with FINRA and 12% of

advisers solely registered with the SEC have disclosures on their records.

    We also reestimate our main specications separately for those FINRA registered representatives that are

and are not also registered as investment advisers.
                                                             30 The main results hold for both populations, but to dif-

fering degrees. We nd that FINRA registered investment advisers are more likely to be reprimanded for mis-

conduct than non investment advisers, but face less punishment at both the industry and rm levels. These

dierences could potentially be driven by dierences in clientele or regulatory requirements/supervision.




6.5 Additional Adviser Controls
Throughout our analysis we control for an adviser's qualications and experience. We also include rm by

year by county xed eects such that we are exploiting variation within the same rm, in a given location,

and in a given year. Although our set of controls should largely capture dierences across rms and adviser

job functions, we run several robustness checks where we restrict our data set to those advisers that are in

client-facing positions and control for other measures of adviser quality and productivity. To measure adviser

quality and control for other job characteristics, we supplement our nancial adviser data set with additional

data from Meridian IQ. The Meridian IQ data set contains additional adviser level data on the productivity

and job position of currently active nancial advisers. We are able to match 85% of the currently active

nancial advisers in our FINRA data set to the Meridian IQ data.

 30 We   only observe whether a nancial adviser is registered as an investment adviser if the nancial adviser is currently active
in the industry. Hence, we treat all advisers who have completed an investment adviser examination (Series 65 or 66 exam) as
investment advisers.




                                                                32
6.5.1      Client-Facing Advisers

We do not directly observe whether or not a nancial adviser is in a client-facing position in our baseline data

set. We determine whether or not an adviser is in a client-facing position using two separate methods. First,

we supplement our nancial adviser data set with data from Meridian IQ which includes information about

which advisers are client-facing. Second, we dene client-facing advisers as those currently active advisers

registered in more than three states. As discussed in Qureshi and Sokobin (2015), they report that "Based

on its experience, FINRA sta believes that brokers with more than three state registrations generally deal

with public investors.

    We reestimate our baseline results where we restrict our data set to the set of currently active nancial

advisers that are in client-facing roles.
                                                31 We nd that those advisers with past records of misconduct are

more likely to engage in future misconduct, regardless of how we dene client-facing.                      Similarly, we nd

that those advisers with recent misconduct disclosures are 17pp more likely to experience job separations.

The estimates are qualitatively and quantitatively similar to our baseline set of results.



6.5.2      Controlling for Adviser Quality and Productivity

The Meridian IQ data set includes additional information on the quality and productivity of a nancial

adviser for a large subset of the active nancial advisers in the data set.                   We replicate our baseline set

of results where we control for the adviser's current quality rating, assets under management (AUM), and

productivity/revenue as of 2016.
                                        32 Our main results are robust to the inclusion of additional controls. We

nd that those advisers with a past record of misconduct are 1.4pp more likely to receive a misconduct

disclosure in a given year.         The results also indicate that more productive advisers are also more likely

to have misconduct disclosures, though the eects are economically small. For example, we estimate that

a 10% increase in AUM is associated with a 0.005pp increase in the probability of receiving misconduct

disclosure in a given year. After controlling for productivity and quality dierences, we again nd that those

advisers with recent misconduct disclosures are 9-15pp more likely to experience employment separations in

the proceeding year. We also nd that advisers that are more productive (in terms of AUM and revenue)

and that are higher quality are less likely to experience job separations. For example, advisers with a high

quality rating are 4% less likely to experience job separations. Overall, our main results regarding the high

rates of recidivism and career punishments do not appear to be driven by productivity and adviser quality

dierences.
  31 We   only observe Meridian IQ data for currently active nancial advisers in our data set. Similarly, we only observe the
number of state registrations for the current set of active nancial advisers. Hence, our analysis regarding client-facing advisers
is restricted to the set of nancial advisers that are currently active.
  32 Meridian   IQ also generates a proprietary measure of adviser quality. The control variable High Quality Rating indicates a
high rating as of July 2016.




                                                                 33
7     Conclusion
We document substantial misconduct among nancial advisers in the United States. More than            7%   of -

nancial advisers have been reprimanded for misconduct. The costs of misconduct are not small: the mean

settlement amount is $550,000. Misconduct varies dramatically across advisers and rms, and repeat oend-

ers are common. Although advisers face consequences for misconduct, the majority of advisers remain in the

industry following misconduct. More than 50% remain with the same rm after a year, and 20% switch to a

dierent rm in the industry. The rms that hire advisers after misconduct-driven separation have advisers

with higher rates of prior misconduct. This evidence suggests that some rms specialize in misconduct.

This match on misconduct reemployment potentially undermines the disciplining mechanism in the indus-

try, lessening the punishment for misconduct. We argue that heterogeneity in consumer sophistication could

explain the prevalence and persistence of misconduct at such rms. Our results suggest that misconduct is

widespread in regions with relatively high incomes, low education, and elderly populations. These results

suggest that rms that consistently engage in misconduct are likely targeting vulnerable consumers, while

other clean rms use their reputation to attract sophisticated consumers.

    Our estimates likely understate the true extent of misconduct in the industry for several reasons. First,

it is likely that not all misconduct is detected/reported.    Second, we do not classify pending consumer

complaints and several other disclosure categories, some of which are acts of misconduct, as misconduct.

Third, while we show that the average penalty for cases in the data is large, the penalties themselves are

decided by arbitration committees, which have been accused of being favorable to the industry (Bernard

2014). Fourth, if some advisers do not have an opportunity to engage in misconduct, because of their job

assignment (e.g.   a non-client-facing position), then our estimates will be a lower bound for misconduct

among those advisers that have the opportunity to do so. Finally, our numbers would also be a lower bound

if adviser disclosures or other adverse information about advisers were expunged (Antilla 2014).

    More broadly, studying nancial advisers provides a lens into markets in which sellers are experts relative

to their customers. For example, it is dicult for consumers to ascertain the value of services provided by such

professionals as doctors, attorneys, accountants, car mechanics, and plumbers. In these markets, trust and

reputation are supposed to prevent the supply of poor services. Disclosure of nancial advisers' misconduct

is public, providing a market mechanism that should prevent and punish misconduct. Given our ndings,

in markets with less disclosure, misconduct may be even more dicult to eradicate through competition

alone.

    Two related questions naturally arise. First, is the extent of misconduct punishment optimal from the

perspective of individual rms?    Second, is the extent of misconduct punishment in the market socially

optimal? We can use the estimates from Section 3 to provide a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the rm's

costs and benets of ring an employee with a recent misconduct record. The benet of ring an employee

following misconduct arises from preventing future misconduct related costs.         Advisers who engaged in

misconduct in the previous year are 10pp more likely to engage in misconduct the following year (Figure



                                                      34
4b). Given that the average settlement cost is $550,000, these simple summary statistics suggest that ring

an adviser prevents expected misconduct costs of $55,000 in the rst year following misconduct. The cost

of ring an adviser reects the opportunity costs of losing the adviser and her clients. In Section 6 we nd

that more productive advisers are less likely to be red following misconduct. Advisers who kept their job

following misconduct generate an additional $52,000 in annual revenue relative to those who were red.
                                                                                                                           33

These back-of-the-envelope calculations are extremely simple and rely on average, rather than marginal,

costs and benets.       Nevertheless, the estimates of expected costs and benets of ring advisers following

misconduct are quantitatively close, suggesting that the average nancial advisory rm is somewhat prot

maximizing when considering how it punishes misconduct.

   Evaluating whether the market punishment of misconduct is too lenient or too harsh from the perspective

of society is substantially more dicult. Punishing misconduct is subject to Type I and Type II errors. To

compute the optimal punishment, we would need estimates of the social costs for each of these errors, as well

as the extent of these errors. One way to illustrate why inferences about the optimal level of punishment are

dicult is to compare the misconduct rate of nancial advisers to that of medical malpractice. As discussed

in Section 3.2, the baseline rate of nancial misconduct is similar to the rate of medical malpractice. Surely,

one would be hard pressed to argue that the social costs of Type I and Type II errors for nancial adviser

misconduct are similar to the costs of medical malpractice. Therefore, it is dicult to conclude that there

is too much (or too little) misconduct in the nancial advisory sector.                 What is clear is that the labor

market punishes misconduct to some extent, rejecting both the benchmark of no punishment as well as the

benchmark of extreme punishment we discussed in the introduction.

   Our ndings also suggest that the current structure of penalties or reputation concerns may not have

been sucient to deter advisers from repeatedly oending.                A natural policy response aimed at lowering

misconduct would be to increase market transparency and provide unsophisticated consumers access to

more information. Several recent eorts by regulators, such as the establishment and promotion of FINRA's

BrokerCheck website, have been along these lines.              Proposals to increase penalties for misconduct could

also potentially decrease nancial misconduct.             Another policy proposal in this area is the Department

of Labor's initiative to mandate a duciary standard for all nancial advisers. Interestingly, we also nd

similar patterns of misconduct among investment advisers who are already subject to duciary standards.

This result suggests that duciary standards may not be a simple solution to decreasing misconduct.

 33 Using   Meridian IQ data, we compare the average productivity of advisers who kept their jobs following misconduct ($659k)
with those who experienced employment separations following misconduct ($607k).




                                                              35
References
   2015 Monthly and Quarterly Disciplinary Actions. 2015. FINRA. http://www.nra.org/industry/
      disciplinary-actions [accessed 5/19/2017].

   Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel. 2014. Reg-
      ulating Consumer Financial Products: Evidence from Credit Cards. Forthcoming in Quar-
      terly Journal of Economics.

   Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2009. The Age of Reason:
      Financial Decisions Over the Life Cycle with Implications for Regulation. Brookings Papers
      on Economic Activity, 2009(2): 51-117.

   Agrawal, Anup, Jerey F. Jae, and Jonathan M. Karpo. 1999. "Management Turnover and
      Governance Changes Following the Revelation of Fraud." The Journal of Law & Economics
      42(1): 309-342.

   Anagol, Santosh, Shawn Cole and Shayak Sakar. 2013. Understanding the Incentives of Com-
      missions Motivated Agents: Theory and Evidence from the Indian Life Insurance Market.
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 00(0).

   Antilla, Susan. 2014. A Murky Process Yields Cleaner Professional Records for Stockbrokers.
      The New York Times.       https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/09/25/a-murky-process-yields-
      cleaner-professional-records-for-stockbrokers/ [accessed 3/1/2016].

   Barwick, Panle Jia, Parag A. Pathak, and Maisy Wong.        2015.   Conicts of Interest and the
      Realtor Commission Puzzle. NBER Working Paper No. w21489.

   Becker, Gary S. 1968. Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.           Journal of Political
      Economy, 76: 169-217.

   Bergstresser, Daniel, John M. Chalmers, and Peter Tufano.       2009.    Assessing the Costs and
      Benets of Brokers in the Mutual Fund Industry. Review of Financial Studies, 22(10): 4129-
      4156.

   Bernard, Tara Siegel. 2014. Taking A Broker to Arbitration. The New York Times. https://
      www.nytimes.com/2014/07/19/your-money/a-closer-look-at-the-arbitration-process-for-investors.html?
      _r=1 [accessed 3/8/2016].

   Campbell, John Y. 2006. Household Finance. Journal of Finance, 61(4): 15531604.

   Campbell, John Y., Howell E. Jackson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Peter Tufano.          2010.   The
      Regulation of Consumer Financial Products: An Introductory Essay with Four Case Studies.
      HKS Faculty Research Working Paper Series RWP10-040.

   Campbell, John Y., Howell E. Jackson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Peter Tufano. 2011. Consumer
      Financial Protection. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 91114.

   Carlin, Bruce I. 2009.   "Strategic Price Complexity in Retail Financial Markets." Journal of
      Financial Economics, 91(3): 278-287.

   Carlin, Bruce I., and Gustavo Manso.      2011.    "Obfuscation, Learning, and the Evolution of
      Investor Sophistication." Review of Financial Studies, 24(3): 754-785.

   Célérier, Claire and Boris Vallée. 2014. What Drives Financial Complexity? A Look into the
      Retail Market for Structured Products. Working Paper.

   Chalmers, John and Jonathan Reuter. Is Conicted Investment Advice Better than No Advice?
      NBER Working Paper No. w18158.

   Christoersen, Susan EK, Richard Evans, and David K. Musto. 2013. "What Do Consumers'
      Fund Flows Maximize? Evidence from their Brokers' Incentives." The Journal of Finance,
      68(1): 201-235.

   Coen, Andrew. 2015. Investable Assets Hit $33.5 Trillion. FinancialPlanning. https://www.
      nancial-planning.com/news/investable-assets-hit-335-trillion [accessed on 5/2/2017].



                                                     36
Dimmock, Stephen G., William C. Gerken and Nathaniel P. Graham. 2015. Is Fraud Conta-
   gious? Career Networks and Fraud by Financial advisers. Working Paper.

Duarte, Fabian, and Justine S. Hastings. 2012. Fettered Consumers and Sophisticated Firms:
   Evidence from Mexico's Privatized Social Security Market.            NBER Working Paper No.
   w18582.

Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse and Luigi Zingales. 2010. Who Blows the Whistle on Corporate
   Fraud. Journal of Finance, 65(6): 2213-2253.

Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse and Luigi Zingales. 2014. How Pervasive is Corporate Fraud?
   Rotman School of Managment Working Paper No. 2222608.

Edelman Trust Barometer. 2015. 2015 Edleman Trust Barometer Executive Summary. http://
   www.edelman.com/insights/intellectual-property/2015-edelman-trust-barometer/trust-and -innovation-
   edelman-trust-barometer/executive-summary/ [accessed 5/2/2017].

Egan, Mark. 2016. Brokers vs. Retail Investors: Conicting Interests and Dominated Products.
   Working Paper.

Fama, Eugene F. 1980. Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm. The Journal of Political
   Economy, 88(2): 288-307.

Fama, Eugene and Michael Jensen. 1983. Agency Problems and Residual Claims. The Journal
   of Law & Economics, 26(2): 327-349.

Fich, Eliezer M., and Anil Shivdasani. 2007. "Financial fraud, director reputation, and share-
   holder wealth." Journal of Financial Economics 86(2): 306-336.

Fos, Vyacheslav, and Margarita Tsoutsoura.     2014.    "Shareholder democracy in play:      Career
   consequences of proxy contests." Journal of Financial Economics, 114(2): 316-340.

Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Infor-
   mation Suppression in Competitive Markets." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1):
   505-540.

Garleanu, Nicolae B. and Lasse H. Pedersen. 2015. Eciently Inecient Markets for Assets and
   Asset Management. NBER Working Paper No. w21563.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny.          2015.   "Money doctors." Journal of
   Finance, 70(1): 91-114.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Raven E. Saks.       2006.   Corruption in America.      Journal of Public
   Economics. 90: 1053-1072.

Grin, John M. and Gonzalo Maturana.        2014.   Who Facilitated Misreporting in Securitized
   Loans? Forthcoming in Review of Financial Studies.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. "Trusting the stock market." Journal of
   Finance, 63(6): 2557-2600.

Gurun, Umit G., Gregor Matvos and Amit Seru.           2015.    Advertising Expensive Mortgages.
   Forthcoming in Journal of Finance.

Gurun, Umit G. Noah Stoman, and Scott Yonkers. 2017. Trust Busting: The Eect of Fraud
   on Investor Behavior. Forthcoming in Review of Financial Studies.

Hastings, Justine S., Ali Hortaçsu, and Chad Syverson. 2015. Advertising and Competition in
   Privatized Social Security: The Case of Mexico. NBER Working Paper No. w18881.

Hastings, Justine S., and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton.      2008.      Financial Literacy, Information, and
   Demand Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence from Mexico. NBER Working Paper
   No. w14538.

Helland, Eric. 2006.   Reputational Penalties and the Merits of Class Action Securities Litiga-
   tion. The Journal of Law & Economics, 49(2): 365-395.




                                               37
Kaplan, Eve. 2012. 9 Reasons You Need to Avoid Variable Annuities.         Forbes. http://www.
   forbes.com/sites/feeonlyplanner/2012/07/02/9-reasons-you-need-to-avoid-variable-annuities/
   [accessed 11/17/2015].

Karpo, Jonathan M., D. Scott Lee, and Gerald S. Martin. 2008. "The consequences to managers
   for nancial misrepresentation." Journal of Financial Economics, 88(2): 193-215.

Khanna, Vikramaditya S., E. Han Kim and Yao Lu. 2015. CEO Connectedness and Corporate
   Fraud. Journal of Finance, 70(3): 1203-1252.

Krupa, Carolyne. 2010. Medical liability: By late career, 61% of doctors have been sued. Amer-
   ican Medical News. http://www.amednews.com/article/20100816/profession/ 308169946/2/#cx
   [accessed on 2/3/2016].

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011. "Financial literacy and retirement planning
   in the United States." Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4): 509-525.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Noeth, and Antoinette Schoar. 2012. The market for nancial
   advice: An audit study. NBER Working Paper No. w17929.

Parsons, Christopher A., Johan Sulaeman and Sheridan Titman.         2014.    The Geography of
   Financial Misconduct. NBER Working Paper No. w20347.

Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru and James Witkin.      2015.   Asset Quality Misrepresentation by
   Financial Intermediaries: Evidence from the RMBS Market. Forthcoming in the Journal of
   Finance.

Povel, Paul, Rajdeep Sign and Andrew Winton. 2007. Booms, Busts, and Fraud.          Review of
   Financial Studies, 20(4): 1219-1254.

Prior, Anna. 2015. Brokers are Trusted Less than Uber Drivers, Survey Finds. Wall Street Jour-
   nal. http://www.wsj.com/articles/brokers-are-trusted-less-than-uber-drivers-survey-nds -1438081201
   [accessed on 2/26/2015].

Srinivasan, Suraj. 2005. "Consequences of nancial reporting failure for outside directors: Evi-
   dence from accounting restatements and audit committee members." Journal of Accounting
   Research, 43(2): 291-334.

Stahl, Dale O. 1989. "Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search." The American
   Economic Review, 79(4): 700-712.

Wang, Tracy Yu, Andrew Winton and Xiaoyun Yu.           2010.   Corporate Fraud and Business
   Conditions: Evidence from IPOs. Journal of Finance, 65(6): 2255-2291.

Woodward, Susan E., and Robert E. Hall.     2012.   "Diagnosing Consumer Confusion and Sub-
   optimal Shopping Eort: Theory and Mortgage-Market Evidence." American Economic Re-
   view, 102(7): 3249-3276.

Zingales, Luigi. 2015. Does Finance Benet Society. The Journal of Finance, 70(4): 1327-1363.




                                              38
                                Table 1: Adviser and Firm Summary Statistics


                                          (a) Adviser Summary Statistics

              Variable                                     Obs         Mean        Std. Dev.     Median
              Experience (years)                        7,946,680      11.25         9.60         9.00
              Registration:
                  Currently Registered                  7,946,680      69.8%
                  Registered as IA                      5,544,727      51.4%
              Disclosures:
                  Disclosure (ow in one year)          7,946,680      1.62%
                  Misconduct (ow in one year)          7,946,680      0.60%
                  Disclosure (stock)                    7,946,680      12.7%
                  Misconduct (stock)                    7,946,680      7.28%
              Exams and Qualications (Series):
                  No. Qualications                     7,946,680        2.92        1.37         3.00
                  Uniform Sec. Agent St. Law (63)       7,946,680      77.1%
                  General Sec. Rep. (7)                 7,946,680      68.0%
                  Inv. Co. Products Rep. (6)            7,946,680      39.9%
                  Uniform Combined St. Law (66)         7,946,680      21.3%
                  Uniform Inv. Adviser Law (65)         7,946,680      20.5%
                  General Sec. Principal (24)           7,946,680      15.8%


                                           (b) Firm Summary Statistics

                          Variable                       No. Firms         Obs      Mean       Std. Dev.   Median
    BrokerCheck Data:
      Investment Advisory Firm                                 4,178     38,627      23.1%
      Aliated w/ Fin. Inst.                                   4,178     38,627      52.7%
      Firm Age                                                 4,178     38,627      15.15         13.34       12
      Owner/Ocer Misconduct                                   4,178     38,627      30.7%
      No. Business Lines                                       4,178     38,627       5.79          4.57        4
      Number of Advisers                                       4,178     38,627        170         1,212       10
      Firm Employee Misconduct (ow in one year)               4,178     38,627      0.51%        3.36%     0.00%
      Firm Employee Misconduct (stock)                         4,178     38,627      10.2%        17.1%      2.6%
    Form ADV Data:
      Services Retail Clients                                    405       1,136      0.86
      Number of Accounts                                         441       1,554    24,535         1,065   133,446
      Compensation/Fee Structure
         Assets Under Management                                 441       1,554     94.1%
         Hourly                                                  441       1,554     49.7%
         Fixed Fee                                               441       1,554     65.6%
         Commission                                              441       1,554     47.0%
         Performance                                             441       1,554      8.9%
    Other Data Sources:
      No. Social Network Links                                 1,696     16,159      2,365        22,693       47
      Total Assets (bn)                                           75        824         31           61        13
      Total Revenue (mm)                                          74        813        343          670       134
      Avg. Annual Payout                                          73        802    201,819       101,163   195,818


Note: Table 1a displays the summary statistics corresponding to our panel of nancial advisers over the
period 2005-2015.    Observations are adviser by year.     We report the standard deviation and median for
the non-dummy variables. Table 1b displays summary statistics of nancial advisory rms. Observations
reported in Table 1b are rm by year. The BrokerCheck data covers the period 2005-2015. Information on
the number of business lines, investment advisory registration, and aliations are as of 2015. Form ADV
data covers the period 2011-2015. No. Social Network Links measures the number of individuals who follow
a rm on a popular social media website as of May 2015.          Data covering the asset, revenue, and average
adviser payout/salary data are from a private industry survey as of 2014.
                                                    39
                             Table 2: Financial Adviser Disclosures and Misconduct


                         Disclosure                                Disclosure/Misconduct
                                                       Flow of New Disclosures   Stock of Disclosures
      Misconduct Disclosures:
         Customer Dispute - Settled                                     0.317%                 3.71%
         Employment Separation After Allegations                        0.183%                 0.98%
         Regulatory - Final                                             0.096%                 1.23%
         Criminal - Final Disposition                                   0.025%                 2.05%
         Customer Dispute - Award/Judgment                              0.017%                 0.57%
         Civil - Final                                                  0.003%                 0.03%
         Any Misconduct Related Disclosure                              0.603%                 7.28%
      Other Disclosures:
         Financial - Final                                              0.348%                 2.10%
         Customer Dispute - Denied                                      0.311%                 3.20%
         Judgment/Lien                                                  0.215%                 1.00%
         Customer Dispute - Closed-No Action                            0.072%                 0.96%
         Financial - Pending                                            0.058%                 0.20%
         Customer Dispute - Pending                                     0.057%                 0.28%
         Customer Dispute - Withdrawn                                   0.016%                 0.17%
         Criminal - Pending Charge                                      0.009%                 0.02%
         Investigation                                                  0.009%                 0.03%
         Regulatory - Pending                                           0.004%                 0.01%
         Civil - Pending                                                0.004%                 0.01%
         Customer Dispute - Final                                       0.002%                 0.02%
         Customer Dispute - Dismissed                                   0.001%                 0.01%
         Civil Bond                                                     0.001%                 0.02%
         Regulatory - On Appeal                                         0.001%                 0.00%
         Criminal - On Appeal                                           0.000%                 0.00%
         Civil - On Appeal                                              0.000%                 0.00%
      Any Disclosure                                                   1.620%               12.73%


Note: Table 2 displays the incidence of disclosures and misconduct among nancial advisers. Observations
are adviser by year over the period 2005-2015.      The column ow of new disclosures displays the share
of observations in which the adviser received one or more of a given type of disclosure in a given year.
The column stock of disclosures displays the share of observations in which the adviser either received or
previously received one or more of a given type of disclosure.




                                                      40
                  Table 3: Misconduct Complaints, Products, and Settlements/Damages


                                           (a) Reasons for Complaint

                            Reasons for Complaint                 Disclosure Type
                                                             Misconduct        Other Type
                         Unsuitable                               21.3%            31.1%
                         Misrepresentation                        17.7%            25.6%
                         Unauthorized Activity                    15.0%            10.6%
                         Omission of Key Facts                    11.6%                7.7%
                         Fee/Commission Related                      8.7%              7.4%
                         Fraud                                       7.9%              4.2%
                         Fiduciary Duty                              6.5%              4.5%
                         Negligence                                  5.8%              4.5%
                         Risky Investments                           3.7%              6.3%
                         Churning/ Excessive Trading                 2.6%              2.7%
                         Other                                    42.5%            31.5%


                                                  (b) Products

                                    Product                 Disclosure Type
                                                     Misconduct        Other Type
                               Insurance                     13.8%             15.2%
                               Annuity                        8.6%             18.6%
                               Stocks                         6.0%             6.3%
                               Mutual Funds                   4.6%             5.9%
                               Bonds                          1.9%             4.5%
                               Options                        1.2%             1.2%
                               Other/Not Listed              69.9%             55.0%


                                             (c) Settlements/Damages

                            Variable                    Obs          Mean        Std. Dev.    Median
             Misconduct Related Disclosures:
                 Settlements/Damages Granted          35,406         551,471     9,300,282     40,000
                 Settlements/Damages Requested        28,046      1,520,231     61,601,420    100,000
             Other Disclosures:
                 Settlements/Damages Granted                751   6,152,410     50,738,600     45,478
                 Settlements/Damages Requested        31,653         739,753    18,655,940     32,199


Table 3a displays the most frequently reported allegations corresponding to the disclosures that occurred
over the period 2005-2015. We observe allegations for 91.9% of the misconduct related disclosures and 33.4%
of the other types of disclosures. The allegation categories are not mutually exclusive. The "Other" category
includes all other allegations/classications that were reported with a frequency of less than 2%. Table 3b
displays the most frequently reported nancial products in the allegations. Over half of the allegations do
not list a specic nancial product. Table 3c displays the settlements/damages (in $) that were granted and
requested over the period 2005-2015. We observe the settlements/damages details for 45.8% of misconduct
related disclosures and 0.6% of the other types of disclosures.




                                                       41
                                       Table 4: Adviser Misconduct


                                                            (1)       (2)       (3)
                       Prior Misconduct                2.40***     2.27***    1.90***
                                                        (0.100)     (0.096)   (0.074)
                       Experience                                  0.078***   0.12***
                                                                    (0.017)   (0.012)
                       Exams and Qual. (Series):
                         Inv. Adviser Exam (65/66)                 0.31***    0.22***
                                                                    (0.031)   (0.024)
                         Sec. Agent St. Law (63)                   0.17***    0.13***
                                                                    (0.021)   (0.018)
                         Gen. Sec. Rep. (7)                         0.032     0.045*
                                                                    (0.033)   (0.024)
                         Inv. Co. Prod. Rep. (6)                    0.0043     0.028
                                                                    (0.029)   (0.028)
                         Gen. Sec. Principal (24)                   0.020     0.0033
                                                                    (0.030)   (0.020)
                         No. Other Qual.                           -0.26**    -0.28***
                                                                    (0.11)    (0.075)
                       Year×Firm×County F.E.                                     X
                       Observations                    7,946,680 7,946,680 7,597,776
                       R-squared                           0.006    0.007      0.092


Note: Table 4 displays the regression results for a linear probability model (eq. 1). The dependent variable
measures the ow of new misconduct over a one year period and is a dummy variable indicating that the
adviser received one or more misconduct disclosures in a given year. Coecient units are percentage points.
The independent variables Experience and No.        Other Qual.    are measured in tens of years and tens of
qualications. Observations are at the adviser by year level. Standard errors are in paraentheses and are
clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                      42
                         Table 5: Firms with the Highest Incidence of Misconduct


 Rank                               Firm                           Firm CRD#       Misconduct   # Advisers
   1    OPPENHEIMER & CO. INC.                                         249             19.6%         2,275
   2    FIRST ALLIED SECURITIES, INC.                                 32444            17.7%         1,112
   3    WELLS FARGO ADVISORS FINANCIAL NETWORK, LLC                   11025            15.3%         1,797
   4    UBS FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.                                   8174             15.1%        12,175
   5    CETERA ADVISORS LLC                                           10299            14.4%         1,432
   6    SECURITIES AMERICA, INC.                                      10205            14.3%         2,546
   7    NATIONAL PLANNING CORPORATION                                 29604            14.0%         1,760
   8    RAYMOND JAMES & ASSOCIATES, INC.                               705             13.7%         5,495
   9    STIFEL, NICOLAUS & COMPANY, INCORPORATED                       793             13.3%         4,008
  10    JANNEY MONTGOMERY SCOTT LLC                                    463             13.3%         1,394
  11    MORGAN STANLEY                                               149777            13.1%        23,618
  12    SAGEPOINT FINANCIAL, INC.                                    133763            12.1%         2,063
  13    WELLS FARGO ADVISORS, LLC                                     19616            12.1%        26,308
  14    FSC SECURITIES CORPORATION                                    7461             11.6%         1,373
  15    PURSHE KAPLAN STERLING INVESTMENTS                            35747            11.4%         1,224
  16    ROYAL ALLIANCE ASSOCIATES, INC.                               23131            11.4%         1,975
  17    RAYMOND JAMES FINANCIAL SERVICES, INC.                        6694             11.2%         5,176
  18    WOODBURY FINANCIAL SERVICES, INC.                              421             10.9%         1,377
  19    AMERIPRISE FINANCIAL SERVICES, INC.                           6363             10.4%        13,549
  20    INVEST FINANCIAL CORPORATION                                  12984            10.1%         1,425


Note: Tables 5 displays the rms in the U.S. with the highest employee misconduct rates as of May 2015.
Firms are dened by their Central Registration Depository (CRD) number. Misconduct measures the per-
centage of advisers working for a rm that have been reprimanded for misconduct in the past. We restrict
the set to the 100 rms with at least 1,000 advisers.




                                                        43
                                   Table 6: Firm Employee Misconduct


                                                    (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)
               Firm Employee Misconductt−1       0.40***     0.36***       0.33***    0.30***
                                                  (0.023)    (0.024)       (0.022)    (0.030)
               Owner/Ocer Misconduct                        0.082*        0.096**    0.22***
                                                             (0.043)       (0.039)    (0.053)
               No. advisers (millions)                        3.33*         3.43*      42.1*
                                                              (1.88)       (2.01)      (21.9)
               Investment Advisory Firm                       0.043         0.014      -0.015
                                                             (0.044)       (0.039)    (0.065)
               Aliated w/ Fin. Inst.                        -0.083        -0.082*     -0.076
                                                             (0.053)       (0.045)    (0.053)
               Firm Age                                      -0.0013       0.00046    -0.0022
                                                            (0.00087)     (0.00095)   (0.0020)
               ln(Social Network Links+1)                                             -0.018**
                                                                                      (0.0078)
               Other Firm Controls                                X           X          X
               Year F.E.                                                      X          X
               State F.E.                                                     X          X
               Observations                       34,415     34,415        34,415      14,447
               R-squared                           0.172      0.198         0.251      0.243


Note: Table 6 corresponds to the linear regression of the rm's employee misconduct rate in a given year on
the rm's past employee misconduct rate and other covariates (eq. 2). The data consists of an unbalanced
panel of the universe of 4,178 currently active (as of May 2015) nancial advisory rms over the period 2005-
2015. Observations are at the rm by year level. Firm Employee Misconduct is dened as the percentage
of advisers currently working for a rm that received one or more misconduct disclosures in a given year.
Coecient units are percentage points. Firm Age is measured in tens of years. Other rm controls include
the rm's formation type (corporation, limited liability, etc.)    as well as whether or not it has a referral
arrangement with other advisory rms. Each observation is weighted by the square root of the number of
advisers in the rm. Standard errors are in paraentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.10.




                                                     44
                              Table 7: Labor Market Consequences of Misconduct


                                                      (a) Job Turnover

                                                                         No Misconduct             Misconduct
                    Remain with the Firm                                        81.3%                 52.0%
                    Leave the Firm                                              18.7%                 48.0%
                    Conditional on Leaving the Firm:
                       Leave the Industry                                       47.7%                 56.2%
                       Join a Dierent Firm (within 1 year)                     52.3%                 43.8%


                                              (b) Employment Separation

                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
        Misconduct                                    29.3***         30.8***        24.4***
                                                       (1.69)          (1.62)         (1.82)
        ln(Settlement)                                                                             0.59       0.99** 0.89***
                                                                                                   (0.48)       (0.47)     (0.24)


        Adviser Controls                                                 X              X                         X             X
        Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                           X
        Year F.E.                                                                                                               X
        County F.E.                                                                                                             X
        Firm F.E.                                                                                                               X
        Observations                                  7,278,974 7,278,974 6,954,542 25,083 25,083                          23,958
        R-squared                                      0.004           0.011          0.326        0.001        0.017      0.223
        Average employment separation rates             18.9           18.9           19.0         27.4         27.4          27.3


                                                   (c) Reemployment

                                                (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
           Misconduct                        -8.47***     -12.8***        -9.59***
                                              (2.48)        (1.53)           (1.10)
           ln(Settlement)                                                               -1.80** -2.40*** -2.87***
                                                                                         (0.75)       (0.67)           (0.49)


           Adviser Controls                                     X               X                         X               X
           Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                X
           Year F.E.                                                                                                      X
           County F.E.                                                                                                    X
           Firm F.E.                                                                                                      X
           Observations                     1,375,641 1,375,641 1,246,907                6,874        6,874            6,169
           R-squared                          0.000            0.125          0.373      0.005        0.076            0.326
           Average reemployment rates          52.2            52.2           53.2          66.2       66.2              67.7


Note: Table 7a displays the average annual job turnover among nancial advisers over the period 2005-2015. Leave
the Industry is dened as an adviser's not being employed as a nancial adviser for at least one year; Join a Dierent
Firm is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the adviser is employed at a dierent nancial advisory
rm within a year. The job transitions are broken down by the whether or not the adviser received a misconduct
disclosure in the previous year.
Tables 7b and 7c measure the labor market consequences of misconduct by estimating linear probability models in
eq. (3)-(6). The dependent variable in Table 7b is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser
left his rm (eq.   3 and 4). The dependent variable in Table 7c is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a
nancial adviser joined a new rm within one year (eq. 5 and 6). In Table 7c we restrict the sample to advisers who
left their rm in a given year. In columns (4)-(6) of Tables 7b and 7c we restrict the sample to advisers who received
misconduct disclosures in the previous year and for whom we observe settlement/damage amount paid. Coecients
are in units of percentage points. Other adviser controls include the adviser's industry experience, tests (series 6, 7,
63, 24 and investment adviser exam), and number of other qualications. Observations are at the nancial adviser
by year level. Standard errors are in paraentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.


                                                               45
                          Table 8: Duration Out of the Financial Advisory Industry


                                                      (1)           (2)        (3)              (4)
                   Misconduct                     0.83***        0.83***     1.03***       1.03***
                                                (0.0064)         (0.0065)    (0.0080)     (0.0080)


                   Other Adviser Controls             X             X           X               X
                   Year F.E.                                        X                           X
                   Complete Spells                                              X               X
                   Observations                1,357,046         1,357,046   758,870       758,870


Note: Table 8 estimates the relationship between misconduct and an adviser's duration out of the nancial
advisory industry, corresponding to a Cox proportional hazard model (eq.                  7).    Other adviser controls
include the adviser's experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63, 24 and investment adviser exam), and number of
other qualications. The coecients are reported in terms of proportional hazards. Observations are at the
nancial adviser by out of the industry spell level over the period 2005-2015. In columns (3)-(4) we restrict
the data set to include only complete out of the industry spells where we observe the adviser found new
employment in the industry. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                       Table 9: New Firm Characteristics


                          Avg. Payout No. Social Links Misc. Rate (pp) Firm Size Assets ($bn) Rev. ($mm)
  Misconduct              -14,690***      -12,477***             0.53***      -1,898***     -36.76***      -391***
                            (3,567)         (3,361)               (0.058)      (230.2)          (4.82)       (41)


  Orig Firm x Year F.E.        X              X                     X            X                  X         X
  Observations              69,050          32,586               456,947       456,947          75,392      75,087
  R-squared                  0.559           0.145                0.290         0.467            0.332      0.503


Note: Table 9 displays the characteristics of new rms joined by advisers who switched rms as a function
of whether or not the adviser was reprimanded for misconduct in the year prior to the job transition (eq. 8).
No. Social Network Links measures the number of individuals who follow a rm on a popular social media
website as of May 2015. Firm Employee Misconduct (Misc. Rate) measures the share of nancial advisers
working at a rm that were reprimanded for misconduct in a given year. Observations are adviser by job
transition for which the adviser found a job within a year. We restrict the data to observations in which
advisers who were and were not reprimanded for misconduct leave a given rm in a given year. Standard
errors are in paraentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                            46
                             Table 10: Firm Dierences in Misconduct Tolerance


                                            (a) Employment Separation

                                                                         (1)             (2)             (3)
                     Misconduct                                       31.2***          33.1***         27.3***
                                                                        (1.89)         (1.74)           (1.84)
                     Firm Employee Misconduct                         2.79***          3.06***
                                                                        (0.41)         (0.37)
                     Firm Employee Misconduct   ×   Misconduct        -2.84***       -3.10***          -1.32***
                                                                        (0.41)         (0.37)           (0.11)


                     Adviser Controls                                                    X                X
                     Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                                X
                     Observations                                   7,278,974 7,278,974 6,954,542
                     R-squared                                          0.009           0.017           0.326


                                                     (b) Hiring

                                                                  (1)            (2)             (3)
                          Firm Employee Misconductt−1        0.72***           0.69***       0.68***
                                                             (0.079)           (0.081)         (0.080)


                          Firm Controls                           X              X               X
                          Year F.E.                                              X               X
                          State F.E.                                                             X
                          Observations                       18,628            18,628          18,628
                          R-squared                           0.087             0.093          0.102


Note: Table 10a examines whether rms which employ more advisers with misconduct records are more
tolerant of misconduct in their separation decisions. It presents results corresponding to a linear probability
model (eq.   9).   Observations are at the nancial adviser by year level over the period 2005-2015.              The
coecients are in units of percentage points.     Firm Employee Misconduct measures the share of nancial
advisers working at a rm that were reprimanded for misconduct in a given year. Firm Employee Misconduct
is in units of percentage points. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63,
24 and investment adviser exam), and number of other qualications. Standard errors are in paraentheses
and are clustered by rm.
Table 10b examines whether rms which employ more advisers with misconduct records are more tolerant
of misconduct in their hiring decisions by presenting estimates from (eq. 10). Observations are at the rm
by year level where we restrict the data set those observations where the rm hired new advisers. The data
consists of an unbalanced panel of the universe of 4,178 currently active nancial advisory rms over the
period 2005-2015 was of May 2015. The dependent variable is the percentage of new hires made by a rm
who were reprimanded for misconduct in the previous year. The coecient units are in percentage points.
Firm controls include: the number of advisers, the rm's formation type (corporation, limited liability, etc.),
the rm's age, whether any owner/ocers have a record of misconduct, whether the rm is an investment
advisory rm, whether the rm is aliated with a nancial institution, and whether the rm has a referral
arrangement with other advisory rms. Each observation is weighted by the square root of the number of
advisers in the rm. Standard errors are in paraentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.10.




                                                        47
                                  Table 11: Firm Employee Misconduct


                                                            Firm Employee Misconduct
                                             Stock of Misconduct       Flow of New Misconduct
                                                (1)            (2)       (3)            (4)
             Retail Investors                 3.43**         4.23***   0.32**          0.21*
                                              (1.56)         (1.39)    (0.15)      (0.12)
             Number of Accts (millions)        0.93          5.01***    0.085      -0.056
                                              (1.31)         (1.38)    (0.082)     (0.16)
             Compensation Structure:
                Assets Under Management        0.37           0.31      0.14           0.11
                                              (1.23)         (0.97)    (0.12)      (0.11)
                Hourly                         1.99          2.07**    0.15**      0.18***
                                              (1.32)         (0.98)    (0.064)     (0.062)
                Fixed Fee                     -0.016          -1.16    -0.0051         0.012
                                              (1.16)         (1.03)    (0.12)      (0.13)
                Commission                   3.13***         2.79***    0.012          0.022
                                              (0.74)         (0.72)    (0.078)     (0.059)
                Performance                    -1.64          0.77      0.22           0.20*
                                              (1.13)         (1.41)    (0.17)      (0.12)
             Firm Controls                                     X                        X
             Year F.E.                                         X                        X
             State F.E.                                        X                        X
             Observations                     1,136           1,125     1,136          1,125
             R-squared                        0.356           0.464     0.084          0.184


Note: Table 11 examines whether rms who service less sophisticated (retail) customers have higher shares
of advisers with misconduct records. It displays regression results corresponding to (eq. 11). Observations
are at the rm by year level over the period 2011-2014 for an unbalanced panel of 405 investment advisory
rms. In columns (1) and (2) we measure the rm employee misconduct rate as the stock of misconduct:
the percentage of advisers currently working for a rm that have ever been reprimanded for misconduct.
In columns (3) and (4) we measure the rm employee misconduct rate as the ow of new misconduct: the
percentage of advisers currently working for a rm that are reprimanded for misconduct in a given year.
Coecients are in units of percentage points. Firm controls include the rm size (no. advisers), number of
states the rm operates in, and the age of the rm. Each observation is weighted by the square root of the
number of advisers in the rm. Standard errors are in paraentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                       48
                   Table 12: Counties with the Highest and Lowest Rates of Misconduct


            (a) % of advisers with Misconduct Records                        (b) % of advisers with Misconduct Records

  Rank             County             Misc. Rate # Advisers         Rank            County        Misc. Rate # Advisers
    1    Madison, NY                        32.1%             131        1      Franklin, PA             2.6%             114
    2    Indian River, FL                   19.2%             282        2      Saline, KS               2.7%             112
    3    Guaynabo Municipio, PR             19.1%             126        3      Cerro Gordo, IA          2.7%             112
    4    Monterey, CA                       18.4%             397        4      Kenton, KY               2.9%            1,991
    5    Martin, FL                         18.4%             357        5      Washington, VT           3.0%             197
    6    Palm Beach, FL                     18.1%         5,278          6      Bronx, NY                3.1%             226
    7    Richmond, NY                       17.7%             436        7      Rutherford, TN           3.1%             161
    8    Suolk, NY                         17.3%         4,136          8      Stearns, MN              3.3%             491
    9    Bay, FL                            17.0%             106        9      Ottawa, MI               3.5%             312
   10    Lee, FL                            16.8%             853       10      Boone, MO                3.8%             159


                                                (c) County Misconduct

                                                           County Misconduct
                                           Stock of Misconduct      Flow of New Misconduct
                                              (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)
                    ln(pop) -                0.016        0.21          0.0011          0.034
                                            (0.23)       (0.14)         (0.029)        (0.021)
                    ln(inc)                6.78***      8.41***         0.60***        1.03***
                                            (1.29)       (1.81)         (0.17)          (0.18)
                    Pct Rural              -5.90***     -4.09**         -0.62**        -0.47**
                                            (2.01)       (1.83)         (0.25)          (0.23)
                    Pct College            -20.5***     -18.5***    -1.91***           -2.20***
                                            (3.13)       (3.46)         (0.26)          (0.34)
                    Pct 65 or Older        34.5***      37.8***         3.38***        2.97***
                                            (9.43)       (7.11)         (1.04)          (0.84)
                    Labor Force Part.        -9.50        -5.52     -2.17***           -1.95***
                                            (7.24)       (6.20)         (0.80)          (0.75)


                    Year F.E.                                 X                              X
                    State F.E.                                X                              X
                    Observations             2,607       2,607           2,607          2,607
                    R-squared                0.453       0.640           0.222          0.397


Note: Table 12a panels (a) and (b) display the counties in the U.S. with the highest and lowest misconduct
rates as of May 2015.    The county misconduct rate is dened in terms of the stock of misconduct:                   the
percentage of nancial advisers in a county that have ever had a misconduct record. We restrict the set of
counties to those with at least 100 advisers.
Table 12c examines which county characteristics predict misconduct, corresponding to (eq. 12). Observations
are at the county by year level over the period 2010-2013. We restrict the data set to those counties with
more than 50 advisers for which demographic data is available from the American Community Survey. In
columns (1) and (2) we measure the county misconduct rate as the stock of misconduct: the percentage of
advisers currently in a county that have been reprimanded for misconduct at or prior to the given year. In
columns (3) and (4) we measure the county misconduct rate as the ow of new misconduct: the percentage
of advisers currently in a county that were reprimanded for misconduct in the given year. Coecients are
in units of percentage points. The independent variables Pct Rural, Pct College, and Pct 65 or Older are
measured on the scale 0-1. Each observation is weighted by the square root of the number of advisers in the
county. Standard errors are in paraentheses and are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                         49
                         Figure 1: Size Distribution of Financial Advisory Firms




Note:   Figure 1 displays the size distribution of US nancial advisory rms in terms of the number of
registered advisers working at each rm in May 2015.    Firms are dened by their Central Registration
Depository (CRD) number.




                                                   50
                              Figure 2: Distribution of Settlements/Damages




Note: Figure 2 displays the frequency of settlements/damages that were granted over the period 2005-2015.




                                     Figure 3: Misconduct over Time




Note: Figure 3 displays the percentage of nancial advisers who received one or more misconduct disclosures
in the given year over the period 2005-2015.




                                                    51
                                                Figure 4: Misconduct Frequency


                                                    (a) Distribution of Misconduct




                                                          (b) Repeat Oenders




Note: Figure 4a displays the percentage of advisers registered in May 2015 who have misconduct records and the
number of misconduct disclosures. The gray line in Figure 4b displays the conditional probability of a new misconduct
record at time     t   given the adviser had a new misconduct record at time          t = 0.    The black dashed line displays the
unconditional probability of a new misconduct record (0.60%).               We construct the gray series by calculating the
percentage of advisers who received misconduct disclosures at time               t   (for   t = 1, 2, ..., 9)   given that the adviser
received a misconduct disclosure at time         t = 0.   We examine the set of nancial advisers who were active for at least
this period of time      t   in our sample. So, to estimate the probability an adviser receives a new misconduct disclosure 9
years after previously receiving a misconduct disclosure, we calculate the conditional probabilities among the set of
nancial advisers who were active in both 2005 and 2014 and/or 2006 and 2015. Therefore, the sample size changes
as   t   changes from 1 to 10 years.


                                                                  52
                            Figure 5: Distribution of Misconduct Across Firms


                                     (a) Firms with at Least 100 Employees




                                    (b) Firms with at Least 1,000 Employees




Note: Figures 5a and 5b display the distribution of rms in terms of the percentage of advisers working for
the rm with a prior misconduct record in May 2015. Panel (a) restricts the sample to rms with at least
100 advisers. Panel (b) restricts the sample to rms with at least 1,000 advisers.




                                                      53
                                     Figure 6: Duration Out of the Industry


                                       (a) Out of the Industry Survival Function




                (b) Out of the Industry Survival Function - Conditional on Finding a Job in the Industry




Figure 6a displays the out of the nancial advisory industry survival function for all 1.35mm out of the
industry spells over the period 2005-2015. The dashed gray (solid black) line plots the out of the industry
survival function for advisers who (do not) have a new record misconduct in the twelve months prior to the
start of their out of the industry spell. Figure 6b is constructed using only complete out of the industry
spells (760,000 observations).




                                                          54
                       Figure 7: Financial Adviser Misconduct Across U.S. Counties




Note: Figure 7 displays the percentage of advisers who have a record of misconduct, the county misconduct
rate, in May 2015. Colors denote the quartiles of the distribution.




                                                     55
Appendix
Disclosure Denitions              34




Civil-Final: This type of disclosure event involves (1) an injunction issued by a court in connection with

investment-related activity, (2) a nding by a court of a violation of any investment-related statute or

regulation, or (3) an action brought by a state or foreign nancial regulatory authority that is dismissed by

a court pursuant to a settlement agreement.


Civil - Pending: This type of disclosure event involves a pending civil court action that seeks an

injunction in connection with any investment-related activity or alleges a violation of any

investment-related statute or regulation.


Customer Dispute - Award/Judgment: This type of disclosure event involves a nal,

consumer-initiated, investment-related arbitration or civil suit containing allegations of sales practice

violations against the adviser that resulted in an arbitration award or civil judgment for the customer.


Customer Dispute - Settled: This type of disclosure event involves a consumer-initiated,

investment-related complaint, arbitration proceeding or civil suit containing allegations of sale practice

violations against the adviser that resulted in a monetary settlement to the customer.


Customer Dispute - Closed-No Action/Withdrawn/Dismissed/Denied/Final: This type of

disclosure event involves (1) a consumer-initiated, investment-related arbitration or civil suit containing

allegations of sales practice violations against the individual adviser that was dismissed, withdrawn, or

denied; or (2) a consumer-initiated, investment-related written complaint containing allegations that the

adviser engaged in sales practice violations resulting in compensatory damages of at least $5,000, forgery,

theft, or misappropriation, or conversion of funds or securities, which was closed without action,

withdrawn, or denied.


Customer Dispute - Pending: This type of disclosure event involves (1) a pending consumer-initiated,

investment-related arbitration or civil suit that contains allegations of sales practice violations against the

adviser; or (2) a pending, consumer-initiated, investment related written complaint containing allegations

that the adviser engaged in, sales practice violations resulting in compensatory damages of at least $5,000,

forgery, theft, or misappropriation, or conversion of funds or securities.


Employment Separation After Allegations: This type of disclosure event involves a situation where

the adviser voluntarily resigned, was discharged, or was permitted to resign after being accused of (1)

violating investment-related statutes, regulations, rules or industry standards of conduct; (2) fraud or the

wrongful taking of property; or (3) failure to supervise in connection with investment-related statutes,

regulations, rules, or industry standards of conduct.
 34 Denitions   as per http://brokercheck.nra.org/




                                                        56
Judgment/Lien: This type of disclosure event involves an unsatised and outstanding judgments or liens

against the adviser.



Criminal - Final Disposition: This type of disclosure event involves a criminal charge against the

adviser that has resulted in a conviction, acquittal, dismissal, or plea. The criminal matter may pertain to

any felony or certain misdemeanor oenses, including bribery, perjury, forgery, counterfeiting, extortion,

fraud, and wrongful taking of property.



Financial - Final: This type of disclosure event involves a bankruptcy, compromise with one or more

creditors, or Securities Investor Protection Corporation liquidation involving the adviser or an organization

the adviser controlled that occurred within the last 10 years.



Financial - Pending: This type of disclosure event involves a pending bankruptcy, compromise with one

or more creditors, or Securities Investor Protection Corporation liquidation involving the adviser or an

organization the adviser controlled that occurred within the last 10 years.



Investigation: This type of disclosure event involves any ongoing formal investigation by an entity such

as a grand jury state or federal agency, self-regulatory organization or foreign regulatory authority.

Subpoenas, preliminary or routine regulatory inquiries, and general requests by a regulatory entity for

information are not considered investigations and therefore are not included in a BrokerCheck report.



Regulatory - Final: This type of disclosure event may involves (1) a nal, formal proceeding initiated by

a regulatory authority (e.g., a state securities agency, self-regulatory organization, federal regulatory such

as the Securities and Exchange Commission, foreign nancial regulatory body) for a violation of

investment-related rules or regulations; or (2) a revocation or suspension of a adviser's authority to act as

an attorney, accountant, or federal contractor.



Civil Bond: This type of disclosure event involves a civil bond for the adviser that has been denied, paid,

or revoked by a bonding company.



Criminal - On Appeal: This type of disclosure event involves a conviction for any felony or certain

misdemeanor oenses, including bribery, perjury, forgery, counterfeiting, extortion, fraud, and wrongful

taking of property that is currently on appeal.



Criminal - Pending Charge: This type of disclosure event involves a formal charge for a crime involving

a felony or certain misdemeanor oenses, including bribery, perjury, forgery, counterfeiting, extortion,

fraud, and wrongful taking of property that is currently pending.



Regulatory - On Appeal: This type of disclosure event may involves (1) a formal proceeding initiated

by a regulatory authority (e.g., a state securities agency, self-regulatory organization, federal regulator such

as the Securities and Exchange Commission, foreign nancial regulatory body) for a violation of



                                                      57
investment-related rules or regulations that is currently on appeal; or (2) a revocation or suspension of a

adviser's authority to act as an attorney, accountant, or federal contractor that is currently on appeal.



Regulatory - Pending: This type of disclosure event involves a pending formal proceeding initiated by a

regulatory authority (e.g., a state securities agency, self-regulatory organization, federal regulatory agency

such as the Securities and Exchange Commission, foreign nancial regulatory body) for alleged violations

of investment-related rules or regulations.



Civil - On Appeal: This type of disclosure event involves an injunction issued by a court in connection

with investment-related activity or a nding by a court of a violation of any investment-related statute or

regulation that is currently on appeal.




                                                      58
                         Table A1: Distribution of Financial Advisers Across the US


              (a) Total Number of Advisers                               (b) Advisers Per Capita

   Variable           Description                         Rank                County               Advisers P.C.
       1      New York County, NY            89,704            1   McLean County, IL                      0.074
       2      Cook County, IL                18,620            2   New York County, NY                    0.055
       3      Los Angeles County, CA         15,969            3   St. Louis city, MO                     0.022
       4      McLean County, IL              12,979            4   Kenton County, KY                      0.012
       5      Maricopa County, AZ            11,032            5   Suolk County, MA                      0.012
       6      Harris County, TX               9,429            6   Chester County, PA                     0.011
       7      Hennepin County, MN             9,407            7   San Francisco County, CA               0.009
       8      Suolk County, MA               9,054            8   Mecklenburg County, NC                 0.008
       9      Mecklenburg County, NC          8,564            9   Denver County, CO                      0.008
      10      Orange County, CA               8,475           10   Arapahoe County, CO                    0.008


                                  (c) Advisers Per Capita vs. County Demographics

                                                      Financial Advisers Per Capita
                                                        (1)              (2)
                              ln(pop)                 0.62***          0.59***
                                                       (0.24)           (0.22)
                              ln(inc)                 -2.09***        -2.84***
                                                       (0.54)           (0.85)
                              Pct Rural                 0.26            -0.031
                                                       (0.74)           (0.61)
                              Pct College             11.2***          12.5***
                                                       (3.45)           (4.09)
                              Pct 65 or Older          3.72*             5.15
                                                       (2.12)           (3.63)
                              Labor Force Part.       5.83***          3.32**
                                                       (1.91)           (1.64)


                              Year F.E.                                   X
                              State F.E.                                  X
                              Observations             3,277            3,277
                              R-squared                0.121            0.157


Note: Tables A1a and A1b display the counties in the U.S. with the greatest number of total advisers and
greatest number of advisers per capita as of May 2015. Advisers per capita is calculated using population
data from the 2013 American Community Survey (ACS); therefore the ranking of advisers per capita is
restricted to the 824 counties covered in the ACS.
Table A1c displays the regression results corresponding to the regression of the number of nancial advisers
per capita on a set of county covariates.    The dependent variable is measured as the number of nancial
advisers in a county per 1,000 individuals. The independent variables Pct Rural, Pct College, and Pct 65 or
Older are measured on the scale 0-1. Observations are at the county by year level over the period 2010-2013.
We restrict the data set to those counties for which demographic data is available from the ACS. Standard
errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                         59
                                 Table A2: Largest Financial Advisory Firms


 Rank                                        Firm                                     Firm CRD#     No. Advisers
   1       MERRILL LYNCH, PIERCE, FENNER & SMITH INCORPORATED                            7691              32,107
   2       WELLS FARGO ADVISORS, LLC                                                     19616             26,308
   3       J.P. MORGAN SECURITIES LLC                                                     79               26,251
   4       MORGAN STANLEY                                                               149777             23,618
   5       LPL FINANCIAL LLC                                                             6413              18,093
   6       PFS INVESTMENTS INC.                                                          10111             17,700
   7       EDWARD JONES                                                                   250              16,750
   8       STATE FARM VP MANAGEMENT CORP.                                                43036             15,089
   9       AMERIPRISE FINANCIAL SERVICES, INC.                                           6363              13,549
  10       FIDELITY BROKERAGE SERVICES LLC                                               7784              12,697


Note: Table A2 displays the ten largest rms in terms of the number of advisers as of May 2015. Firms are
dened by their Central Registration Depository (CRD) number.




                         Table A3: Misconduct Per Employee Across Industries (2010)


        State                    Adviser Misconduct            Medical Malpractice   Public Corruption
                          All Advisers   Investment Advisers
        New York             0.74%             1.36%                 2.04%                0.00%
        California           1.24%             1.66%                 0.96%                0.00%
        Illinois             0.72%             0.97%                 0.95%                0.01%
        Texas                0.79%             0.86%                 0.99%                0.00%
        Florida              1.60%             1.94%                 1.71%                0.01%
        New Jersey           0.98%             1.36%                 1.75%                0.01%
        Pennsylvania         0.84%             1.18%                 2.05%                0.01%
        Ohio                 1.03%             0.98%                 0.77%                0.01%
        Massachusetts        0.83%             1.44%                 0.84%                0.01%
        North Carolina       0.56%             0.85%                 0.59%                0.00%
        Total US            0.97%              1.35%                 1.20%                0.00%


Note: Table A3 displays the incidence of misconduct, medical malpractice and public corruption per employee
as of 2010 among the ten states with the highest level of misconduct related disclosures as of 2010. Column
(1) displays the share of advisers in 2010 in each state that received misconduct disclosures. Column (2)
displays the share of nancial advisers in 2010 that were disciplined for misconduct among those advisers who
hold a Series 65 or 66 license (investment advisers). Column (3) displays the number of medical malpractice
cases per doctor. Column (4) displays the number of public corruption cases per public employee. Sources:
(i) AAMC 2011 State Physician Workforce Data Book and US Department of Health & Human Services
National Practitioner Data Bank and (ii) Report to Congress on the Activities and Operations of the Public
Integrity Section for 2012 and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                       60
                        Table A4: Firms with the Lowest Incidence of Misconduct


 Rank                                Firm                              Firm CRD#        Misconduct   # Advisers
   1    MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC                                          8209               0.79%        3,807
   2    GOLDMAN, SACHS & CO.                                               361               0.88%        7,380
   3    BNP PARIBAS SECURITIES CORP.                                      15794              1.17%        1,109
   4    SUNTRUST ROBINSON HUMPHREY, INC.                                  6271               1.25%        1,040
   5    BLACKROCK INVESTMENTS, LLC                                        38642              1.39%        1,442
   6    UBS SECURITIES LLC                                                 7654              1.51%        1,785
   7    JEFFERIES LLC                                                      2347              1.67%        1,676
   8    PRUDENTIAL INV. MGMT SERVICES LLC                                 18353              1.70%        1,234
   9    WELLS FARGO SECURITIES, LLC                                       126292             1.70%        2,876
  10    PERSHING LLC                                                       7560              1.72%        1,049
  11    BARCLAYS CAPITAL INC.                                             19714              1.86%        3,717
  12    T. ROWE PRICE INVESTMENT SERVICES, INC.                           8348               1.90%        1,741
  13    VANGUARD MARKETING CORPORATION                                     7452              2.11%        5,777
  14    NATIONAL FINANCIAL SERVICES LLC                                   13041              2.12%        1,177
  15    CREDIT SUISSE SECURITIES (USA) LLC                                 816               2.20%        3,733
  16    GWFS EQUITIES, INC.                                               13109              2.21%        2,078
  17    NATIONWIDE INVESTMENT SERVICES CORPORATION                        7110               2.29%        2,011
  18    JACKSON NATIONAL LIFE DISTRIBUTORS LLC                            40178              2.32%        1,034
  19    M&T SECURITIES, INC.                                              17358              2.64%        1,439
  20    USAA FINANCIAL ADVISORS, INC.                                     129035             2.81%        1,672


Note: Table A4 displays the rms in the U.S. with the lowest employee misconduct rates as of May 2015.
Firms are dened by their Central Registration Depository (CRD) number. Misconduct is dened as the
percentage of advisers working for a rm that have been reprimanded for misconduct in the past. We restrict
the set to the 100 rms with at least 1,000 advisers.




                                     Table A5: New Firm Characteristics


                           Avg. Payout No. Social Links Misc. Rate (pp) Firm Size Assets ($bn) Rev. ($mm)
Misconduct                   -10,379**       -12,542***         0.50***          -1,498***     -8.37         -134**
                              (5,011)         (3,581)           (0.082)           (340.8)      (6.16)        (54.7)


Year×Firm×County F.E.            X               X                 X                X            X                X
Observations                  19,620           5,238            162,290           162,290      21,780        21,694
R-squared                      0.835           0.209             0.419             0.601       0.386         0.842


Note: Table A5 displays the characteristics of new rms joined by advisers who switched rms as a function
of whether or not the adviser was reprimanded for misconduct in the year prior to the job transition (eq. 8).
No. Social Network Links measures the number of individuals who follow a rm on a popular social media
website as of May 2015. Firm Employee Misconduct (Misc. Rate) measures the share of nancial advisers
working at a rm that were reprimanded for misconduct in a given year. Observations are adviser by job
transition for which the adviser found a job within a year. We restrict the data to observations in which we
observe advisers who were and were not reprimanded for misconduct leave a given rm in a given year and
county. Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                        61
                                               Table A6: Firm Hiring


                                                     (1)          (2)            (3)
                                  Firm Discipline -0.0030* -0.0049** -0.0063***
                                                   (0.0018)     (0.0022)    (0.0020)


                                  Firm Controls       X            X             X
                                  Year F.E.                        X             X
                                  State F.E.                                     X
                                  Observations      4,063        4,063          4,063
                                  R-squared         0.070        0.093          0.119


Table A6 displays the estimation results corresponding to a rm's hiring patterns. Observations are at the
rm by year level where we restrict the data set those observations where the rm hired new advisers. The
dependent variable is the percentage of new hires made by a rm who were reprimanded for misconduct in
the previous year. The key independent variable is Firm Discipline which reects the percentage of nancial
advisers working for rm   j   who experienced an employment separation at time           t+1   among those advisers
working for rm   j   who received misconduct disclosures at time          t.   Firm controls include: the number of
advisers, the rm's formation type (corporation, limited liability, etc.), rm age, whether any owner/ocers
have a record of misconduct, whether the rm is an investment advisory rm, whether the rm is aliated
with a nancial institution, and if the rm has a referral arrangement with other advisory rms.               Each
observation is weighted by the square root of the number of advisers in the rm.              Standard errors are in
parenthesis and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                           62
                               Table A7: Alternative Misconduct Denitions


                                               (a) Summary Statistics

                                  Disclosure               Disclosure/Misconduct
                                                       Current      Current and Past
                            Misconduct                    0.60%                    7.28%
                            Any Disclosure                1.62%                12.74%
                            Severe Misconduct 1           0.24%                    2.91%
                            Severe Misconduct 2           0.13%                    1.92%


                                               (b) Adviser Misconduct

                                 Misconduct       Disclosure      Severe Misconduct-1      Severe Misconduct-2
    Prior Misconduct               1.90***         3.62***              1.53***                  1.15***
                                   (0.074)          (0.14)               (0.091)                 (0.085)


    Adviser Controls                  X               X                    X                       X
    Year×Firm×County F.E.             X               X                    X                       X
    Observations                  7,597,776       7,597,776             7,597,776               7,597,776
    R-squared                       0.092           0.099                0.091                    0.091


Note: Table A7a displays the incidence of disclosures/misconduct among nancial advisers over the period
2005-2015 under our alternative denitions of misconduct. Observations are year by adviser. The row labeled
"Misconduct" corresponds to our baseline denition of misconduct discussed in Section 3. Severe Misconduct
1 and 2 correspond to our alternate denitions of misconduct discussed in Section 6. The column "Current"
displays the share of observations in which the adviser received one or more of a given type of disclosure that
particular year. The column "Current and Past" displays the share of observations in which the adviser was
received one or more of a given type of disclosure in that year and/or previously.
Table A7b displays the regression results for a linear probability model (eq. 1). The dependent variable is
whether or not a nancial adviser received a misconduct disclosure at time t. Coecient units are percentage
points. Observations are at the adviser by year level. Adviser controls include the adviser's experience, tests
(series 6, 7, 63, 24 and investment adviser exam), and number of other qualications. Columns (1)-(4) dier
in terms of how misconduct and prior misconduct are dened. Standard errors are in parenthesis and are
clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                          63
        Table A8: Labor Market Consequences of Misconduct - Alternative Misconduct Denitions


                                                (a) Job Turnover

                                              No Misc        Misc    Disclosure    Severe Misc-1    Severe Misc-2
  Remain with the Firm                          81%          52%       69%             56%              50%
  Leave the Firm                                19%          48%       31%             44%              50%
     Leave the Industry                         48%          56%       46%             55%              59%
     Join a Dierent Firm (within 1 year)       52%          44%       54%             45%              41%


                                          (b) Employment Separation

                                             Misc      Disclosure Severe Misc-1 Severe Misc-2
               Misconduct                   24.40***    9.72***         18.94***      23.78******
                                             (1.82)         (0.92)       (1.29)          (1.90)


               Adviser Controls                X              X            X               X
               Year×Firm×County F.E.           X              X            X               X
               Observations               6,954,542    6,954,542       6,954,542       6,954,542
               R-squared                     0.326          0.324        0.324           0.324


                                               (c) Reemployment

                                             Misc      Disclosure Severe Misc-1 Severe Misc-2
               Misconduct                   -9.69***        -1.16       -9.88***       -12.62***
                                             (1.10)         (0.81)       (1.01)          (0.97)


               Adviser Controls                X              X            X               X
               Year×Firm×County F.E.           X              X            X               X
               Observations               1,246,907    1,246,907       1,246,907       1,246,907
               R-squared                     0.373          0.373        0.373           0.373


Note: Table A8a displays the average annual job turnover among nancial advisers over the period 2005-
2015. Leave the industry is dened as an adviser not being employed as a nancial adviser for at least one
year; join a new rm is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the adviser is employed at a dierent
nancial advisory rm within a year. The job transitions are broken down by whether or not the adviser
received a disclosure, misconduct related disclosure, or severe misconduct disclosure in the previous year.
Tables A8b and A8c measure the labor market consequences of misconduct by estimating linear probability
models in eq. (3) and (5). In Table A8c we restrict the sample to advisers who left their rm in a given
year. The coecients are in units of percentage points. Other adviser controls include the adviser's industry
experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63, 24 and investment adviser exam), and number of other qualications.
Observations are at the nancial adviser by year level. The columns of each table dier with respect to how
misconduct is dened. Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.10.




                                                       64
                                         Table A9: Types of Disclosures


 Dep Var.                                           Misconduct       Empl. Separation   Duration Out of the Industry
 Misconduct Related Disclosures:
    Employment Separation After Allegations           2.12***             68.94***                 0.75***
                                                       (0.12)              (1.56)                  (0.0090)
    Regulatory - Final                                1.42***             9.75***                  0.42***
                                                       (0.09)              (0.97)                  (0.0093)
    Criminal - Final Disposition                      0.57***             6.93***                  1.09***
                                                      (0.039)              (0.99)                   (0.035)
    Customer Dispute - Settled                        2.07***             2.51***                  1.16***
                                                       (0.12)              (0.43)                   (0.013)
    Customer Dispute - Award/Judgment                 1.44***              -1.28                    0.90**
                                                       (0.15)              (1.07)                   (0.044)
    Civil - Final                                     1.86***             9.53***                  0.34***
                                                       (0.56)              (3.43)                   (0.042)
 Other Disclosures:
    Financial - Final                                 0.23***               0.31                   1.54***
                                                      (0.032)              (0.65)                   (0.016)
    Judgment/Lien                                     1.19***               0.19                   1.26***
                                                       (0.11)              (1.05)                   (0.019)
    Customer Dispute - Denied                         1.34***             1.07***                  1.32***
                                                      (0.095)              (0.35)                   (0.016)
    Customer Dispute - Closed-No Action               1.61***              1.36*                   1.25***
                                                      (0.210)              (0.70)                   (0.028)
    Customer Dispute - Withdrawn                      2.40***              -0.62                   1.32***
                                                       (0.30)              (1.00)                   (0.067)
    Customer Dispute - Dismissed                       0.39                 0.47                     0.96
                                                       (0.60)              (3.11)                   (0.18)
    Customer Dispute - Final                          2.33***              -0.51                   0.62***
                                                       (0.77)              (2.48)                   (0.11)
    Civil Bond                                         0.37                -0.041                    1.01
                                                       (0.36)              (4.56)                   (0.21)


 Adviser Controls                                        X                   X                        X
 Year×Firm×County F.E.                                   X                   X
 Year F.E.                                                                                            X
 Observations                                        7,597,776           6,954,542                1,357,046
 R-squared                                             0.096               0.329


Note: Table A9 displays the estimation results corresponding to our three baseline models broken down by
the type of disclosure. Column (1) displays the regression results for a linear probability model (eq. 1). The
dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the adviser was formally reprimanded for
misconduct in year   t.   Coecients are in terms of percentage points. Column (2) displays the corresponding
estimates for a linear probability model where the dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether
or not a nancial adviser left his rm (eq. 3). Coecients are in terms of percentage points. Column (3)
corresponds to a Cox proportional hazard model (eq.            7).   The dependent variable is the length of an
unemployment spell in months. The coecients in column (3) are reported in terms of proportional hazards.
Observations are adviser by unemployment spell. In column (1) the disclosure variable indicates whether
or not the adviser has previously received a disclosure of that particular type. In columns (2) and (3) the
disclosure variable indicates whether or not the adviser received a disclosure of that particular type in the
previous year. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63, 24 and investment
adviser exam), and number of other qualications. Standard errors are clustered by rm in columns (1) and
(2). Robust standard errors are presented in column (3). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                       65
              Table A10: Consumer Sophistication and Non-Customer Initiated Misconduct


                                                          Firm Employee Misconduct
                                       Non-Customer Initiated Claims      Customer Initiated Claims
                                                      (1)                               (2)
      Retail Investors                              1.42**                            3.27***
                                                    (0.61)                             (1.16)
      Number of Accts (millions)                     -0.10                            5.55***
                                                    (0.56)                             (1.10)
      Compensation Structure:
          Assets Under Management                    0.45                              -0.024
                                                    (0.62)                             (0.89)
          Hourly                                   1.39***                              0.91
                                                    (0.40)                             (0.76)
          Fixed Fee                                  -0.74                             -0.53
                                                    (0.49)                             (0.78)
          Commission                                 0.61*                            2.67***
                                                    (0.31)                             (0.60)
          Performance                                0.35                               0.66
                                                    (0.64)                             (1.05)


      Firm Controls                                   X                                  X
      Year F.E.                                       X                                  X
      State F.E.                                      X                                  X
      Observations                                   1,125                             1,125
      R-squared                                      0.328                             0.540


Note: Table A10 examines whether rms who service less sophisticated (retail) customers have higher shares
of advisers with misconduct records. It displays regression results corresponding to eq. (11). Observations
are at the rm by year level over the period 2011-2014 for an unbalanced panel of 435 investment advisory
rms. In column (1) we measure the rm employee misconduct rate as the percentage of advisers working
for a rm that have a non-customer initiated misconduct disclosure on his/her record as of time t. In column
(2) we measure the rm employee misconduct rate as the percentage of advisers working for a rm that
have a customer initiated misconduct disclosure on his/her record as of time   t.   Coecients are in units of
percentage points. Firm controls include the rm size (no. advisers), number of states the rm operates in
and the age of the rm. Each observation is weighted by the square root of the number of advisers in the
rm. Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                    66
                Table A11: Non-Customer Initiated Misconduct and County Characteristics


                                                            County Misconduct
                                 Non-Customer Initiated Claims          Customer Initiated Claims
                                               (1)                                  (2)
             ln(pop)                          0.029                               0.283**
                                             (0.068)                              (0.122)
             ln(inc)                         3.39***                              6.51***
                                              (0.86)                              (1.43)
             Pct Rural                       -2.54***                              -2.25
                                              (0.88)                              (1.48)
             Pct College                     -7.98***                            -13.46***
                                              (1.69)                              (2.70)
             Pct 65 or Older                 9.88***                             34.09***
                                              (3.19)                              (6.03)
             Labor Force Part.                -0.24                                -6.60
                                              (2.74)                              (5.12)


             Year F.E.                          X                                   X
             State F.E.                         X                                   X
             Observations                     2,607                                2,607
             R-squared                        0.550                                0.617


Note:   Table A11 examines which county characteristics predict misconduct, corresponding to (eq.             12).
Observations are at the county by year level over the period 2010-2013. We restrict the data set to those
counties with more than 50 advisers for which demographic data is available from the American Community
Survey.   In column (1) we measure the county misconduct rate as the percentage of advisers in a county
that have a non-customer initiated misconduct disclosure on his/her record as of time        t.   In column (2) we
measure the county misconduct rate as the percentage of advisers in a county that have a customer initiated
misconduct disclosure on his/her record as of time     t.    Coecients are in units of percentage points.    The
independent variables Pct Rural, Pct College, and Pct 65 or Older are measured on the scale 0-1.             Each
observation is weighted by the square root of the number of advisers in the county. Standard errors are in
parenthesis and are clustered by county. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                       67
                                         Table A12: Firm Dissolutions


                                           (a) New Firm Characteristics

                                                             Misc. Rate            Firm Size
                          Misconduct                           0.35***               -827*
                                                                   (0.12)            (453)


                          Original Firm x Year F.E.                  X                X
                          Observations                          70,756              70,756
                          R-squared                                0.532             0.751


                                                (b) Reemployment

                                                             (1)            (2)      (3)
                           Misconduct                    -20.6*** -23.0*** -15.9***
                                                            (3.54)       (3.20)    (2.87)


                           Adviser Controls                                 X        X
                           Year×Firm×County F.E.                                     X
                           Observations                  124,696         124,696   118,313
                           R-squared                        0.003         0.055     0.361


Note: Table A12a displays the characteristics of new rms joined by advisers who switched rms as a function
of whether or not the adviser was reprimanded for misconduct in the year prior to the job transition (eq.
8). Firm Employee Misconduct (Misc. Rate) measures the share of nancial advisers working at a rm that
were reprimanded for misconduct in a given year. Observations are adviser by job transition for which the
adviser found a job within a year. We restrict the data to observations in which we observe advisers who
were and were not reprimanded for misconduct leave a given rm in a given year. We also restrict the data
set to only those job transitions that were the result of a rm dissolution. Standard errors are in parenthesis
and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Tables A12b measures the labor market consequences of misconduct by estimating a linear probability model
in (eq. 5). The dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser joined
a new rm within one year. The coecients are in units of percentage points. Other adviser controls include
the adviser's industry experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63, 24 and investment adviser exam), and number of other
qualications. Observations are at the nancial adviser by year level. We restrict the sample to advisers
who left their rm in a given year as the result of a rm dissolution. Standard errors are in parenthesis and
are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                       68
                          Table A13: Investment Adviser Subsample Analysis


                                            (a) Incidence of Misconduct

                                            Current Misconduct Current and Past Misconduct
               Investment Advisers                 0.85%                        10.01%
               Non-Investment Advisers             0.43%                        5.39%


                             (b) Consequences of Misconduct: Investment Advisers

                              Misconduct Empl. Sep. Reemployment Duration Out of the Industry
  Misconduct                      1.91***        20.3***         -9.95***                   0.82***
                                  (0.091)         (1.28)          (1.16)                    (0.0080)


  Other Adviser Controls              X               X              X                         X
  Year×Firm×County F.E.               X               X              X
  Year F.E.                                                                                    X
  Observations                 3,022,722        2,754,755        458,469                    535,917
  R-squared                         0.111         0.379            0.302


                           (c) Consequences of Misconduct: Non-Investment Advisers

                              Misconduct Empl. Sep. Reemployment Duration Out of the Industry
  Misconduct                      1.80***        30.2***         -9.19***                    0.86**
                                  (0.088)         (3.09)          (1.54)                     (0.011)


  Other Adviser Controls              X               X              X                         X
  Year×Firm×County F.E.               X               X              X
  Year F.E.                                                                                    X
  Observations                 4,413,362        4,051,117        739,190                    821,129
  R-squared                         0.117         0.319            0.385


                                    (d) New Firm Characteristics: Investment Advisers

                         Avg. Payout No. Social Links Misc. Rate (pp) Firm Size Assets ($bn) Rev. ($mm)
Misconduct               -14,327***          -9,175***            0.38***        -2,363***      -42.4***    -430***
                           (4,289)             (1,877)             (0.048)        (288.2)          (5.47)   (43.5)


Orig Firm x Year F.E.         X                   X                   X                 X             X       X
Observations               37,123              11,704             250,537         250,537          39,827   39,639
R-squared                   0.503               0.060               0.245          0.346           0.281     0.438


                               (e) New Firm Characteristics: Non-Investment Advisers

                         Avg. Payout No. Social Links Misc. Rate (pp) Firm Size Assets ($bn) Rev. ($mm)
Misconduct               -25,567***          -8,490***            0.77***        -1,407***      -31.2***    -370***
                           (5,185)             (2,451)             (0.11)         (220.3)          (7.68)   (72.9)


Orig Firm x Year F.E.         X                   X                   X                 X             X       X
Observations               18,751               9,306             143,991         143,991          22,123   22,024
R-squared                   0.766               0.226               0.391          0.673           0.530     0.731




                                                          69
Note: In Table A13 we recompute our baseline analysis where we restrict our data set to only those advisers who
are and are not registered as investment advisers. We only observe whether a nancial adviser is registered as an
investment adviser if the nancial adviser is currently active in the industry. Hence, we treat all advisers who have
completed an investment adviser examination (Series 65 or 66 exam) as being investment advisers.            The results
reported in Tables A13b and A13d are estimated using the set of investment advisers in the data. Tables A13c and
A13e display the corresponding estimates for the pool of non-investment advisers.
Table A13a displays the incidence of misconduct among investment advisers and non-investment advisers.                The
column "Current" displays the share of observations in which the adviser received one or more misconduct disclosure
in that particular year. The column "Current and Past" displays the share of observations in which the adviser either
received or previously received one or more misconduct disclosure.
Tables A13b and A13c display the estimated results for the baseline analysis in the model where we restrict the
sample to those advisers who are and are not registered as investment advisers. Columns (1)-(3) correspond to linear
probability models that were estimated using adviser by year data. In column (1), the dependent variable is a dummy
variable indicating whether or not the investment adviser was formally disciplined for misconduct in year   t (eq.   1). In
column (2), the dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the investment adviser experienced
an employment separation (eq. 3). In column (3), the dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether
or not the investment adviser switched rms in a given year (eq. 5). In columns (1)-(3) the coecients are in terms
of percentage points.   Column (4) displays the estimates corresponding to a Cox-proportional hazards model (eq.
7). The dependent variable is the length of an unemployment spell in months. The coecients in column (4) are
reported in terms of proportional hazards. Observations are adviser by unemployment spell. The key independent
variables of interest are the misconduct dummy variables. In column (1) the misconduct variable indicates whether
or not the adviser has ever received a misconduct disclosure. In columns (2)-(4) the misconduct variable indicates
whether or not the adviser received a misconduct disclosure in the previous year. Other adviser controls include the
adviser's experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63, and 24), and number of other qualications.
Tables A13d and A13e display the characteristics of new rms joined by advisers who switched rms as a function
of whether or not the adviser was reprimanded for misconduct in the year prior to the job transition (eq. 8). No.
Social Network Links measures the number of individuals who follow a rm on a popular social media website as of
May 2015. Firm Employee Misconduct (Misc. Rate) measures the share of nancial advisers working at a rm that
were reprimanded for misconduct in a given year. Observations are adviser by job transition for which the adviser
found a job within a year. We restrict the data to observations in which we observe advisers who were and were not
reprimanded for misconduct leave a given rm in a given year. Standard errors are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                          70
      Table A14: Disclosures - FINRA Registered, SEC Registered, and Dually Registered Advisers


                                  (a) Disclosure Summary Statistics - Full Data Set

      Disclosure Type                      FINRA Data                                 SEC Data
                                Registered Rep Dual Registered Dual Registered Investment Adviser
      Customer Dispute                     3.14%              15.02%             14.86%             5.28%
      Bankruptcy                           4.28%               4.11%              4.26%             2.46%
      Criminal                             1.99%               2.06%              2.08%             1.44%
      Regulatory                           1.04%               1.41%              1.40%             2.79%
      Termination                          0.70%               1.38%              1.43%             1.75%
      Judgment                             1.53%               1.29%              1.55%             0.94%
      Civil                                0.04%               0.04%              0.04%             0.19%
      Bond                                 0.02%               0.03%              0.03%             0.04%
      Investigation                        0.03%               0.03%              0.03%             0.13%
      Any Disclosure                     10.78%               21.86%             22.00%             11.52%
      No. Financial Advisers             372,836              271,446            277,198            51,256


                   (b) Disclosure Summary Statistics - Excluding Known Non-Client Facing Advisers

      Disclosure Type                      FINRA Data                                 SEC Data
                                Registered Rep Dual Registered Dual Registered Investment Adviser
      Customer Dispute                     4.02%              17.23%             17.16%             5.53%
      Bankruptcy                           5.22%               4.09%              4.27%             2.55%
      Criminal                             2.19%               2.14%              2.15%             1.48%
      Regulatory                           1.10%               1.53%              1.52%             2.86%
      Termination                          0.79%               1.53%              1.58%             1.84%
      Judgment                             1.93%               1.38%              1.65%             0.98%
      Civil                                0.03%               0.04%              0.05%             0.17%
      Bond                                 0.02%               0.03%              0.03%             0.04%
      Investigation                        0.03%               0.03%              0.03%             0.13%
      Any Disclosure                     12.86%               24.08%             24.32%             11.93%
      No. Financial Advisers             246,366              228,860            231,491            47,541


Note: Table A14 displays the percentage of nancial advisers with a disclosure on his/her record. We sepa-
rately analyze those nancial advisers that are solely registered with FINRA as Registered Representatives,
those solely registered with the SEC as Investment Advisers, and those dually registered. We observe the
disclosure history for each FINRA Registered Representative in FINRA's BrokerCheck database. We ob-
serve the disclosure history for each Investment Adviser in the SEC's Investment Advisor Public Disclosure
(IAPD) database. We observe the disclosure history for those dually registered representatives in both the
BrokerCheck and IAPD databases. The SEC Investment Advisor Public Disclosure database classies disclo-
sures into nine categories: customer disputes, bankruptcy, criminal, regulatory, termination, judgment, civil,
bond, and investigation. We construct the corresponding categories from the 23 disclosure categories spec-
ied in FINRA's BrokerCheck database. The disclosure categories include all types of reported disclosures
including those that are withdrawn, pending, or under appeal.           The FINRA reported summary statistics
reported in Columns (1) and (2) of Tables A14a and A14b represent all active registered representatives as
of May 2015. The SEC reported summary statistics reported in Columns (3) and (4) represent all active
investment advisers as of July 2016.
Table A14a reports the summary statistics using the full data set of Registered Representatives and Invest-
ment Advisers as of May 2015 and July 2016 respectively. In Table A14b we exclude those nancial advisers
that are known non-client facing advisers. We supplement our FINRA and SEC nancial adviser data with
additional data from Meridian IQ. Meridian IQ contains additional details on which advisers are not client
facing for a large subset of the nancial advisers in our data set. We are able to match 85% of the currently
active nancial advisers in BrokerCheck to the Meridian IQ data. Similarly, we are able to match the 99%
of the nancial advisers in the SEC IAPD data set to the Meridian IQ data.




                                                         71
                                      Table A15: Client Facing Advisers


                                             (a) Adviser Misconduct

                                            (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)            (6)
         Prior Misconduct                 1.80***     1.65***   1.39***   1.87***   1.75***        1.46***
                                          (0.090)     (0.083)   (0.065)   (0.10)    (0.096)        (0.074)


         Adviser Controls                                X            X               X               X
         Year×Firm×County F.E.                                        X                               X
         Client Facing Denition
           Meridian IQ                      X            X            X
           Qureshi and Sokobin (2015)                                       X         X               X
         Observations                    3,391,960 3,391,960 3,151,011 2,856,999 2,856,999 2,640,739
         R-squared                         0.004       0.005     0.115     0.005     0.005          0.120




                                           (b) Employment Separation

                                            (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)            (6)
         Misconduct                       16.7***     16.4***   11.6***   14.2***   14.8***        9.35***
                                          (1.20)       (1.10)    (0.83)   (1.11)    (1.02)          (0.62)


         Adviser Controls                                X            X               X               X
         Year×Firm×County F.E.                                        X                               X
         Client Facing Denition
           Meridian IQ                      X            X            X
           Qureshi and Sokobin (2015)                                       X         X               X
         Observations                    3,012,945 3,012,945 2,792,321 2,553,753 2,553,753 2,356,221
         R-squared                         0.002       0.016     0.486     0.002     0.010          0.487


Note: Tables A15a and A15b displays the regression results for linear probability models (eq. 1 and eq. 3).
The dependent variable in Table A15a is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser
received a misconduct disclosure at time    t.    The dependent variable in Table A15b is a dummy variable
indicating whether or not a nancial adviser received a misconduct disclosure at time       t.   Observations are
at the adviser by year level.   The coecients are in units of percentage points.   Adviser controls include
the adviser's industry experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63, 24 and investment adviser exam), and number of
other qualications. Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.10.
We restrict our sample in Tables A15a and A15b to those advisers likely to be in a client facing position. We
use two dierent methods to restrict our sample to client facing advisers. First, we supplement our nancial
adviser data set with data from Meridian IQ which includes data on known non-client facing advisers. We
are able to match 85% of the currently active nancial advisers in our adviser data set to the Meridian IQ
data. In columns (1)-(3) of Tables A15a and A15b we exclude known non-client facing advisers from our
sample. Second, we dene client facing advisers as those advisers registered in more than three states. As
discussed in Qureshi and Sokobin (2015), they report that "Based on its experience, FINRA sta believes
that brokers with more than three state registrations generally deal with public investors." We report our
results using the Qureshi and Sokobin (2015) denition of client facing advisers in columns (4)-(6) of Tables
A15a and A15b.       Because of data availability, our analysis using the Qureshi and Sokobin (Meridian IQ)
denition of client facing advisers is restricted to the set of advisers who were active as of May 2015 (June
2016).




                                                        72
    Table A16: Firms with the Highest/Lowest Incidence of Misconduct among Client Facing Advisers


                        (a) % of Client Facing Advisers who have been Disciplined for Misconduct

          Rank                         Firm                           Firm CRD#        Misconduct    # Advisers
           1      OPPENHEIMER & CO. INC.                                  249              28.2%           1,453
           2      FIRST ALLIED SECURITIES, INC.                          32444             24.2%             677
           3      RAYMOND JAMES & ASSOCIATES, INC.                        705              22.2%           2,973
           4      CETERA ADVISORS LLC                                    10299             19.5%             857
           5      SECURITIES AMERICA, INC.                               10205             19.0%           1,484
           6      NATIONAL PLANNING CORPORATION                          29604             18.9%           1,019
           7      WELLS FARGO ADVISORS FIN. NETWORK                      11025             18.6%           1,384
           8      UBS FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.                             8174             18.4%           9,522
           9      STIFEL, NICOLAUS & COMPANY, INC.                        793              18.3%           2,720
           10     JANNEY MONTGOMERY SCOTT LLC                             463              17.7%             999


                       (b) % of Client Facing Advisers who have been Disciplined for Misconduct

    Rank                               Firm                               Firm CRD#       Misconduct      # Advisers
      1        MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC                                         8209               1.1%        1,505
      2        GOLDMAN, SACHS & CO.                                              361               1.3%        3,087
      3        BNP PARIBAS SECURITIES CORP.                                   15794                1.3%            474
      4        BLACKROCK INVESTMENTS, LLC                                     38642                1.5%        1,035
      5        UBS SECURITIES LLC                                               7654               1.7%            761
      6        PRUDENTIAL INVESTMENT MGMT SERVICES LLC                        18353                1.8%            739
      7        SUNTRUST ROBINSON HUMPHREY, INC.                                 6271               1.8%            218
      8        WELLS FARGO SECURITIES, LLC                                   126292                1.9%        1,973
      9        GWFS EQUITIES, INC.                                            13109                2.0%        1,051
     10        NATIONAL FINANCIAL SERVICES LLC                                13041                2.2%            178


Note: Tables A16a and A16b display the rms in the U.S. with the highest and lowest employee misconduct
rates as of May 2015. Firms are dened by their Central Registration Depository (CRD) number. Misconduct
is dened as the percentage of client facing advisers working for a rm that have been reprimanded for
misconduct in the past. We dene client facing advisers in Tables A16a and A16b as those advisers registered
in more than three states.     As discussed in Qureshi and Sokobin (2015), they report that "Based on its
experience, FINRA sta believes that brokers with more than three state registrations generally deal with
public investors." We restrict the set of rms to those with at least 1,000 registered representatives and at
least 100 client facing advisers.




                                                          73
    Table A16: Firms with the Highest/Lowest Incidence of Misconduct among Client Facing Advisers


                    (c) % of Client Facing Advisers (Alt. Defn.) who have been Disciplined for Misconduct

 Rank                                     Firm                                  Firm CRD#         Misconduct    # Advisers
   1          OPPENHEIMER & CO. INC.                                                   249             24.3%         1,720
   2          FIRST ALLIED SECURITIES, INC.                                           32444            20.3%             905
   3          RAYMOND JAMES & ASSOCIATES, INC.                                         705             19.1%         3,613
   4          UBS FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.                                             8174             19.0%         9,370
   5          STIFEL, NICOLAUS & COMPANY, INCORPORATED                                 793             18.4%         2,693
   6          WELLS FARGO ADVISORS FINANCIAL NETWORK, LLC                             11025            17.2%         1,527
   7          JANNEY MONTGOMERY SCOTT LLC                                              463             16.9%             998
   8          SECURITIES AMERICA, INC.                                                10205            16.1%         2,137
   9          CETERA ADVISORS LLC                                                     10299            15.9%         1,252
   10         MORGAN STANLEY                                                       149777              15.8%        18,778


                    (d) % of Client Facing Advisers (Alt. Defn.) who have been Disciplined for Misconduct

        Rank                             Firm                              Firm CRD#          Misconduct    # Advisers
         1      MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC                                       8209                0.6%          1,696
         2      JACKSON NATIONAL LIFE DISTRIBUTORS LLC                         40178               0.7%           408
         3      GOLDMAN, SACHS & CO.                                            361                0.9%          5,157
         4      PRUDENTIAL INV. MGMT SERVICES LLC                              18353               1.1%           280
         5      UBS SECURITIES LLC                                             7654                1.2%           607
         6      SUNTRUST ROBINSON HUMPHREY, INC.                               6271                1.2%           167
         7      BLACKROCK INVESTMENTS, LLC                                     38642               1.2%           245
         8      WELLS FARGO SECURITIES, LLC                                   126292               1.3%           624
         9      JEFFERIES LLC                                                  2347                1.8%           799
         10     NATIONWIDE INV. SERVICES CORP.                                 7110                1.8%          1,305


Note: Tables A16c and A16d display the rms in the U.S. with the highest and lowest employee misconduct
rates as of May 2015. Firms are dened by their Central Registration Depository (CRD) number. Misconduct
is dened as the percentage of client facing advisers working for a rm that have been reprimanded for
misconduct in the past. We use data from Meridian IQ to help determine which advisers are client facing.
When constructing Tables A16c and A16d we exclude those advisers in the Meridian IQ database that are
known non-client facing advisers as of 2016. We also restrict the set of rms to those with at least 1,000
registered representatives and at least 100 client facing advisers.




                                                             74
                      Table A17: Controlling for Adviser Quality, Size, and Protability


                                               (a) Adviser Misconduct

                                                               (1)        (2)        (3)
                              Prior Misconduct             1.63***      1.65***    1.42***
                                                              (0.11)     (0.11)    (0.097)
                              High Quality Rating             0.056     -0.0037     0.011
                                                           (0.071)      (0.066)    (0.059)
                              ln(AUM)                     0.056*** 0.049***        0.029*
                                                           (0.016)      (0.013)    (0.016)
                              ln(Revenue)                  0.20***      0.20***    0.17***
                                                           (0.022)      (0.022)    (0.021)


                              Adviser Controls                             X         X
                              Year×Firm×County F.E.                                  X
                              Observations                 696,842      696,842    575,312
                              R-squared                       0.004      0.005      0.176




                                              (b) Employment Separation

                                                               (1)        (2)       (3)
                               Misconduct                 15.2***      15.1***    9.30***
                                                              (1.22)    (1.19)     (0.87)
                               High Quality Rating         -2.70** -3.68*** -4.02***
                                                              (1.32)    (1.11)     (0.64)
                               ln(AUM)                     0.0078       -0.086    -0.41***
                                                              (0.24)    (0.16)    (0.066)
                               ln(Revenue)                    -0.27     0.012     -0.26***
                                                              (0.19)    (0.18)    (0.068)


                               Other Adviser Controls                     X          X
                               Year×Firm×County F.E.                                 X
                               Observations               632,775      632,775    522,118
                               R-squared                      0.005     0.015      0.623


Note: Tables A17a and A17b display the regression results for linear probability models. The dependent
variable in Table A17a is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the adviser was formally disciplined for
misconduct in year   t.   The key independent variable of interest is Prior Misconduct which indicates whether
or not the adviser has been disciplined previously for misconduct. The dependent variable in Table A17b is
a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser left his rm. The key independent variable
of interest is Misconduct which indicates whether or not an adviser received a misconduct disclosure in the
previous year. We also control for the adviser's self-reported AUM and the revenue (production) generated
by the adviser as of 2016 which is available from Meridian IQ. Meridian IQ also generates a proprietary
measure of adviser quality.     The control variable High Quality Rating indicates a high rating as of 2016.
Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63, 24 and investment adviser
exam), and number of other qualications.        Observations in Tables A17a and A17b are nancial advisers
by year over the period 2005-2015. Coecients are in terms of percentage points. Standard errors are in
parenthesis and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                         75
Figure A1: BrokerCheck Examples


(a) BrokerCheck Example




(b) BrokerCheck Example




                 76
                                    Figure A1: BrokerCheck Examples


                                     (c) BrokerCheck Example




Figure A1 panels (a)-(c) display three real-world examples of BrokerCheck reports. The name/identication
details in panel (a) have been intentionally omitted by the authors of this paper.




                                                     77
                         Figure A2: Distribution of Financial Advisers in the US




Note: Figure A2 displays the geographic distribution of advisers in terms of advisers per county in the US
as of May 2015.




                                                   78
