NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAMILIES IN MACROECONOMICS
Matthias Doepke
Michèle Tertilt
Working Paper 22068
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22068

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

Manuscript in preparation for Handbook of Macroeconomics. We thank Stefania Albanesi,
Raquel Fernández, Moshe Hazan, Claudia Olivetti, Víctor Ríos-Rull, John Taylor, Harald Uhlig,
and Alessandra Voena for comments that helped to greatly improve the manuscript. Titan Alon,
Florian Exler, and Xue Zhang provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from the
National Science Foundation (grant SES-1260961) and the European Research Council (grant
SH1- 313719) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Matthias Doepke and Michèle Tertilt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Families in Macroeconomics
Matthias Doepke and Michèle Tertilt
NBER Working Paper No. 22068
March 2016
JEL No. E2,E3,J10,J20,O40
ABSTRACT
Much of macroeconomics is concerned with the allocation of physical capital, human capital, and
labor over time and across people. The decisions on savings, education, and labor supply that
generate these variables are made within families. Yet the family (and decision-making in
families) is typically ignored in macroeconomic models. In this chapter, we argue that family
economics should be an integral part of macroeconomics, and that accounting for the family leads
to new answers to classic macro questions. Our discussion is organized around three themes. We
start by focusing on short and medium run fluctuations, and argue that changes in family structure
in recent decades have important repercussions for the determination of aggregate labor supply
and savings. Next, we turn to economic growth, and describe how accounting for families is
central for understanding differences between rich and poor countries and for the determinants of
long-run development. We conclude with an analysis of the role of the family as a driver of
political and institutional change.

Matthias Doepke
Northwestern University
Department of Economics
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
doepke@northwestern.edu
Michèle Tertilt
Department of Economics
University of Mannheim
L7, 3-5
68131 Mannheim
Germany
tertilt@uni-mannheim.de

1 Introduction
First impressions suggest that family economics and macroeconomics should be the
two fields within economics at the greatest distance from each other: one looks at
interactions between at most a handful of members of the same family, whereas the
other considers the aggregated behavior of the millions of actors in an economy as a
whole. Despite this contrast between the small and the large, we argue in this chapter that family economics and macroeconomics are in fact intimately related, and
that much can be learned from making the role of the family in the macroeconomy
more explicit.1
There are two different ways in which family economics and macroeconomics intersect. One side of the coin is to focus on questions that originate in family economics,
but use the methodology of dynamic macroeconomics to answer the questions. For
example, macroeconomic models can be adapted to answer questions about how
fertility rates, marriage rates, divorce rates, or the assortativeness of mating are determined and how they evolve over time. There is an active and exciting literature
that takes this approach, but it is not the focus of this chapter.2 Rather, our interest here is in the reverse possibility, namely that incorporating family economics
into macroeconomics leads to new answers for classic macroeconomic questions.
These questions concern, for example, the determination of the level and volatility
of employment, the factors shaping the national savings rate, the sources of macroeconomic inequality, and the origins of economic growth.
We choose this path because, so far, it has been less traveled, yet we believe that it
holds great promise. This belief is founded on the observation that many of the key
decision margins in macroeconomic models, such as labor supply, consumption and
saving, human capital investments, and fertility decisions, are made in large part
within the family. The details of families then matter for how decisions are made; for
example, the organization of families (e.g., prevalence of nuclear versus extended
1

The basic point that family economics matters for macroeconomics was made by Gary Becker in
his AEA Presidential Address (Becker 1988). At the time, Becker placed a challenge that inspired a
sizeable amount of follow-up research. However, much of the early work at the intersection family
economics and macroeconomics was focused on economic growth, whereas we argue in this chapter
that family economics is equally relevant for other parts of macroeconomics.
2
See Greenwood, Guner, and Vandenbroucke (2016) for an excellent recent survey of that kind of
family economics.

1

families or monogamous versus polygynous marriage) changes the incentives to
supply labor, affects motives for saving and acquiring education, and determines
possibilities for risk sharing. Yet typical macroeconomic models ignore the family,
and instead build on representative agent modeling that abstracts from the presence
of multiple family members, who may have conflicting interests, who might make
separate decisions, and who may split up and form new households.
One might argue that subsuming all family details into one representative household decision-maker constitutes a useful abstraction. This would perhaps be the
case if the structure and behavior of families was a given constant. However, the
structure of the family has changed dramatically over time, and is likely to continue
to do so in the future. Large changes have occurred in the size and composition
of households. Fertility rates have declined, divorce risk has increased (and then
decreased), the fraction of single households has grown steadily, and women have
entered the labor force in large numbers. Given these trends, the nature of family
interactions has changed dramatically over time, and so have the implications of
family economics for macroeconomics.
There is a small, but growing, literature that opens the family black box within
macro models. The goal of this chapter is to survey this literature, to summarize the
main results, and to point to open questions and fruitful avenues for future research.
We also aim to introduce macroeconomists to the tools of family economics.
There are multiple ways in which families can be incorporated into macroeconomics.
The first generation of macroeconomists who took the family more seriously added
home production to business cycle models (e.g., Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright
1991 and Greenwood and Hercowitz 1991). The insight was that home production
cannot be ignored if the cyclicality of investment and labor supply are to be understood. A large part of investment happens within the household in the form of
consumer durables, and a large part of time is spent on home production, and both
vary over the cycle. The interaction of market time and business investment with
these variables that are decided within the family is therefore important for understanding business cycles. In the home production literature, the family is a place of
production, but decisionmaking is still modeled in the then-standard way using a
representative household with a single utility function.
In this chapter, we take the notion of families a step further. We emphasize that
2

families consist of multiple members and that the interaction between these multiple members is important. We look both at horizontal interactions in the family,
i.e., between husband and a wife, and vertical interactions, i.e., between parents
and children. Family members may have different interests, resources, and abilities. How potential conflicts of interests within the family are resolved has repercussions for what families do, including macro-relevant decisions on variables such
as savings, education, fertility, and labor supply.
This chapter has three parts. We first consider how the family matters for short- and
medium-run fluctuations. Second, we turn to economic growth. Third, we consider
the role of families for understanding political and institutional change.
Our discussion of short- and medium-run fluctuations uses the U.S. economy as an
example to demonstrate how changes in family structure feed back into macroeconomics. We start by documenting how U.S. families have changed in recent
decades, including a decline in fertility rates, a large increase in the labor force participation especially of married women, and changes to marriage and divorce. We
then analyze how these changes affect the evolution of aggregate labor supply over
the business cycle and the determination of the savings rate. With regards to labor
supply, we emphasize that couples can provide each other with insurance for labor market risk. For example, a worker may decide to increase labor supply if the
worker’s spouse become unemployed, and couples may make career and occupation choices that minimize the overall labor market risk for the family. The extent
to which such insurance channels operate depends on family structure (e.g., the
fraction of single and married households and divorce rates) and on the relative education levels and labor force participation rates of women and men. We argue that
recent changes to family structure have likely changed the volatility of aggregate
labor supply and contributed to the “Great Moderation” in economic fluctuations
observed between the 1980s and the Great Recession. We also discuss research that
suggests that changes in female labor force participation are the main reason behind
the recent phenomenon of jobless recoveries. Regarding savings rates, we emphasize how changes to divorce risk affects couples’ incentives to save. We conclude
this part of the chapter by discussing alternative models of the family and their
use within macroeconomics. We argue that there is a need for more detailed dynamic modeling of family decision making, an area where methods widely used in
3

macroeconomics may be fruitfully applied to family economics.
The second part of the chapter focuses on the long run, i.e., economic growth. Here
education, human capital accumulation, and fertility are the key choices of interest.
We start by documenting sharp correlations between measures of family structure
and measures of economic development in cross-country data. In a series of simple
growth models, we then show how different family dimensions affect the growth
rate. The first dimension is the interaction between parents and children, noting
that, typically, parents make education decisions for their children. We then add
fertility choice and discuss government imposed fertility restrictions such as the
one-child policy in China. Next we move from one-gender to two-gender models
by first adding a second person in decision-making and then adding a distinction
between the two in technology. We use the framework to discuss the implications
of the widely observed son preference for economic growth. We conclude the section with a discussion on the importance of non-western family structures (such as
polygyny) and endogenous marriage.
The third part examines the role of the family in the context of political economy. We
argue that the family is an important driver of political and institutional change in
the course of development. Throughout the development process, all of today’s rich
countries (except a few countries whose wealth is built on oil) went through a similar series of reforms. Democracy was introduced, public education was initiated,
child labor laws were implemented, the legal position of women was improved,
and welfare and social security systems were established. Two important questions
are why these reforms were implemented at a particular stage of development, and
why many poorer countries failed to introduce similar reforms. We emphasize that
most of these reforms concern the nature of the family. Public schooling moved the
responsibility of education from the family to the public sphere, and public pension
did the same for old age support. Child labor laws put constraints on the power
parents have over their children. The introduction of women’s rights changed the
nature of the interaction between husband and wife. We discuss mechanisms linking the family and political change and the possibility of a two-way feedback between economic development and political reform. We then focus on the political
economy of two specific reforms, namely the expansion of women’s economic rights

4

and the introduction of child labor laws.3
Throughout this chapter, we point out promising directions for future research. In
line with the overall theme of the chapter, most of these research directions concern
using family economics to generate new answers for questions that originate from
macroeconomics. However, we also see a lot of potential for intellectual arbitrage in
the opposite direction, namely using tools that are widely used in macroeconomics
to build improved models of the family. In particular, a striking difference between
the fields is that almost all macroeconomic models are dynamic, whereas in family economics static modeling is still common. In reality, dynamic considerations
should be just as important in family economics as in macroeconomics. For example, if a woman decides to stay at home with her children, she will usually be
aware that her absence from the labor market decreases her outside option. Similarly, when a woman and a man decide on whether to have a child, how the child
will affect their future interactions will be an important consideration. There is a
small literature that documents the importance of dynamics for the family. In particular, Mazzocco (2008) shows empirically that Euler equations hold at the individual but not the household level, and Mazzocco (2007) and Lise and Yamada (2015)
provide evidence suggesting that bargaining power within the household evolves
over time. To capture such phenomena and to better understand the link between
family decisions and aggregate outcomes, more dynamic family bargaining models are needed. Tools that are widely used in macroeconomics, such as dynamic
contracting under limited commitment and private information constraints, should
prove useful for building such models.
In the following section, we start our analysis by considering the implications of
the family for macroeconomic outcomes in the short and the medium run. In Section 3, we investigate the role of the family for economic growth, and Section 4 puts
the spotlight on the family as a driver of political change. Section 5 concludes by
discussing yet other dimensions in which the family matters for macroeconomics
and by providing thoughts on promising directions for future research. Proofs for
propositions are contained in the appendix.
3
The political economy of women’s rights is addressed in more detail by Doepke, Tertilt, and
Voena (2012).

5

2 The Family and the Macroeconomy in the Short and
Medium Run
Ever since micro-founded modeling became dominant in the 1970s and 1980s, explicit models of household decision making have been a standard ingredient in
macroeconomic models. Depending on the application, the household may face
a variety of decisions, such as choosing labor supply, accumulating assets, or investing in human capital. However, within macroeconomics comparatively few
attempts have been made to explicitly model families. By modeling families, we
mean to account for the fact that households may contain multiple members, who
may have different interests, who may make separate decisions, and who may split
up in divorce or join others and form new households.
In the following sections, we argue that modeling families can make a big difference
in understanding aggregate household behavior in the short and the medium run.
We focus on the most basic role of the household sector in macroeconomic models,
namely to provide a theory of labor supply and savings.

2.1 The Point of Departure: Representative Households
Traditional macroeconomic models used for business cycle and monetary analysis
are populated by an infinitely lived, representative household, who derives utility
from consumption and leisure and derives income from supplying labor and accumulating savings. A prototype household problem looks like this (e.g., Cooley and
Prescott 1995):
{∞
}
∑
max E
β t U (ct , lt )
(1)
{ct ,lt }

t=0

subject to:
ct + at+1 = wt lt + (1 + rt )at ,
at+1 ≥ −B,
a0 = 0,
0 ≤ lt ≤ T.
6

Here ct is consumption, lt is labor supply, wt and rt are the wage and the interest rate
(taken as given by the household), β is a discount factor that satisfies 0 < β < 1, and
B > 0 defines a slack borrowing constraint that rules out running a Ponzi scheme.
The first-order conditions for the household’s maximization problem are:
−

Ul (ct , lt )
= wt ,
Uc (ct , lt )

(2)

Uc (ct , lt ) = βE {(1 + rt+1 )Uc (ct+1 , lt+1 )} .

(3)

Here (2) is the requirement that the marginal rate of substitution between labor and
leisure is equal to the wage, and (3) is the intertemporal Euler equation for consumption. Condition (2) pins down average labor supply and the elasticity of labor
supply as a function of the relative wage and overall wealth, and (3) determines
savings as a function of wealth, interest rates, and expectations over future leisure
and consumption.
A representative household based on a problem similar to (1) underlies most of the
macroeconomic modeling in the real business cycle literature, the monetary DSGE
literature, and many other subfields of macroeconomics. A theory of labor supply
and savings that is build on a representative household has a number of limitations,
including the obvious one that such a theory has nothing to say about questions that
involve heterogeneity and inequality across households. Of course, there is nothing
wrong with simplifying assumptions in principle; after all, models are intended to
be simplified representations of reality. The limitations of the representative household become a bigger concern, however, when some of the driving forces the model
abstracts from are subject to changes over time that substantially alter macroeconomic behavior.
There is already a sizeable literature that extends the representative-household framework in other key dimensions, in particular by accounting for heterogeneity in age
(i.e., allowing for the life cycle) and heterogeneity in wealth and income.4 This literature has characterized some of the macroeconomic changes brought about by the
changing economic environment in recent decades, such as the large rise in income
inequality and returns to education since the 1970s, and the population aging in in4

Much of this literature is surveyed by Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2009) and in the
chapter by Krueger, Mitman and Perri in this volume.

7

dustrial societies that resulted from rising life expectancy and low fertility. There is
much less work on the dimension that this chapter focuses on, namely allowing for
the fact that many households have multiple members, i.e., accounting for families.
In the following sections, we argue that accounting for families is just as important
as the existing extensions of the representative-agent framework. The main reason
for this is that families have changed substantially in recent decades; for example,
there have been large changes to rates of marriage and divorce, to female labor force
participation, and to fertility rates. We start by outlining the main facts of changing
families in the United States (to the extent that they are relevant from a macroeconomic perspective), and we then outline channels for how these changes are relevant for determining aggregate labor supply and savings. We note that while there
is a lot of existing work documenting and explaining the family trends, there are
few papers that focus specifically on the implications of these changes for macroeconomics. In our view, this presents a high-return area for future research, with a
lot of low-hanging fruit.

2.2 The Facts: Changing Families in the United States
Throughout the twentieth century, the major industrialized countries underwent
large changes in the composition and behavior of families. We illustrate this transformation with statistics from the U.S. economy as an example. In the following
sections, we explain the relevance of these trends for macroeconomics.
The first transformation concerns changes in fertility over time. Figure 1 displays
the number of children ever born to U.S. women by birth cohort (i.e., the horizontal
axis is the year in which a mother is born; the corresponding births mostly take
place 20–40 years later). As in all industrialized countries, the main trend associated
with long-run development is declining fertility. In the case of the United States,
fertility fell almost threefold from the cohorts born in the mid-nineteenth century
to those born in the late twentieth century. The trend was not uniform, however.
In the middle of the twentieth century there was a phase of rising fertility: the U.S.
baby boom. In the course of the baby boom, fertility rose from about 2 to about
3 children per woman, and then sharply reversed course to fall back towards 2
again. These changes have led to large variations in cohort sizes, which will affect
8

NumberȱofȱChildren

6
5
4
3
2
1
1820

1840

1860

1880 1900 1920
BirthȱCohort

1940

1960

Figure 1: Children Ever Born by Cohort, United States (i.e., average number of children for women born in a given year. Source: Jones and Tertilt 2008, Table 1A)
the macroeconomy for decades to come now that the baby boom cohorts (i.e., the
babies, not the mothers) are reaching retirement age.
Figure 2 displays a closely related change: a secular decline in the average size of
households. Fertility decline is a main driver of this change, i.e., the decline in fertility resulted in fewer children per household and thus a lower household size.
However, there are additional factors, because the number of adults per household
also declined over time. This is in part due to fewer adults within families, i.e., a
smaller fraction of families includes multiple generations of adults, and more families are headed by a single adult. In addition, fewer households include adults who
are not related to each other.
Figure 3 shows that there is not just a decline in the size of households but also
a dramatic change in the composition of household types. As recently as 1950,
most households (about 80 percent) included at least one married couple. Now,
married-couple households are no longer the majority. Figure 4 breaks down the
non-married households into further sub-categories, with increases in every subcategory. The figures for single women and single men rise most, indicating primarily lower marriage rates, a higher age at first marriage, and a higher divorce rate.
Single mother and single father households have also increased since the 1970s. Fig9

7
NumberȱofȱPeople

6
Household

5
Family

4
3

Adults

2

Children

1
0
1850

1875

1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

Figure 2: Household Size over Time, United States (Source: Salcedo et al. 2012,
Figure 1)

0.9
FractionȱofȱHouseholds

0.8

married

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

not married

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 3: Proportion of Households Including a Married Couple Versus All Other
Households over Time, United States (Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Historical Time
Series, Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social and Economic Supplements, 2015 and earlier)

10

FractionȱofȱHouseholds

0.2
Single Women
0.15
SingleȱMothers

0.1
Single Men
0.05

Single Fathers
0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 4: Non-married Households by Type over Time, United States (Source: U.S.
Census Bureau, Historical Time Series, Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social and Economic Supplements, 2015 and earlier)
ure 5 looks specifically at the role of marriage and divorce. The figure shows that
the decline in the fraction of married women is due in almost equal parts to a rise
in the number of never married women and a rise in the number of divorced women. Figure 6 shows the divorce rate (defined as the number of divorces per 1,000
women). Apart from the spike after World War II, the divorce rate was roughly constant from 1940 until the late 1960s and then increased sharply over the course of a
decade. It has been relatively constant since the early 1980s, albeit at a much higher
level.
Another key trend linking family economics and macroeconomics is the rise in female labor force participation in the post-war era. From the beginning of the twentieth century until the 1950s, for married households the single male breadwinner
model was the norm. Since then, female labor force participation has risen steadily
over a number of decades. As Figure 7 shows, overall female participation rose
from about 30 to more than 60 percent of the adult population between 1950 and
1990. In the late 1990s, female participation flattened out and declined a little in the
current century. Female participation still falls short of male participation, but by
a small margin compared to the 1950s. As we will see later (Figure 13), the rise in
11

PercentȱofȱWomenȱ15+

80
70

married,ȱspouseȱpresent

60
50
40
30

neverȱmarried

20
10

divorced, separated

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Divorcesȱperȱ1,000ȱWomenȱ15+

Figure 5: Breakdown of Marital Status of Women Age 15+ over Time, United States
(Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Families and Living Arrangements, Current Population Reports)

25
20
15
10
5
0
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Figure 6: Divorce Rate over Time, United States (Source: U.S. Vital Statistics, Clarke
1995)

12

100
Male

90
80

Percent

70
All

60
50
40

Female

30
20
10
0
1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Figure 7: Labor Force Participation by Gender over Time, all persons 16-64 years
old, United States (Source: OECD LFS Sex and Age Indicators and U.S. Department
of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, “Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970,” Bicentennial Edition, Part 1, 1975, Tables A119–134 and D29–41)
female participation is predominantly due to married women. There is also a compositional effect due to the increase in the share of single women coupled with the
fact that single women are more likely to work than married women are.
A trend closely related to the rise in female labor market participation is a decline
in time spent on home production by women. Figures 8 and 9 display the average
hours men and women spent per week on market work versus non-market work,
i.e., home production (activities such as child care, cleaning, and preparing food).
For men, there is a small decline in market work and an equally small corresponding
rise in non-market work. For women, in contrast, since 1965 there has been a major
transformation in time use: time spent on non-market work has dropped sharply
while market work has risen, and now exceeds non-market time use.
Another closely related fact is the change in relative wages of men and women.
Over the course of the twentieth century, women have been catching up dramatically in terms of pay. Figure 10 displays women’s median earnings relative to men’s
earnings. In both cases only full-time, year-round workers are considered. As the
figure shows, at the beginning of the twentieth century, women earned less than
13

45

HoursȱperȱWeek

40
35

CoreȱMarketȱWork

30
25
20
Non MarketȱWork

15
10
5
0
1965

1975

1985

1993

2003

Figure 8: Men’s Weekly Market Versus Non-Market (i.e., Home) Work Hours over
Time, United States (Source: Aguiar and Hurst 2007, Table II)

45

HoursȱperȱWeek

40
Non MarketȱWork

35
30
25
20

CoreȱMarketȱWork

15
10
5
0
1965

1975

1985

1993

2003

Figure 9: Women’s Weekly Market Versus Non-Market (i.e., Home) Work Hours
over Time, United States (Source: Aguiar and Hurst 2007, Table II)

14

WomenȇsȱRelativeȱWage

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Figure 10: Gender Wage Gap: Median Earnings of Full-Time, Year-Round, Female
Workers 15 years and older, Relative to Men, United States (Source: U.S. Census
Bureau, Historical Income Tables. Numbers for 1890 and 1930 are from Goldin 1990,
Table 3.2)
half of what men earned. The ratio increased steadily and had reached 65 percent by
1955. There was a drop in the late 1960s and 1970s, but from the 1970s onwards, the
ratio continuously increased again. Today, female relative earnings have reached an
all-time high of 80 percent.
While our focus here is on changes over time in the United States, an interesting
pattern in cross-country data is that there is a positive correlation between the fertility rate and the female labor-force participation rate across industrialized countries
(Figure 11). That is, the OECD countries with the highest fertility rates (the United
States, France, and the Scandinavian countries) all have relatively high female labor
force participation rates, whereas in low fertility countries (such as Italy and Spain)
fewer women work in the labor market. The pattern is important because it goes
against the relationship between these variables in time-series data: within most
countries, the trend through the last 100 years or so has been towards lower fertility and higher female participation. Working in the market and caring for children
are alternative uses of women’s time. If a single force (say, a rise in relative female
wages) was responsible for changes to both labor force participation and fertility,
we would expect these variables to always move in opposite directions. The observation in Figure 11 that, across countries, these variables are positively correlated
15

FemaleȱParticipationȱRate,ȱ2010ȱinȱ%
80
70
60
50
40
1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

TotalȱFertilityȱRate,ȱ2010
Figure 11: Fertility Versus Female Labor Force Participation Across European OECD
Countries (Sources: OECD LFS Sex and Age Indicators and World Development
Indicators)
suggests that such a one-dimensional explanation is at odds with the data, and is
informative for which kind of theories can explain the family trends described here.

2.3 Explaining the Facts
There is a large literature (spanning family economics, labor economics, development economics, and macroeconomics) that provides explanations for the transformation of the family described above. We keep our discussion of this literature brief,
since the goal of this chapter is not explaining these family facts but rather studying
their importance for macroeconomic analysis. For a comprehensive survey of the
literature on the drivers of changes in the family we refer the reader to Greenwood,
Guner, and Vandenbroucke (2016).
The best-known explanations for the historical fertility decline are based on the
quantity-quality tradeoff together with the idea that returns to education were increasing over time due to technological progress (see also Section 3.3). The more
recent fertility decline that followed the baby boom is often connected to the increasing value of female time. The baby boom itself still presents a bit of a puzzle.
16

The conventional wisdom of women catching up on their fertility after the war is
clearly not the main driver, as it was young women (not of child-bearing age during
the war) who had most children during the baby boom, as Figure 1 shows. Doepke,
Hazan, and Maoz (2015) suggest that the increase in labor force participation during the war was a major driver for the baby boom. The war generation of women
accumulated valuable labor market experience, and after the war these women provided strong competition in the labor market for younger women who lacked that
experience. Doepke, Hazan, and Maoz argue that many of these younger women
were crowded out of the labor force and decided to start having children earlier
instead.5 Other papers provide a complementary explanation by attributing part of
the baby boom to a decline in the cost of child-bearing, for example due to medical
progress that made child-birth less risky to mothers (Albanesi and Olivetti 2014)
or improvements in household technology that lowered the time cost of children
(Greenwood, Seshadri, and Vandenbroucke 2005).6
The causes for the secular increase in female participation have also been widely
explored. Some of the explanations focus on the alternative uses of female time
and argue that the time required for home production (such as child care, preparing
food, or cleaning the home) fell, freeing up time for work. Greenwood, Seshadri,
and Yorukoglu (2005) attribute the reduction in time required for home production
to technological progress, and in particular the introduction of time saving appliances. Even if technology had stayed as it was, home production time would have
fallen because of the large reduction in the average fertility rate from the baby boom
period of the 1950s to the present. As Figures 8 and 9 show, time use data indeed
display a large reduction in non-market work (i.e., home production) for women
that closely mirrors the rise in market work. We also observe a small rise in home
production for men, suggesting that some of the reduction in female home production arises from substitution within the household. However, the rise in male
home production is quantitatively small compared to the decline in female home
production. A related theory put forth by Albanesi and Olivetti (2016) is based on
technological advances in health. Innovations such as infant formula made it much
5
See also Goldin (1990) and Goldin and Olivetti (2013) for other perspectives on the long-run
impact of World War II on the female labor market.
6
Yet another possibility is a link between economic and demographic cycles; Jones and
Schoonbroodt (2015) provide a model in which the baby boom arises due to the recovery from the
Great Depression in terms of both income and fertility.

17

easier to reconcile work and motherhood and thus were an important contributor
to the contemporaneous increase in fertility and female participation between 1930
and 1960.
Another factor contributing to the rise in female participation in the labor market
is the decline in the gender wage gap between men and women, as shown in Figure 10. While some of the overall rise in relative female pay is due to endogenous
decisions such as education and the accumulation of work experience, other factors
such as the disappearance of marriage bars can be regarded as exogenous driving
forces.7 The gender gap may also have narrowed because of technological change
in the market sector that made male and female work more similar. If men have the
comparative advantage in brawn and women in brain, then as knowledge becomes
more important, female relative wages go up.8 The role of the declining gender
gap in explaining the rise in participation is emphasized by Jones, Manuelli, and
McGrattan (2015), who also allow for technological improvements in home production, but find them not to be quantitatively important. Attanasio, Low, and
Sánchez-Marcos (2008) study the life-cycle labor supply of three cohorts of American women, born in the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s. Their model allows for a number
of potential determinants of labor supply, including changes in the gender wage
gap, the number and cost of children, and changes in the returns to labor market
experience. They find that for the cohorts considered, both a reduction in the costs
of children and a decrease in the gender wage gap need to be allowed for to explain
the rise in participation. More recent contributions connect the decline in the gender wage gap explicitly with the rise of the service sector (Rendall 2010, Ngai and
Petrongolo 2014).
Another channel that can affect relative male and female labor supply is endogenous bargaining within the household. In explicit household bargaining models
(see Section 2.5 below), the outside options of the spouses are usually important
determinants of bargaining power. Improved labor market opportunities for women (through whichever channel they occur) improve women’s outside options and
7
Eckstein and Lifshitz (2011) decompose the effect of rising education and the decline in the gender gap conditional on education, and find that rising female education accounts for a larger fraction
of the increase in female participation.
8
This idea was first formally modeled by Galor and Weil (1996). See Albanesi and Olivetti (2009)
for an alternative theory of how a gender wage gap can arise from private information on work effort
and specialization within the household.

18

thus should improve women’s bargaining power in marriage. Using a quantitative
model, Knowles (2013) argues that an endogenous increase in female bargaining
power is important in explaining the rise in female labor supply over the 1970-2000
period without implying a (counterfactual) large decline in male labor supply. Eckstein and Lifshitz (2015) estimate a labor supply model in which couples differ in
how bargaining takes place (e.g., cooperative versus non-cooperative bargaining),
and find that bargaining has a large impact on female, but not male labor supply.
The link between fertility and employment decisions is likely to have become more
important throughout the last few decades. Before the 1960s, in industrialized countries most mothers were not in the labor force, so that for many the employment
margin was not operative as far as decisions on additional births was concerned.
Today, in the United States and other industrialized countries most mothers are in
the labor force. Hence, having children interacts with employment more directly,
through margins such as deciding to work full or part time or the choice between
career paths that differ in flexibility for dealing with child care needs. Recently,
Adda, Dustmann, and Stevens (2016) have provided a detailed study of the costs
of children in terms of mother’s careers based on a detailed life cycle model of female employment and fertility matched to German data. They show that the career costs of having children are substantial and that realized and expected fertility
can account for a large fraction of the gender wage gap.9 Based on the same data,
Bick (2015) provides a quantitative analysis of the importance of the availability of
market-based child care for fertility and female labor supply.
As discussed in Section 2.2, if a single force was responsible for both the upward
trend in female labor force participation and the downward trend in fertility, we
would expect these variables to always move in opposite directions. However, if
we look at the cross section of industrialized countries, a positive correlation between female labor force participation and fertility emerges (see Figure 11).10 A
number of recent studies have developed theories that are consistent with this pat9

See also Miller (2011) who estimates the career costs of children, using U.S. data on biological
fertility shocks as instruments. Guvenen, Kaplan, and Song (2014) provide a recent analysis of the
gender pay gap at the very top of the income distribution. They argue that a large part of the underrepresentation of women among top earners is due to the “paper floor,” i.e., a higher likelihood of
women dropping out of the top pay percentiles, part of which may be due to fertility decisions.
10
A similar phenomenon has emerged recently in cross-sectional data in the U.S. Hazan and Zoabi
(2015a) document a U-shaped relationship between female education and fertility.

19

tern. The general intuition for these results is that many women now want to have
both children and careers. In places where policies (or cultural expectations) are
such that mothers can easily combine having children and careers, fertility and female labor force participation will both be high. In contrast, if there are obstacles
to combing motherhood with working, many women will choose one or the other,
and both fertility and participation will be lower. One of the first papers to formalize this intuition is Da Rocha and Fuster (2006), who focus on differences in labor market frictions across countries. Using a quantitative model, they find that in
countries where unemployment risk is high, women both work less and are more
likely to postpone births. Similarly, Erosa, Fuster, and Restuccia (2010) find that
more generous parental leave policies can increase both fertility and female labor
force participation. Another source of variation can be cultural expectations for the
roles of mothers and fathers in raising children. Doepke and Kindermann (2015)
show that in European countries with exceptionally low fertility rates, women bear
a disproportionately large share of the burden of caring for children. In a model
of household bargaining over fertility decisions, they show that this leads to many
women being opposed to having (additional) children. Hence, once again fertility
will be lower, while at the same time many mothers are not able to work due to their
child care duties.
The causes behind the decline in marriage, rise in divorce, and increase in single
motherhood (as shown in Figures 3 to 6) are likely related to the increase in female
labor force participation. For a discussion of the causes behind these changes in
family structure see Greenwood, Guner, and Vandenbroucke (2016).

2.4 Changing Families and Aggregate Labor Supply
We now turn to the main focus of this section, namely how changes to the family
affect how labor supply and savings are determined in the aggregate. We start with
aggregate labor supply, where the role of changes in female labor market behavior
takes center stage.
A common thread through the studies of the rise in female participation is that the
female participation decision is qualitatively different than the male participation

20

decision. At least in part, this is due to a higher fixed cost of participation for women, who often bear the primary responsibility for child care. The different nature
of female labor supply suggests that today, aggregate labor supply is determined
in a qualitatively different fashion compared to a few decades ago. We now consider a deliberately simplified model to illustrate the main channels through which
the joint determination of female and male labor supply within a family affects the
macroeconomic properties of labor supply.

Joint Labor Supply in the Family
To focus on the extensive margin, we consider a setting where an individual can
either work full time or not at all.11 The utility function of an individual of gender
g ∈ {f, m} is given by:
Ug (cg , lg ) = log(cg ) − ηg lg ,
where lg ∈ {0, 1} is labor supply and cg is consumption.12 The relative weight of
leisure in utility ηg varies in the population. People can either live as singles or as
married (or cohabiting) couples. The budget constraint for a single individual is:
cg + ψlg = wg lg + yg ,
where wg is the wage for gender g, yg is unearned income (i.e., endowment or transfer income), and ψ represents the fixed cost of running a household conditional on
working. The implicit assumption is that a person who does not work can replace
the cost ψ through costless home production. We assume that ψ is a scalar that
satisfies 0 < ψ < min(wf , wm ). The model is static, but alternatively we can interpret the decision problem as representing the labor-supply decision of a long-lived
individual/household with exogenous saving in a given period, in which case yg
represents exogenous net saving/dissaving in the period.
For a married couple, the same fixed cost of running a household applies, but only
11
We focus on the extensive margin for tractability. However, similar forces will be effective at the
intensive margin as well.
12
Here we assume that consumption is a private good. Many family models assume consumption
in the family is a public good. We consider pure public goods in Section 3. In reality there are some
private and some public elements in household consumption; see Salcedo, Schoellmann, and Tertilt
(2012) for a detailed analysis of this point.

21

if both spouses are working.13 The joint budget constraint for a couple then is:
cf + cm + ψ min(lf , lm ) = wf lf + wm lm + y,

(4)

where y = yf + ym . In this setting, the decision problem for a single person is
straightforward. Comparing the utility conditional on working versus not working,
an individual chooses to work if the condition:
log(wg + yg − ψ) − ηg ≥ log(yg ),
is satisfied, or, equivalently, if the opportunity cost of working is sufficiently low:
(
ηg ≤ log

wg + yg − ψ
yg

)
.

For a married couple, we have to take a stand on how the inherent conflict of interest between the spouses given their different preferences is resolved. We assume
cooperative bargaining, i.e., the household solves a Pareto problem with welfare
weights λf and λm for the wife and the husband, with λf + λm = 1. The problem
solved by a married couple is then given by:
max {λf [log(cf ) − ηf lf ] + λm [log(cm ) − ηm lm ]}

(5)

subject to the budget constraint (4). The maximization problem can be solved by using first-order conditions to characterize the consumption allocation conditional on
a given pattern of labor supply, and then comparing utilities to determine optimal
labor supply. To simplify notation, we focus on the case where husbands always
work as long as wm > 0. If the wife does not work, household income is given by
wm + y and the consumption allocation is cf = λf (wm + y), cm = λm (wm + y). If the
wife also works, household income net of the participation cost is wf + wm + y − ψ,
and the consumption allocation is cf = λf (wf +wm +y−ψ), cm = λm (wf +wm +y−ψ).
Denote by V (lf , lm ) the value of the objective function of the household (5) given labor supply and the optimal conditional consumption allocation. The wife will work
13

See Cho and Rogerson (1988) for an early contribution on the implications of this type of fixed
cost of participation for the elasticity of labor supply.

22

if V (lf = 1, lm = 1) ≥ V (lf = 0, lm = 1), which can be written as:14
log(wf + wm + y − ψ) + λf log(λf ) + λm log(λm ) − λf ηf − λm ηm
≥ log(wm + y) + λf log(λf ) + λm log(λm ) − λm ηm .
Simplifying, women will work if and only if:
1
ηf ≤
log
λf

(

wf + wm + y − ψ
wm + y

)
.

Hence, women are more likely to work if the participation cost ψ or male wages wm
are low, and if female wages wf are high. A low bargaining power for women λf
also translates into higher participation, because households then place less value
on the wife’s leisure. Note that the assumption of full commitment is important
here. If the bargaining power of women is low, women pay the utility cost of working and consume little. Such a woman may prefer not to be a married at all. Later
we endogenize the bargaining weights to ensure that participation constraints hold.
We can now consider the implications of the simple model for the variability of
labor supply. Consider, first, the own-wage elasticity of labor supply. Consider
the case where the only dimension of heterogeneity in the population is in leisure
preference ηg , the distribution of which is described by the distribution function
F (ηg ) with continuous marginal density f (ηg ) = F ′ (ηg ). We assume that the density
satisfies the assumptions F (0) = 0, F ′ (ηg ) > 0 for ηg > 0, limηg →0 f (ηg ) = 0, and
limηg →∞ f (ηg ) = 0. That is, all individuals place at least some value on leisure and
the distribution thins out at each tail (one example is a log-normal distribution for
ηg ). For singles of gender g, the fraction working Ngs given wage wg is given by:
Ngs

))
( (
wg + yg − ψ
.
= F log
yg

14

For now we assume full commitment, i.e., people get married before disutilities from working
are realized, and they stay together even if being single would provide higher utility.

23

The aggregate wage elasticity of labor supply is then given by:
( (
))
wg +yg −ψ
′
F
log
yg
wg
wg
(
(
)) .
=
∂wg Ngs
wg + yg − ψ F log wg +yg −ψ
yg

∂Ngs

Note that this elasticity focuses on the extensive margin and hence is different from
what is typically measured in the micro data (e.g., Pistaferri (2003) measures only
the intensive margin elasticity).15
Consider now married couples. By assumption, we focus on the case where married
men always work if they are able to. The fraction of married women working is then
given by,
(
(
))
1
wf + wm + y − ψ
m
Nf = F
.
log
λf
wm + y
and the elasticity of their labor supply is:
F′

∂Nfm

(

1
λf

(
log

wf +wm +y−ψ
wm +y

))

wf
wf
(
(
)) .
=
m
∂wf Nf
λf (wf + wm + y − ψ) F 1 log wf +wm +y−ψ
λf
wm +y

The relative size of single and married women’s labor supply elasticity cannot be
unambiguously signed, because this depends on the shape of the distribution function F and the size of unearned income. However, married women’s labor supply
will be more elastic than the labor supply of single women if unearned income yf is
sufficiency small:
Proposition 1 (Labor Supply Elasticity of Single versus Married Women). If unearned income yf is sufficiently small, married women’s labor supply elasticity is higher
than that of unmarried women.
Intuitively, if unearned income is small, singles have to work if they want to consume, whereas a married woman can rely in part on her spouse’s income. This
result is in line with the empirical observation that married women’s labor supply
is much more elastic than that of married men or single women at the micro level
15

Recent contributions that explicitly consider the extensive margin include Chetty et al. (2011,
2012) and Attanasio et al. (2015).

24

(see for example the survey by Blundell and MaCurdy 1999). Of course, if the labor supply of married men were endogenized, they would also have more scope
for variability in supply compared to single men. In practice, as long as the gender
wage gap was sizeable and social expectations were that women do more child care
and home work, the assumption that men are the default earners was broadly realistic. But as gender roles have become more equalized over time, we can expect the
labor supply behavior of men and women to converge also.
Ultimately we would like to assess the implications of changes in the family for the
behavior of aggregate labor supply. The results so far may seem to suggest that
a higher proportion of married households should make aggregate labor supply
more variable. However, so far we have only considered the own wage elasticity of
female labor supply. Another important dimension of the family is the possibility of
insurance within the family. Specifically, if in a marriage the working husband experiences a negative shock such as a layoff, the wife may be able to offer insurance
by starting to work. Hence, in the aggregate, the variable labor supply of married
women may dampen fluctuations in total labor supply, by offsetting shocks experienced by men.16
To analyze the possibility of insurance within the family, consider an extension of
the environment with unemployment shocks. With probability u, a given individual
is unable to work, or equivalently, the potential wage is zero. The realization of the
shock is independent across spouses. We can now consider how aggregate labor
supply reacts to changes in u, where an increase in u can represent a recession.
As before, we start by considering singles. Their aggregate labor supply is:
Ngs

( (
))
wg + yg − ψ
= (1 − u)F log
.
yg

For singles, the elasticity of labor supply with respect to the probability of employment 1 − u is unity:
∂Ngs 1 − u
= 1.
∂(1 − u) Ngs
For married couples, labor supply is driven by two different thresholds for the
16
An early study of this insurance channel is provided by Attanasio, Low, and Sánchez-Marcos
(2005).

25

wife’s leisure preference, depending on whether the husband is working or not.
Denote these thresholds by:
(
)
1
wf + wm + y − ψ
η̂e =
log
,
λf
wm + y
)
(
1
wf + y
.
η̂u =
log
λf
y
The average labor supply per married couple is then:
N m = (1 − u) (1 + (1 − u)F (η̂e )) + u(1 − u)F (η̂u ) .
Here the first term corresponds to employed husbands, and the second term corresponds to unemployed husbands. Wives of unemployed husbands work with a
strictly higher probability than wives of employed husbands, because the cost ψ
does not have to be paid (a substitution effect) and overall income is lower (an income effect working in the same direction). The derivative of labor supply with
respect to 1 − u for the married couples is:
∂N m
= (1 + (1 − u)F (η̂e )) + (1 − u)F (η̂e ) + uF (η̂u ) − (1 − u)F (η̂u )
∂(1 − u)
∂N m
= (1 + 2(1 − u)F (η̂e )) − (1 − 2u)F (η̂u ) .
∂(1 − u)
The elasticity of married labor supply with respect to 1 − u is then:
∂N m 1 − u
1 + 2(1 − u)F (η̂e ) − (1 − 2u)F (η̂u )
=
.
m
∂(1 − u) N
1 + (1 − u)F (η̂e ) + uF (η̂u )
If it were the case that F (η̂u ) = F (η̂e ), the expression once again would yield an
elasticity of unity as for the singles. However, in fact we have η̂u > η̂e and hence
F (η̂u ) > F (η̂e ), so that the elasticity of labor supply by married couples is strictly
smaller than one. Intuitively, there is a fraction of women (given by F (η̂u ) − F (η̂e ))
who do not work if their husband is working, but choose to enter the labor force if
the husband is unemployed. Hence, there is insurance in the family that dampens
fluctuations in aggregate employment. Even though married female labor supply
is more elastic at the micro level, it contributes to a dampening of the volatility of

26

aggregate labor supply due to this intra-family insurance effect.17
In the data, married female employment rose massively in the second half of the
twentieth century (see Figure 7), and there were also large shifts in the composition
of household types (see Figures 3 and 4). The model suggests that these changes
should affect the volatility of aggregate labor supply. The following proposition
summarizes the main results.
Proposition 2 (Family Determinants of Volatility of Aggregate Labor Supply). Consider a population of measure one consisting of M married households (with two members
each) and 1 − 2M single households. We then have:
1. The elasticity of aggregate labor supply N with respect to 1−u (the fraction of workers
not affected by the unemployment shock) is equal to one if the fraction of married
people is M = 0 and decreases with M for M > 0.
2. For a fixed M > 0, the elasticity of aggregate labor supply N with respect to 1 − u is
strictly smaller than one, but approaches one when wf converges to zero or to infinity.
The first premise suggests that the large shifts in the composition of households in
the past few decades may have had a marked effect on the response of aggregate
labor supply to shocks. The second premise suggests that, in addition, the increase
in female labor supply should also affect the behavior of aggregate labor supply,
albeit in a non-monotone way. Regarding the married households, what is at stake
is the potential for insurance within the family. When conditions are such that women do not work even if their husbands are unemployed (captured here by the case
of a female wage close to zero), there is no potential for insurance, and hence the
labor supply of married households will be just as elastic as that of single households. Conversely, when conditions are such that all women work regardless of the
employment status of their husbands (captured by the case of the female wages approaching infinity), there is no potential for insurance either. Insurance does play
an important role when there is a sizeable group of women who do not work if
their husbands are employed, but are willing to enter the market when the husband
17
There is an active debate in the literature on how micro and macro estimates of labor supply
elasticities can be reconciled; see Chetty et al. (2011, 2012) and Keane and Rogerson (2012) for recent
contributions.

27

loses his job. Hence, the mechanism would predict the greatest role for insurance at
a time when the rise in female employment is well underway, but still not close to
being completed.
Figure 12 displays how the elasticity of total labor supply by married households
with respect to the unemployment shock depends on relative female wages in a
computed example.18 The male wage is normalized to one, and the source of variation is the relative female wage. The lower panel shows female labor supply as
a function of the relative female wage. Not surprisingly, at a zero female wage,
female labor supply is zero as well. However, even with very low wages some
women work, namely those whose husbands are unable to work and who have a
low leisure preference. The upper panel shows that this implies that the aggregate
elasticity is U-shaped in relative female wages. In light of the observed decline in
the gender wage gap and the increase in female labor force participation in U.S. data
(see Figures 7 and 10), the findings suggest that the aggregate labor supply elasticity
should have changed substantially in recent decades.

Endogenous Bargaining
The analysis of married couples’ decisions has been carried out so far under the
assumption of exogenous bargaining weights and full commitment. As mentioned
above, if female bargaining power is low and female wages are high, women are
likely to work and consume little, and hence such women may prefer not to be
married at all. Without full commitment, i.e., if women were allowed to leave such
a marriage, efficient bargaining subject to the limited commitment constraint would
dictate that bargaining weights adjust to ensure that married women get at least as
much utility as they would if they were single. Adjusting bargaining weights in this
way is possible as long as the surplus from marriage is positive, which is guaranteed
in our setting as long as ψ > 0 (married couples economize on the cost of running a
household).19
18
Parameter values: wm = 1, y = 0.1, ψ = 0.1, and λf = 0.5. The distribution of leisure preferences is log-normal with µ = 0.5 and σ = 1, and the elasticity of labor supply is evaluated at an
unemployment rate of u = 0.1.
19
Other reasons for a positive marital surplus include consumption being a public good (see Section 3) and a utility benefit from being married (see Section 2.5).

28

Lab. Supply Elasticity

1

0.5
0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Relative Female Wage

0.8

1

0.2

0.4
0.6
Relative Female Wage

0.8

1

Female LFP

0.5

0
0

Figure 12: Aggregate Labor Supply Elasticity and Female Labor Force Participation
(LFP) as a Function of Relative Female Wage in Labor Supply Model
Now consider how bargaining weights would adjust to changing wages wg in this
setting.20 The utility of a single female is the maximum value between working and
not working as a single:
Ufs = max{log(wf + yf − ψ) − ηf , log(yf )}.
Assume that wf is high enough (or yf low enough) so that as a single, she always
prefers to work. Comparing her utility as a single with that when married, she will
prefer to be single if:
λf
wf + yf >
(wm + ym ) + ψ.
1 − λf
This condition will hold, for example, when her wages are high or her bargaining
power is low. In such a case, the bargaining power in marriage should adjust to
20

The model is static of course so there is no adjustment over time. Rather, one should think of
bargaining weights differing across couples in an economy with heterogeneity in relative wages.
However, the basic logic would carry over to a dynamic model with limited commitment where
similar forces would lead to adjustments in the bargaining weights over time, see Mazzocco (2007)
and Voena (2015).

29

guarantee her at least her reservation (i.e., single) utility:
λf =

wf + yf − ψ
.
wm + ym + wf + yf − ψ

Of course, any λf higher than the expression above would also guarantee that her
participation constraint is satisfied.
We can use this logic to assess what would happen in a dynamic model with shocks
to wages and participation cost. Suppose the couple starts out with a large marital
surplus and bargaining weights such that neither participation constraint is binding. Suppose now that her wage increases unexpectedly such that, holding λf constant, her participation constraint would be violated. In response, her bargaining
weight will increase. Similarly, a fall in the participation cost ψ may also lead to a
tightening of the participation constraint and hence a shift in bargaining weights.21
Bargaining positions will also be affected by changes in unearned income such as
lottery winnings or an inheritance.
Now consider how such changes in bargaining weights affect the elasticity of labor supply. Qualitatively, the effects described in Propositions 1 and 2 rely on the
possibility of insurance within the family and do not depend on the assumption
of fixed bargaining weights. However, endogenous bargaining may well matter
for the quantitative size of the effects. Both Knowles (2013) and Voena (2015) examine this issue, although their analyses are concerned with longer-term changes
rather than with the business cycle. Nevertheless, the forces they identify should
also be active at the business cycle frequency. If a higher wage increases bargaining
power, it also increases the weight in the bargaining process on the leisure of the
spouse who is receiving the raise. This effect lowers the response of labor supply
to wage changes. Indeed, Knowles (2013) argues that the overall response of aggregate labor supply to the increase in female wages is dampened because of shifts in
bargaining power. Whether such shifts in bargaining power also dampen aggregate
labor volatility is less clear, as the opposite effect will apply to the other spouse. We
21

Since a decline in ψ affects both the male and female participation constraint, the direction of
the change will depend on the details and in particular the status quo bargaining weight. Suppose
her constraint is exactly binding before the shock lowering ψ is realized. Then, clearly, since he is
currently reaping the entire surplus, her weight will have to go up to ensure continued participation
in marriage by the female.

30

view this as a fruitful area for future research.

Linking Changes in the U.S. Labor Market to Family Labor Supply
We now relate the theoretical channels linking the family to variations in aggregate
labor supply outlined above to empirical evidence on fluctuations in employment
and output in the United States. We are interested in how the variability of aggregate labor supply varies between men and women and single and married individuals, and how these factors changed over time. Our analysis is based on annual data
from the Current Population Survey (CPS) for the years 1962–2014. We focus on average weekly hours worked per person for the population aged 25–65.22 Figure 13
shows how this measure of labor supply evolves over time by gender and marital
status. The sharp upward trend in married women’s labor supply from the 1960s to
the 1990s is apparent, as well as the comparatively larger drop in male labor supply
since the Great Recession of 2008.
To focus on fluctuations at the business cycle frequently, we compute the cyclical
component as the residual after subtracting a Hodrick-Prescott trend from the logarithm of each series (with a smoothing parameter of 6.25). The cyclical component
of labor supply by gender and marital status is displayed in Figure 14. It is immediately apparent that aggregate male labor supply is more volatile than aggregate
female labor supply. Single men experience the largest fluctuations in labor supply
over the cycle, whereas the smallest fluctuations are observed for married women.
The large differences in the volatility of female and male labor supply together with
the large increase in female labor supply suggest that family trends may have had
repercussions for the cyclical properties of aggregate labor supply over the observed
period. To examine this possibility more formally, Table 1 provides detailed information on fluctuations in aggregate labor supply in the United States in relation to
gender and marital status. In the table, the total volatility of a given series is the
percentage standard deviation of the cyclical component of average labor supply
per person in the group. Cyclical volatility is the percentage standard deviation of
the predicted value from a regression of the cyclical component of employment in
each group on the cyclical component of real GDP per capita (also computed using
22

The sample includes self-employed individuals.

31

40
mean hrswork
20
30
10
1960

1980

2000

2015

Survey year
Males unmarried
Males married

Females unmarried
Females married

Figure 13: Average Weekly Work Hours by Gender and Marital Status over Time,
United States (Source: Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social and
Economic Supplements, 1962 to 2014)
the HP filter). Cyclical volatility captures the component of employment volatility
that is related to aggregate economic fluctuations. The hours share and volatility
share break down the contribution of each component to aggregate hours and to
the cyclical volatility of aggregate labor supply.23
The first column displays the volatility of aggregate labor supply (women and men
combined), and the next two columns break down labor supply between women
and men. Over the entire sample, women’s labor supply is less volatile than men’s
labor supply. Moreover, for women cyclical volatility is a smaller fraction of total
volatility compared to men, i.e., less of the variation in female labor supply is related
to aggregate economic fluctuations. As a consequence, even though over the entire
sample women contribute close to 40 percent of total hours, they account for less
than 30 percent of volatility in aggregate labor supply.
23

The computation of cyclical volatility and hours and volatility shares follows the methodology
used by Jaimovich and Siu (2009) and Jaimovich, Pruitt, and Siu (2013) to characterize the contributions of the young and the old to aggregate fluctuations.

32

Table 1: Volatility of Hours Worked in the United States, by Gender and Marital
Status
All
Total

Women

Married
Men

Women

Single

Men

Women

Men

1962–2014
Total Volatility

1.25

1.04

1.46

1.04

1.25

1.33

2.33

Cyclical Volatility

0.99

0.72

1.18

0.67

1.01

0.74

1.68

Hours Share

38.09

61.91

23.90

47.71

14.19

14.20

Volatility Share

27.22

72.78

16.20

48.98

10.64

24.17

1962–1988
Total Volatility

1.35

1.19

1.48

1.26

1.36

1.37

2.44

Cyclical Volatility

1.08

0.87

1.19

0.87

1.09

0.79

1.65

Hours Share

33.71

66.29

21.99

55.29

11.72

11.00

Volatility Share

27.14

72.86

18.02

56.29

8.67

17.02

1989–2014
Total Volatility

1.15

0.87

1.47

0.79

1.16

1.30

2.25

Cyclical Volatility

0.91

0.51

1.23

0.38

0.95

0.70

1.82

Hours Share

42.64

57.36

25.89

39.83

16.75

17.53

Volatility Share

23.68

76.32

10.80

41.51

12.88

34.81

Notes: All data from Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social and Economic Supplements, 1962 to 2014. Total volatility is the percentage standard deviation of the Hodrick-Prescott
residual of average labor supply per person in each group. Cyclical volatility is the percentage deviation of the predicted value of a regression of the HP-residual on the HP-residual of GDP per capita.
Hours share is the share of each component in total hours. Volatility share is share of each group in
the cyclical volatility of total hours.

33

log_hrs cyclical component from hp filter
−.05
0
.05
1960

1980

2000

2015

Survey year
Males unmarried
Males married

Females unmarried
Females married

Figure 14: Cyclical Component of Average Weekly Work Hours by Gender and Marital Status over Time, United States (Cyclical component is deviation from HodrickPrescott trend, smoothing parameter 6.25. Source: Current Population Survey,
March and Annual Social and Economic Supplements, 1962 to 2014)
A key observation is that female labor supply is less variable than male labor supply in the aggregate, even though at the micro level women have a much higher
labor supply elasticity than men. These facts can be reconciled if some of the micro
variability in female labor supply is due to adjustments that move in the opposite direction of aggregate changes, such as women increasing labor supply in a recession.
We would expect such movements to be especially likely to arise among married
households, where the spouses can provide each other with some insurance. To
evaluate this possibility, in the further columns the fluctuations in labor supply are
further broken down into married versus single individuals. Consistent with a role
for insurance, we see that, for both women and men, fluctuations are much smaller
for the married than for the single individuals.
At first sight, the lower variability of married labor supply may appear to contradict
Proposition 1, which states that married women should have a higher wage elasticity of labor supply than single women. However, Table 1 captures macroeconomic
34

fluctuations rather than micro elasticities, and we would expect married women to
have lower aggregate volatility precisely if their higher micro elasticity arises from
a fraction of married women adjusting their labor supply countercyclically in response to changes in their husbands’ earnings.24
Some of the lower variability of female labor supply is related to the fact that a larger
share of women is employed in the service sector, which is less cyclical than the
manufacturing sector where men dominate. However, when we compare workers
employed in manufacturing and services, we find that within each sector women
experience a lower cyclical volatility than men. Moreover, the link to the sector
of employment does not contradict a role for insurance within the family, because
the choice of sector (and also occupation) is endogenous and may be made in part
precisely to offset risk encountered by a worker’s spouse.25
The theoretical mechanisms outlined in the previous section suggest that the aggregate elasticity of labor supply should respond to changes in female labor force
participation. To explore this possibility, the remainder of Table 1 compares fluctuations during the first half of our sample (1962–1988), when female labor supply
was rising quickly from an initially low level, to the period 1989–2014, when female labor supply had reached a higher plateau. The most important observation
here is that whereas the volatility of male labor supply is essentially unchanged, the
volatility of female labor supply has substantially decreased, and particularly so the
cyclical volatility. The breakdown by marital status shows that this change is driven
primarily by married women. Married women already have a low total volatility
of about 0.8 percent in the second half of the sample, and less than half of this total
24

A second factor driving the higher aggregate volatility of single labor supply (which is not captured in the model) is that singles tend to be younger than married people, and the young generally
have more variable labor supply for other reasons (such as a more important education margin, see
Jaimovich, Pruitt, and Siu 2013). We can control for the effect of age by considering narrower age
brackets. For example, among people aged 25–30, the total volatility of the labor supply of married
and single women is about the same.
25
The special role of the service sector in the rise of female employment is analyzed by Buera,
Kaboski, and Zhao (2013), Ngai and Petrongolo (2014), and Rendall (2015). Olivetti and Petrongolo
(2016) provide an empirical study of the role of industry structure for trends in female employment, working hours, and relative wages in a cross-section of developed economies, and argue that
the rise of the service sector accounts for at least half of the long-term variation in female hours. Albanesi and Şahin (2013) study the role of industry composition for male-female differences in cyclical
fluctuations in employment in the United States, and show that that industry composition was not
important for pre-1990 recessions, but mattered more once female participation flattened out in the
1990s.

35

volatility is accounted for by cyclical volatility. These numbers suggest, as predicted
by the simple theoretical model in the previous section, that the rise in female labor
force participation had a substantial dampening effect on the volatility of total labor
supply. In contrast, there are no substantial changes in the cyclical volatility of the
labor supply of singles, with a small decrease in volatility for single women and a
small increase for single men.
The overall result of the changes is that at the same time women increased their
share of total hours (from 34 to 43 percent), they accounted for a smaller share of
total volatility (24 percent in 1989–2014 compared to 27 percent in 1962–1988). As
a consequence, the total volatility and cyclical volatility of aggregate labor supply
fell substantially (see first column), even though the volatility of male labor supply
slightly increased over the period. Hence, the rise in female participation dampened
the volatility of aggregate labor supply over the cycle, in line with Proposition 2 and
the declining portion of the aggregate elasticity in Figure 12. Rising female participation may thus have been one of the driving forces of the “Great Moderation” in
U.S. aggregate fluctuations observed from the mid-1980s to the onset of the Great
Recession in 2007.26 Of course, the Great Recession appears to have brought the
Great Moderation to an end, and hence one may wonder whether this dampening effect is still operative. The data suggest that female labor supply continues to
partially offset aggregate fluctuations. A division of the sample into three periods
shows that the most recent era displays the lowest volatility of female labor supply,
with a cyclical volatility for married women of only 0.37 percent. The dampening role of married women’s labor supply was particularly pronounced during the
Great Recession itself. From 2007 to 2010, the average labor supply by married men
declined by more than 8 percent, whereas the decrease was less than 3 percent for
married women.
If the trend towards more gender equality continues, according to Proposition 2 the
volatility of female and male labor supply should ultimately become more similar
again (see also Figure 12). In part, as married women become even more strongly
26
See Galı́ and Gambetti (2009) for an overview of the discussion on the Great Moderation, and
Jaimovich and Siu (2009) for an explanation that focuses on changes in the age composition of the
labor force. Mennuni (2015) also considers the impact of demographic trends on the Great Moderation (although without considering the distinction of single and married individuals), and finds that
demographics (including the rise in female participation) account for about 20 percent of the Great
Moderation in the United States.

36

attached to the labor force (e.g., in the sense of more women being the main breadwinner for their family), their labor supply will become less elastic (this can already
be observed at the micro level, e.g., Heim 2007). Conversely, men will become more
able to rely on their wives’ incomes, which should make their labor supply more
elastic at the micro level but also less cyclical in the aggregate. Hence, family trends
will continue to play a role in shaping aggregate fluctuations.

Jobless Recoveries
A phenomenon that has received a lot of attention recently in business cycle research is the so-called “jobless recoveries.” This term refers to a recent change in
the employment response to recessions in the United States. Before the 1990s, most
post-war recessions were characterized by a strong rise in employment from the
trough of the recession. In contrast, since the 1990s the increase in employment
during the recovery has been anemic.
A variety of explanations have been proposed for the recent jobless recoveries, including structural change (Groshen and Potter 2003), an increase in “job polarization” (the disappearance of jobs in the middle of the skill distribution in recessions;
see Jaimovich and Siu 2014), and fixed costs of labor adjustment (Bachmann 2012).
However, in recent work, Albanesi (2014) makes a strong case for jobless recoveries at least in part being due to changes within families, and more specifically to
changes in female labor force participation. In a nutshell, Albanesi argues that employment differed in the aftermath of pre-1990 and post-1990 recessions because
the earlier recessions took place in the context of a strong secular upward trend
in female labor force participation, whereas the more recent ones did not. As Figure 7 shows, female labor force participation in the United States followed a sharp
upward trend, but participation leveled out after about 1990, and even declined
somewhat in the last 15 years.
Table 2 summarizes the employment response to recent recessions and breaks them
down by male versus female employment. Each entry in the table is a percentage
change in the employment to population ratio (E/P) in the four years following the
trough of the recession. The first column reproduces the basic fact of jobless recoveries. In the pre-1990 recessions, employment had fully recovered (and even increased
37

Table 2: Jobless Recoveries: Change in Employment/Population Ratio in Four Years
After Peak in Unemployment Rate, in Percentage Points, by Gender. Includes Three
Pre-1990 and Three Post-1990 Recessions.
Change in E/P
Period

Total

Men

Women

Pre-1990

0.65

-2.62

5.85

Post-1990

-2.78

-3.94

-1.41

Post-1990, excl. Great Recession

-1.35

-2.47

-0.07

Notes: Pre-1990 recessions include the 1969, 1973, and 1981 recessions. Post-1990 recessions include
the 1990, 2001, and 2007 recessions.

a little) four years after the downturn, whereas for the post-1990 recessions the E/P
ratio is on average close to 3 percent lower at that point of the recovery (1.35 percent
if the Great Recession is excluded). Hence, it appears that recoveries after 1990 are
qualitatively different from earlier recoveries. The next two columns break down
the overall employment change into changes in the E/P ratio for women and men.
The main message from these data is that, statistically, the jobless recoveries are due
to changes in the behavior of female but not male employment. For men, recoveries
have been “jobless” even before 1990, in the sense that the E/P ratio is down by 2.62
percent on average four years after the trough. The decline in E/P after 1990 is of a
similar order of magnitude, and in fact a little smaller when the Great Recession is
excluded. In contrast, we see a dramatic change for women. In the pre-1990 recessions, the female E/P ratio recovers strongly after each recession, with an average
increase of close to 6 percent after four years. In contrast, in the post-1990 downturns female employment declines and now follows a pattern similar to that of male
employment.
Table 2 suggests that, in a statistical sense, the change in the trend in female labor
supply is responsible for jobless recoveries. Specifically, for men recoveries have
always been jobless, whereas for women, before 1990 recession-related job losses
were quickly made up by the secular upward trend in female participation. Of
course, the empirical findings alone are not conclusive evidence in favor of such an
explanation. For example, it is conceivable that if in the pre-1990s recessions female
employment had risen more slowly, male employment would have suffered fewer

38

losses. To fully evaluate the role of the changing trend in female labor supply for
explaining jobless recoveries, one needs to spell out an economic model. Albanesi
(2014) considers a model in which the increase in female participation is driven by
gender-biased technological change, i.e., tasks at which women have a comparative
advantage become more important compared to those that favor men (such as those
relying on physical strength). Albanesi shows that the model can reproduce both
the long-run trend in female participation and the occurrence of jobless recoveries
after female employment levels out.

Additional Notes on Related Literature
Whereas few papers explicitly consider how family trends change business cycle
dynamics, there is a larger literature that incorporates at least some of the features
of the family labor supply model described above into business cycle research. An
early example is the literature on home production in macroeconomics (see Greenwood, Rogerson, and Wright 1995 for an early overview of this work). The first
models did not explicitly distinguish between male and female labor supply, but
by incorporating the possibility of working in the home (on child care, food production, and so on), the literature took implicit account of the different nature of
female labor supply. Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright (1991) is an early contribution focusing on the importance of home production for explaining business cycle
facts. In their model, households derive utility from home and market consumption and supply both home and market hours. They find that the model with home
production is much better at matching various volatilities and correlations over the
business cycle than standard macro models. Closely related arguments are made
by Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991) and Rı́os-Rull (1993).
The role of family labor supply in the context of search models of the labor market
has been analyzed by Guler, Guvenen, and Violante (2012). Spouses who are both
in the labor force can provide each other insurance in the case of unemployment.
They find that the possibility of insurance lowers the search effort of unemployed
workers, but also provides higher welfare compared to a setting where all workers
are singles. Ortigueira and Siassi (2013) use a quantitative model to assess the importance of risk sharing within the family, and find that insurance through spousal
39

labor supply is particularly important for wealth-poor households who lack access
to other insurance mechanisms.
Family labor supply also plays a central role in a recent macroeconomic literature
on the effects of tax reform. Using a quantitative life-cycle model with single and
married households calibrated to U.S data, Guner, Kaygusuz, and Ventura (2012a)
explore the economic consequences of revenue-neutral tax reforms that adopt either
a flat income tax or separate taxation of married couples (i.e., separate filing). In
either case, the reform generates a large increase in labor supply, which is mostly
driven by married women (see also Guner, Kaygusuz, and Ventura 2012b). Guner,
Kaygusuz, and Ventura (2014) extend this work to consider the effects of child care
subsidies. They find that such subsidies have large effects on female labor supply, in
particular at the bottom of the skill distribution. Bick and Fuchs-Schündeln (2014)
document differences in labor supply of married couples across 18 OECD countries,
and find that variation in tax systems (in particular joint versus separate taxation)
can account for most of the differences.27
In the labor literature, the phenomenon of a wife entering the labor market in response to her husband’s unemployment that partly underlies Proposition 2 is known
as the “added worker effect” (Lundberg 1985). Empirical studies using data from
the early 1980s or earlier have generally only found weak evidence in favor of the
added worker effect. Using CPS data over a long time period, Juhn and Potter
(2007) find evidence in support of the added worker effect but also argue that it
has diminished in strength recently, in part because assortative mating has led to a
higher intra-household correlation of the labor market shocks faced by wives and
husbands.
The large differences in the cyclical volatility of the labor supply of single and married women and men documented above suggest that insurance within the family
goes beyond a narrow added worker affect (which specifically concerns wives entering the labor force after their husbands become unemployed). Other forms of
insurance include entering employment already in response to higher unemployment risk for the spouse (rather than the actual realization of unemployment, when
entering the labor force quickly may be difficult), and adjustments on the intensive
27

See also Chade and Ventura (2005) for an analysis of the welfare consequences of different tax
treatments for married couples.

40

margin when both spouses are in the labor force. Hyslop (2001) and Shore (2010,
2015) provide evidence in favor of a more general sharing of labor market risk in
terms of the correlation of earnings within couples. Using a structural model of life
cycle decisions, Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016) similarly find strong
evidence in favor of insurance within the family. Using CPS data, Mankart and
Oikonomou (2015) document a substantial response of female labor force participation to spousal unemployment, where the response is more drawn out over time
compared to early tests of the added worker effect. Moreover, Shore (2010) provides
evidence that intra-household risk sharing is particularly strong within recessions.
Our findings of a shift over time in the aggregate behavior of labor supply by gender
and marital status suggest that it would be productive to expand on these findings
by examining whether insurance within the family has undergone similar shifts at
the micro level.28
Our analysis of family labor supply has focused on the interaction between husbands and wives. Another dimension of insurance within the family concerns the
interaction between young and old family members. Quantitative studies that focus
on this dimension include Jaimovich, Pruitt, and Siu (2013), who aim to explain age
differences in the volatility of labor supply, and Kaplan (2012), who quantifies the
role of the option of moving in and out of the parental home as an insurance mechanism for young workers. Building on this work, Dyrda, Kaplan, and Rı́os-Rull
(2016) develop a business cycle model that allows for the option of young people
moving in with their parents. They find that living arrangements matter a lot for labor supply elasticities: the elasticity is three times larger for young people who live
with their parents compared to those who live alone. Accounting for household
formation also implies that the aggregate labor supply elasticity is much larger than
the micro elasticity for stable households.

2.5

Changing Families and Aggregate Savings

In addition to providing a theory of labor supply, the representative household that
populates baseline macroeconomic models also provides a theory of savings. In
28

Some evidence in this direction is provided by Blau and Kahn (2007), who show that married
women’s labor supply has become less responsive to their husbands’ wages since the 1980s.

41

this section, we argue that models that go beyond representative households by
explicitly modeling families have important implications for the determination of
savings in the macroeconomy.
There are a few different channels through which families matter for savings; they
relate to the life cycle savings motive and the precautionary savings motive. First,
changes in the size of the household over time (e.g., through marriage, divorce, and
having children) imply that consumption needs vary over the life cycle, which is
reflected in the optimal level of saving. Second, the precautionary savings motive
also plays an important role in macroeconomic models (at least since Aiyagari 1994).
The strength of the precautionary motive depends on the insurance mechanisms
people have access to. Similarly to our analysis of labor supply above, we will argue
that insurance within the family plays an important role in the sharing of income
risk and hence in the determination of savings. Third, not only do families affect the
sharing of existing sources of risk, but accounting for families also introduces new
sources of risk. Getting married and having children can lead to (sometimes large)
additional expenses, and to the extent that people face uncertainty over marriage
and fertility, this should affect their precautionary savings. Equally important is the
probability that a family dissolves: divorce is common and in many cases represents
a sizeable financial risk.
The large shifts in fertility, marriage, and divorce over the last few decades suggest
that the family determinants of savings may have been responsible for some of the
changes in aggregate savings behavior over time. In particular, in the United States
the personal savings rate has declined steadily from more than 10 percent in the
late 1970s to less than 5 percent in the mid-2000s (see Figure 15). Various explanations have been proposed for this change, although no single explanation is widely
accepted (see Guidolin and Jeunesse 2007 for an overview and discussion). In this
section, we examine the possibility that changes at the family level may have played
a role.
As far as the life cycle savings motive is concerned, there is a substantial literature
within macroeconomics that accounts for the life cycle using a unitary model of
the household, i.e., without making an explicit distinction between the interests of
different household members. Life cycle models were first introduced to modern
business cycle research by Attanasio and Browning (1995) and Rı́os-Rull (1996). In
42

14
12

Percent

10
8
6
4
2
0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 15: Personal Savings Rate, United States (Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, retrieved from FRED, St. Louis Fed)
such models, the varying consumption needs due to changes in family composition
over the life cycle can be incorporated through consumption equivalence scales.29
There is a small literature that uses life cycle models to quantify the impact of population aging on savings (Miles 1999, Rı́os-Rull 2001). Depending on future population growth, these effects on the savings rate can be large, although they generally
occur too slowly to explain much of the rapid decline in the savings rate in recent
decades.
Given that there is already a sizeable literature on the life-cycle motive for saving,
our discussion here is focused primarily on the implications of marriage and divorce
for aggregate savings, a topic on which relatively few papers exist.

Savings and Divorce
In the models discussed in Section 2.4, we examined differences in the behavior of
single and married households, while taking the existence of these different types
of households as given. In reality, most adults start out as singles, marry at some
point in their life, and many return to being single, e.g., due to divorce. We now
29

See for example Fernández-Villaverde and Krueger (2007, 2011).

43

consider the implications for savings of the possibility of divorce. We start by taking
marital bargaining power as given and by modeling divorce as an exogenous shock;
endogenous bargaining and endogenous divorce will be considered below.
We consider a married couple whose life extends over two periods. The couple
is married in the first period, and in the second period the union continues with
probability 1 − π, whereas with probability π a divorce occurs. The divorce regime
is that in the case of a divorce the wife retains fraction κf of assets, and the husbands
receives κm = 1 − κf .
We focus on implications for savings and take as given that both spouses work
in both periods.30 Let a′ denote savings. The couple bargains cooperatively with
bargaining weights given by λf and λm = 1 − λf . The couple’s decision problem in
the first period can be formulated as follows:
{
max ′ λf log(cf ) + λm log(cm )

cf ,cm ,a

[
]}
+ β λf (πVfD (a′ ) + (1 − π)Vf (a′ )) + λm (πVmD (a′ ) + (1 − π)Vm (a′ )) .

subject to the budget constraint:
cf + cm + a′ = wf + wm .
Here Vg (a′ ) is the second period value function for spouse g ∈ {f, m} if the union
continues, and VgD (a′ ) is the value function in the case of divorce.
In the case of divorce, in the second period each spouse simply consumes earnings
and savings, which earn interest at rate r. We therefore have:
VgD (a′ ) = log(wg′ + (1 + r)κg a′ ).
In contrast, if the marriage continues, consumption shares are given by bargaining
weights:
′
+ (1 + r)a′ )).
Vg (a′ ) = log(λg (wf′ + wm
30

Clearly, the possibility of divorce also affects the incentive to work, in part by altering the
marginal utility of wealth, and in more complex environments also through the accumulation of
individual-specific labor market experience.

44

We can now consider the savings problem in the first period. The first-order condition for a′ is given by:
[
]
λm (1 + r)κm
1
λf (1 + r)κf
= βπ
+ ′
wf + wm − a′
wf′ + (1 + r)κf a′ wm
+ (1 + r)κm a′
+ β(1 − π)

wf′

+

1+r
. (6)
+ (1 + r)a′

′
wm

The optimal savings in the case of no divorce risk (π = 0) are:
′
β(1 + r)(wf + wm ) − wf′ − wm
ã =
.
(1 + β)(1 + r)

Now consider the case π > 0. The optimal savings will be unchanged at ã if the
following condition is satisfied:
wg′ + (1 + r)κg ã
′
= wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)ã
λg
for g ∈ {f, m}, or:
′
−λm wf′ + λf wm
+ λf (1 + r)ã
κf = κ̃f ≡
,
(1 + r)ã
′
λm wf′ − λf wm
+ λm (1 + r)ã
,
κm = κ̃m ≡
(1 + r)ã

where we have κ̃f + κ̃m = 1 as required. Intuitively, this specific divorce regime
recreates the same consumption allocation that would have been obtained had the
marriage continued, and hence savings incentives are unchanged. What happens
when κf does not equal κ̃f depends on relative female and male bargaining power.
The derivative of the right-hand side of (6) with respect to κf is given by:
(
βπ(1 + r)

′
λf wf′
λm wm
−
′ + (1 + r)κ a′ )2
(wf′ + (1 + r)κf a′ )2 (wm
m

45

)

Evaluating this expression at a′ = ã, κf = κ̃f , and κm = κ̃m gives:
(

(

βπ(1 + r)

)
′ + (1 + r)ã 2
wf′ + wm

wf′
w′
− m
λf
λm

)
.

′
Hence, the derivative is positive if wf′ /λf > wm
/λm , which is equivalent to κ̃f < λf .
A positive derivative, in turn, implies that when κf > κ̃f , the optimal savings a′
satisfy a′ > ã, i.e., the presence of divorce risk increases savings. More generally,
divorce risk increases savings if for the spouse who is made worse off by divorce
the asset share in divorce exceeds the relative bargaining power in marriage. Intuitively, under this condition increasing savings lowers the additional inequality
across spouses brought about by divorce, which generates a precautionary demand
for savings.31 If the couple starts out with equal bargaining power and there is an
equal division divorce regime λf = λm = κf = κm = 0.5, the possibility of divorce
always leads to precautionary savings, except in the knife edge case where the divorce regime that exactly reproduces the married allocation. The intuition is the
same as for the usual motive for precautionary savings with preferences that display prudence. Under divorce, one spouse ends up with less consumption and the
other one with more consumption compared to the married state. Due to the curvature in utility, the outcome of the less fortunate spouse receives higher weight when
savings are determined in the first period, leading to an increase in precautionary
savings.

We derived these results under the assumption that the divorce leaves the consumption possibilities of the couple unchanged. Realistically, there are also direct costs
of divorce and forgone returns to scale from having a joint household. Hence, the
possibility of divorce would also induce a negative income effect, which further
increases desired savings.
To summarize the results, the effect of divorce risk on savings depends on the divorce regime (i.e., the property division rule in divorce) and also on the relative
bargaining power of the spouses. In practice, the most common divorce regimes in
the data are the title based regime and the equitable distribution regime.32 Under
31

This is a local result close to the marriage allocation.
Additional possibilities include an equal division regime, and a regime where the division of
assets is set through enforced pre-nuptial agreements.
32

46

the title based regime, each spouse gets to keep the marital assets that are already
in her or his name, i.e., real estate goes to the owner listed in the title, bank accounts
go to the account owner, and so on. Under the equitable distribution regime, judges
have discretion in dividing assets in divorce. Often an equal division of marital
assets is a starting point, but judges can make allowances for different needs (e.g.,
the spouse with custody for children may receive more assets). When men are the
main breadwinners and also hold title to major assets such as real estate, cars, and
bank accounts, we would expect divorce under the title based regime to lead to a
precautionary demand for savings, because the wife is likely to be worse off in divorce compared to marriage. However, the precautionary demand only arises if the
wife is able to save in her own name, because otherwise she would not be able to increase her outcome in divorce. Predictions are more ambiguous under the equitable
distribution regime, because in this regime the wife may obtain more consumption
in divorce compared to marriage. Comparing across regimes for a given divorce
rate, as long as equitable distribution is more advantageous for the spouse with less
power than the title based system (as seems likely), a switch to equitable distribution (which occurred in most U.S. states in the 1970s) will weaken the precautionary
motive and hence lead to lower savings.
What is more, individual labor earnings are likely to make up a large fraction of
income in divorce. The rise in married women’s earnings over time also implies that
women are better able to support themselves after divorce (under either divorce
regime). Hence, for a given divorce risk, the rise in married women’s labor force
participation and the decline in the gender pay gap are likely to have lowered the
precautionary demand for savings associated with divorce over time.

Savings and Divorce with Endogenous Bargaining Power
The analysis so far suggests that divorce may have a substantial impact on a country’s personal savings rate. Divorce is one of the largest and most common risks
people face today (along with unemployment and ill health). Moreover, changes in
the divorce rate, the divorce regime, and female labor force participation all affect
how much precautionary saving arises from divorce risk, and thus may be in part
responsible for changes in the savings rate over time.
47

In the preceding analysis, we introduced divorce as an exogenous shock, and the
impact of divorce risk on couples’ behavior was proportional to the probability with
which this shock occured. In this setting, the possibility of divorce has large effects
only if the divorce rate is high. We now extend our analysis by endogenizing the divorce decision and the evolution of bargaining power within the marriage. We will
see that in this extended model, the mere possibility of divorce can affect household
behavior, so that large impacts on behavior can arise even if few couples divorce in
equilibrium. Hence, the extension further amplifies the potential role of divorce for
explaining how a country’s savings rate is determined.
We consider a variant of the model above in which bargaining and divorce are endogenous. The ability of the spouses to commit to future allocations is limited by
the ability to divorce, so that divorce functions as a threat point that informs bargaining during the marriage. In the first period, the couple is married and starts
out with initial bargaining power λf and λm , where λf + λm = 1. In the second
period, the couple experience marriage quality shocks ξf , ξm , which can be positive
or negative. There is a unilateral divorce regime, that is, the marriage continues in
the second period only if both spouses are at least as well off married compared to
being divorced.
In the first period, the couple’s decision problem can be written as:
{
}
max λf log(cf ) + λm log(cm ) + β [λf E(Vf (a′ , ξf , ξm )) + λm E(Vm (a′ , ξf , ξm ))] ,
subject to the budget constraint:
cf + cm + a′ = wf + wm .
Here Vg (a′ , ξf , ξm )) is the expected utility of spouse g in the second period as a function of the state variables a′ , ξf , and ξm .
In the second period, the decision problem of the couple is constrained by the possibility of divorce. If a divorce takes place, existing property is divided with share
κf for the wife and κm = 1 − κf for the husband. Utilities conditional on divorce are
therefore given by:
VgD (a′ ) = log(wg′ + (1 + r)κg a′ ).
48

The full decision problem in the second period can then be written as:
max
D∈{0,1},cf ,cm

{ [
]
λf (1 − D) (log(cf ) + ξf ) + DVfD (a′ )
[
]}
+ λm (1 − D) (log(cm ) + ξm ) + DVmD (a′ )
(7)

subject to:
′
cf + cm = wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)a′ ,

(8)

(1 − D) (log(cf ) + ξf ) + DVfD (a′ ) ≥ VfD (a′ ),

(9)

(1 − D) (log(cm ) + ξm ) + DVmD (a′ ) ≥ VmD (a′ ).

(10)

Here D ∈ {0, 1} denotes the endogenous divorce decision and cf , cm is the consumption allocation conditional on staying married. Clearly, by setting D = 1 (divorce)
the constraints (9) and (10) can always be met. However, divorcing is optimal only
if there is no consumption allocation that leaves both spouses at least as well off
married compared to divorced.
The decision problem in the second period can be solved by first considering a
spouse who ends up just indifferent between divorce and staying married. Let λ̃g
denote the consumption share that would make spouse g indifferent between these
options, for a given ξg . The indifference condition is:
( (
))
(
)
′
log λ̃g wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)a′ + ξg = log wg′ + (1 + r)κg a′ ,
which can be solved to give:
wg′ + (1 + r)κg a′
(
).
λ̃g =
′ + (1 + r)a′
exp (ξg ) wf′ + wm
The second period outcome can now be determined by comparing the implicit bargaining weights λ̃f and λ̃m to the actual ex ante bargaining weights λf and λm . In
particular:
Proposition 3 (Divorce and Bargaining Power in Limited Commitment Model). The
outcome of the couple’s decision problem in the second period can be characterized as follows:

49

• If λ̃f ≤ λf and λ̃m ≤ λm , the couple stays married (D = 0), and consumption is:
(
)
′
cf = λf wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)a′ ,
(
)
′
cm = λm wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)a′ .
• If λ̃f > λf and λ̃f + λ̃m ≤ 1, the couple stays married (D = 0), but the wife’s
consumption share is increased to satisfy her participation constraint. Consumption
is:
)
(
′
cf = λ̃f wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)a′ ,
′
cm = wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)a′ − cf .

• If λ̃m > λm and λ̃f + λ̃m ≤ 1, the couple stays married (D = 0), but the husband’s
consumption share is increased to satisfy his participation constraint. Consumption
is:
(
)
′
cm = λ̃m wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)a′ ,
′
cf = wf′ + wm
+ (1 + r)a′ − cm .

• If λ̃f + λ̃m > 1, the couple divorces (D = 1), and consumption is:
cf = wf′ + (1 + r)κf a′ ,
′
cm = wm
+ (1 + r)κm a′ .

The implications of the possibility of divorce for savings are similar to those of the
exogenous-divorce model above, but savings are affected already when one of the
spouses’ participation constraints is binding, even if the marriage continues.
Figure 16 presents a computed example to show how the trend towards higher labor market participation of married women would affect divorce and the savings
rate in the model with endogenous bargaining and divorce.33 Male earnings are
normalized to wm = 1, and the equilibrium savings rate and divorce rate are shown
33
The parameter values used are λf = 0.4, λm = 0.6, r = 0.05, and β = 1/(1 + r). The divorce
regime features equal division of assets, κf = κm = 0.5, and the marriage quality shocks ξf and ξm
are uniformly distributed on the interval [−0.2, 1] and are independent across the spouses.

50

Savings Rate

0.1
Endogenous Divorce
Exogenous Divorce

0.05
0

Divorce Rate

0.1

0.2

0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Relative Female Earnings

0.7

0.8

0.2

0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Relative Female Earnings

0.7

0.8

0.2
0.1
0
0.1

Figure 16: Savings Rate and Divorce Rate as Function of Relative Female Earnings
for female earnings varying from wf = 0.1 to wf = 0.8. The divorce regime is unilateral divorce with an equal division of marital assets upon divorce. Given that total
earnings are constant and the interest rate equals the inverse of the discount factor,
if there was no possibility of divorce, the savings rate would be equal to zero regardless of female earnings. Hence, any positive savings are due to the precautionary
motive generated by the possibility of divorce.
With endogenous bargaining and divorce, we see that the savings rate and divorce
rate are both positive, and sharply decreasing in relative female earnings. Once female earnings are above 60 percent of male earnings, the savings rate approaches
zero (the value that would be obtained without the possibility of divorce). The intuition for these findings is that for low female earnings, divorce leaves women much
worse off compared to marriage. The equal division of assets only provides limited
insurance, because most of the second period income of the couple is due to the husband’s earnings. Thus, the possibility of divorce leads to a precautionary demand
for savings primarily to insure women against the possibility of divorce. Own earnings provide an alternative route of insurance and also increase the overall share
of income that women can claim in divorce. Hence, as earnings rise, precautionary
savings are much reduced and ultimately disappear.
51

The picture also displays the savings rate in the exogenous divorce model when the
equilibrium divorce rate (displayed in the lower panel) is fed as an exogenous variable into the model of the previous section (i.e., the exogenous divorce rate varies
together with female earnings). The exogenous divorce model generates qualitatively similar findings, but the impact on savings is much smaller in size. In the
exogenous divorce model, as long as the couple stays married, bargaining power
stays at the initial value. In contrast, in the endogenous divorce model, there are
couples where, say, the husband is at the participation constraint (the realization
of ξm is low), so that the wife has to offer additional compensation to the husband
for the husband to stay. This need to compensate the other spouse generates an
additional need for precautionary savings. Hence, the endogenous divorce model
generally leads to a larger impact on the savings rate, and can generate a feedback
from the possibility of divorce on aggregate variables even if the realized divorce
rate is low.
Additional Notes on Related Literature
There are only a few papers that use models of the type outlined here to address
macroeconomic questions. Dynamic models of marriage under limited commitment with the possibility of divorce have been introduced by Mazzocco (2007), Mazzocco, Ruiz, and Yamaguchi (2013), and Voena (2015). In these models, the shifts in
bargaining power that are necessary when one of the spouses’ participation constraint is binding have persistent effects on the marital allocation. By specifically
addressing how divorce law affects incentives for saving, Voena (2015) is the closest
to the questions addressed here. Voena finds (using an estimated structural model)
that the introduction of unilateral divorce (in states with an equal division of property) leads to higher savings and lower female employment. Intuitively, the introduction of unilateral divorce removes spouses’ veto power in the divorce decision,
which reduces risk sharing and increases precautionary savings. To our knowledge,
there are no studies that analyze how the possibility of divorce (in a given divorce
regime) affects the private savings rate (and other aggregate variables) in light of
other observed changes to the family, such as the rise in female labor force participation and relative female earnings and the decline in fertility.
An early study that considers the role of divorce as an exogenous shock is Cubeddu
52

and Rı́os-Rull (2003). They assess the potential role of divorce for asset accumulation by comparing counterfactuals that differ in when (or if) people marry and
divorce, and in how costly divorce is. Unlike in the model outlined above, consumption within marriage is constrained to be equal across spouses. They find that
the impact of marriage and divorce can be large in their setting, but they do not
directly relate this finding to observed changes in macro variables.34
Love (2010) documents empirically (and analyzes in a quantitative model) how asset allocations change with marital-status transitions. As in Cubeddu and Rı́os-Rull
(2003) and Hong and Rios-Rull (2012), changes in marital status are modeled as exogenous shocks, and there is only public consumption in marriage. The theoretical
model predicts that portfolio shares (i.e., the fraction of wealth invested in stocks
versus bonds) should react sharply to fertility, marriage, and divorce. Empirical
results based on the Health and Retirement Study and the Panel Study on Income
Dynamics are supportive of some of the predictions of the model, although not for
all groups of households.
Fernández and Wong (2014a, 2014b) use a quantitative life cycle model with exogenous divorce to study the importance of the likelihood of divorce for explaining the
rise in female labor force participation from the 1960s to the 1990s. They argue that
the increase in divorce risk accounts for a substantial fraction of the increase in female labor force participation. The main reason for this finding is that women (who
often have lower wages than their husbands and need to provide for their children)
face lower consumption possibilities after a divorce, which increases desired savings. One way of increasing savings is to work more during marriage, which raises
the total resources of the household and facilitates the smoothing of consumption
between the married and divorced states. In Fernández and Wong (2014c) this analysis is extended to a setting with endogenous divorce.
In addition to increasing savings and increasing labor supply, another insurance
mechanism that is likely to be relevant in the data is education. In Guvenen and
Rendall (2015), women acquire education in part as insurance against a bad marriage. Guvenen and Rendall argue that the introduction of unilateral divorce in34
A similar framework is used by Hong and Rios-Rull (2012) in a setting that also accounts for the
arrival of children, stochastic survival, and bequest motives, and uses information on life insurance
holdings to infer how the utilities of different household members interact.

53

creases this insurance motive, accounting for a sizeable fraction of the increase in
female education and helping rationalize the observation that women now obtain
more higher education than do men.35

2.6

Private Information in the Household

Throughout Section 2, we have used a number of different approaches for modeling
husband-wife interactions. We now step back from the applied questions to discuss the relative advantages of different models of the family and their uses within
macroeconomics. The pioneering work of Gary Becker was largely based on the
so-called unitary model of the family. A unitary model distinguishes between, say,
male and female labor supply, but does so in the context of a single household utility function rather than allowing for separate preferences for each spouse. This
approach is also how the family was first introduced into macroeconomics in the
literature on home production and the business cycle (e.g. Benhabib, Rogerson, and
Wright 1991 and Greenwood and Hercowitz 1991). The limitation of the unitary
approach is that since it does not distinguish individual utility functions, it does not
allow for conflict of interest between spouses. This restricts the range of questions
that can be addressed by the unitary model. Moreover, there is a sizeable literature in family economics that empirically tests the unitary model against richer
alternatives that allow for bargaining, and finds strong evidence against the unitary
model.36
To go beyond the unitary model, one needs to start with women and men (characterized by separate utility functions) as primitives and then analyze how they act
either together as couples or as singles. Within couples, one has to specify some
form of bargaining process that determines how the couple resolves the conflict of
interest between the spouses. Two broad classes of bargaining models that can be
used for this purpose are non-cooperative bargaining models (where the interaction between the spouses is modeled as a non-cooperative game, using standard
35

Another perspective on higher pre-marital investments by women is provided by Iyigun and
Walsh (2007a), who focus on the impact of investments both on sorting of spouses and on bargaining
power within marriage (see also Iyigun and Walsh 2007b and Chiappori, Iyigun, and Weiss 2009).
36
See Alderman et al. (1995) for an early summary of the evidence, and Attanasio and Lechene
(2002) for an influential contribution based on Progresa data from Mexico.

54

game theory tools) and cooperative bargaining models (where the spouses are able
to achieve an outcome that is at least statically efficient). A common argument in
favor of cooperative bargaining is that marriage is usually a sustained long-term
relationship, which suggests that the spouses should be able to avoid major inefficiencies. However, while the majority of recent work in family economics uses
a cooperative approach, other authors provide evidence in favor of inefficient bargaining outcomes within the family,37 and non-cooperative models have been used
by Lundberg and Pollak (1994), Konrad and Lommerud (1995), and Doepke and
Tertilt (2014), among others.
Within the literature on cooperative bargaining in the family, many papers use explicit bargaining models such as Nash bargaining subject to divorce as the outside
option.38 Another popular approach, introduced by Chiappori (1988, 1992), is to
only impose that the couple reaches a statically efficient outcome, but to remain agnostic about the details of the bargaining process. Empirical implementations of this
approach often allow bargaining power to be a function of observables (called “distribution factors”) such as the relative education or the relative age of the spouses,
without specifying the mechanism through which these variables matter.39 The advantage of this approach, labeled the “collective model,” is its generality, because
all (static) efficient allocations can be characterized in this way. The labor supply
model employed in Section 2.4 is an example of a collective model (albeit with fixed
bargaining power).
The collective approach is less suitable for dynamic contexts, because it does not
provide an explicit theory for how bargaining within a couple evolves. This would
perhaps not matter much if bargaining weights were constant over time, which
would also imply ex-ante efficiency, i.e., full insurance in the household. Yet there
is plenty of empirical evidence of limited risk sharing in couples. For example,
based on data from Kenya, Robinson (2012) documents that private expenditures
increase in own labor income. Duflo and Udry (2004) use data from the Ivory Coast
to show that the composition of household expenditure is sensitive to the gender of
37

See, e.g., Udry (1996), Duflo and Udry (2004), and Goldstein and Udry (2008).
The classic papers are Manser and Brown (1980) and McElroy and Horney (1981). Another classic is the “separate spheres” bargaining model of Lundberg and Pollak (1993), which is an interesting
hybrid between a cooperative and a non-cooperative model.
39
See for example Attanasio and Lechene (2014).
38

55

the recipient of a rainfall shock that affects male and female income differentially.
The evidence is not exclusive to developing countries. Cesarini et al. (2015) document a larger fall in labor earnings after winning a lottery for the winners relative to
their spouses in Sweden. One could rationalize such findings in a collective model
where the bargaining weights move due to shifts in relative income, wages, or lottery winnings. However, this approach has the downside of violating ex-ante efficiency without being explicit about the underlying bargaining friction. Moreover,
the approach precludes transitions to a (presumably) non-cooperative state such as
divorce, which is an important limitation given that divorce is commonplace (see
Figure 6).
A more fruitful avenue in our view is to take a stand on the friction that prevents
couples from achieving full insurance and model it explicitly. One obvious friction
is limited commitment. Since spouses usually have the option to walk away from
each other (i.e., divorce or separation), at any point in time each spouse should get
at least as much utility as his or her outside option. This is what we alluded to at
the end of Section 2.4 and modeled more explicitly in the endogenous bargaining
model of Section 2.5. A limited literature on dynamic household decisions pursues this avenue.40 A model based on limited commitment will lead to endogenous
shifts in bargaining power over time, namely whenever the commitment constraint
becomes binding. When divorce is the outside option, limited commitment implies
shifts in bargaining power only when a couple is close to divorce. An alternative
is to consider an outside option of non-cooperation within marriage as in Lundberg and Pollak (1993). Doepke and Kindermann (2015) is a recent example of a
dynamic bargaining model with such an outside option. Such limited commitment
models are consistent with the empirical evidence on continuously shifting bargaining power within couples provided by Lise and Yamada (2015).
An alternative friction that so far has received much less attention is private information within the household. Before showing how this friction can be modeled,
let us discuss some indications that private information may indeed be relevant for
bargaining between spouses. There are many things that spouses may not precisely
know about each other, such as income, assets, consumption, work effort, or preferences. Contrary to the belief that love and altruism will lead to perfect information
40

See in particular Mazzocco (2007) and Voena (2015).

56

sharing between spouses, the evidence suggests otherwise. The most obvious example may be that people do not typically tell their partner when they are having
an extramarital affair. Relatedly, some people do not disclose that they have HIV or
other sexually transmitted diseases to their partner. Women sometimes hide from
their partners that they are using birth control (or, depending on the context, that
they are not using birth control).41 More directly related to the context of this chapter is that people do not always disclose income, spending, and savings behavior
to their spouse. De Laat (2014) shows that husbands in split-migrant couples in
Kenya invest significant resources into monitoring the spending behavior of their
wives. When given the option, people often prefer to put money into private (and
possibly secret) accounts.42 Hoel (2015) finds in Kenyan data that 31 percent of people say their spouse was not aware of any income they had received the preceding
week. Further, evidence from lab and field experiments suggests that information
treatments affect intra-household allocations, suggesting that information frictions
are important.43 Most of this evidence is from developing countries, and in some
dimensions (such as uncertainty about a spouse’s income) couples in industrialized
countries with joint checking accounts and tax filings may be less affected by information frictions. However, private information about preferences and hidden effort
is likely to be equally relevant all around the world.
In sum, there is ample evidence that private information plays an important role
in household bargaining. Nevertheless, hardly any work has been done on this
issue in terms of explicit models of the bargaining process. We believe this is an important area for future work. While most of this chapter concerns applying family
economics to macroeconomics, the issue of information frictions presents an opportunity for intellectual arbitrage in the opposite direction: while in family economics
static models are still common, in macroeconomics dynamic contracting models
that make the underlying frictions explicit have been widespread for many years.
In particular, it should be possible to apply some of the tools to analyze informa41
For example Ashraf, Field, and Lee (2014) show that women in Zambia hide the use of birth
control from their husbands when given the chance.
42
See Anderson and Baland (2002), Ashraf (2009) and Schaner (2015).
43
When income is private information in dictator games, less is transferred to the partner (Hoel
2015). Migrants send home less cash to family members when their choice is not revealed to the
recipients (Ambler 2015). More is spent on goods that are hard to monitor or difficult to reverse and
less on household public goods when a transfer is given privately to one spouse relative to a full
information transfer (Castilla and Walker 2013).

57

tional frictions currently used in theoretical macroeconomics and public finance to
issues in family economics.44 Some work of this kind exists in development economics (e.g., Townsend 2010, Karaivanov and Townsend 2014, and Kinnan 2014),
but the question is a different one as the degree of insurance within a village—as
opposed to within a couple—is analyzed.
We currently explore how to account for information frictions in household bargaining in ongoing work (Doepke and Tertilt 2015). As a simple example for modeling
such a friction, consider a variant of the model analyzed above under private information about each spouse’s labor income wg . To simplify the exposition, we assume
that there is a private income realization only in the first period, whereas there is
′
no income in the second period, wf′ = wm
= 0. Bargaining is assumed to be efficient subject to the constraints imposed by private information, with initial welfare
weights λf and λm . The constrained efficient allocation can be computed as a mechanism design problem. The revelation principle can be applied, and implies that
we can restrict attention to truth-telling mechanisms with truth-telling constraints
imposed. Hence, the spouses will simultaneously report their income wf and wm to
each other, and consumption is given by functions cg (wf , wm ) and c′g (wf , wm ), which
depend on the reports. For simplicity, we assume that each income is drawn from a
finite set wg ∈ Wg with independent probability distributions denoted by p(wg ).
With these preliminaries, the optimization problem faced by the household can be
written as follows:
{ [
]
max E λf log(cf (wf , wm )) + β log(c′f (wf , wm ))

}
+ λm [log(cm (wf , wm )) + β log(c′m (wf , wm ))] ,

subject to the budget constraints:
cf + cm + a′ =wf + wm ,
c′f + c′m =(1 + r)a.
The maximization problem is also subject to truth-telling constraints. Consider first
44

See Atkeson and Lucas (1992) and the follow-up literature for applications of models with information frictions in macroeconomics. For a survey of the literature incorporating information
frictions into public finance see Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Werning (2006).

58

the wife. For each wf and each alternative w̃f ∈ Wf , we impose:
∑

]
[
p(wm ) log(cf (wf , wm )) + β log(c′f (wf , wg ))

wm

≥

∑

[
]
p(wm ) log(cf (w̃f , wm ) + wf − w̃f ) + β log(c′f (w̃f , wm )) .

wm

Similarly, for the husband we have:
∑

p(wf ) [log(cm (wf , wm )) + β log(c′m (wf , wg ))]

wf

≥

∑

p(wf ) [log(cm (wf , w̃m ) + wm − w̃m ) + β log(c′m (wm , w̃m ))] .

wf

A direct implication of this model is that consumption is more responsive to a
change in own income than to a change in the spouse’s income. The reason is that
incentives need to be provided to tell the truth about own income shocks. Other
frictions (such as unobservable effort or unobservable preference shocks) can be
modeled along similar lines.
Models of bargaining with limited commitment frictions and private information
frictions have distinct implications for how consumption and leisure depend on
bargaining power. Consider, for example, a limited commitment model where the
outside option responds to income shocks. In such a setting, a positive income
shock for a given spouse increases this spouse’s bargaining weight, which (all else
equal) tends to increase leisure and lower labor supply. In contrast, in a hidden
effort model it is costly to distort the effort of a productive spouse; hence, a more
productive spouse may be provided more incentives to work and end up working
more. This example shows that the underlying friction matters for how household
bargaining reacts to family trends such as the increase in women’s labor market attachment. We believe that further work on incorporating methods for dealing with
dynamic contracting frictions into family economics will be productive for improving our understanding of these issues.

59

3 The Family and Economic Growth
The most fundamental questions in macroeconomics concern economic growth. As
Robert Lucas put it, once one starts to think about the determinants of cross-country
income differences and policies that may allow poor countries to catch up with rich
ones, “it is hard to think about anything else” (Lucas 1988, p.5).
Early theorizing on the sources of economic growth was focused on firms rather
than families. The Solow model, for example, puts investment in physical capital
by the business sector into the spotlight, coupled with exogenous improvements in
productivity. To be sure, even in a model driven by capital accumulation families
matter for growth; after all, investment has to be financed by savings, and savings
are determined within the family. Both husband-wife and parent-child interactions
are relevant for savings. First, as already shown in Section 2.5, a couple’s savings
rate responds to the possibility of divorce. More generally, if husbands and wives
disagree about the consumption-savings tradeoff (e.g., because they differ in their
degree of patience), then how spouses negotiate affects the savings rate. Second, a
large part of long-run wealth accumulation is due to bequests, for which interactions between parents and children are crucial.
Family decisions have become even more central to growth theory with more recent
developments that emphasize the importance of human capital accumulation and
endogenous population growth. The importance of human capital accumulation
for growth has been well recognized since the work of Lucas (1988). To fix ideas,
consider a simple endogenous growth model based on accumulation of human capital H and physical capital K. Final output is produced using physical capital and
effective units of labor as inputs. Effective units of labor depend both on time spent
working u and the stock of human capital. Assuming a simple Cobb-Douglas production function, output is:
Y = K α (uH)1−α .
Human capital is accumulated by spending time studying. The higher the level of
human capital and the more time spent in school (1 − u), the higher is tomorrow’s
human capital,
H ′ = B(1 − u)H,
(11)

60

where B is a technology parameter. In the simplest model, the fraction of time spent
in school is given exogenously. Then, the growth rate of output in the balanced
growth path is simply B(1 − u). Growth thus depends not only on technology, but
also on the time spent in school.
So far we have taken u to be an exogenous parameter. But clearly the time spent
on education is a choice. Who makes the choice? A large part of education happens during childhood and hence, leaving mandatory schooling laws aside, it is
parents who make education decisions for their children. In other words, education
is a family decision. Note also that the formulation of the human capital production function above assumes past human capital enters into next period’s human
capital. Intuitively, the initial human capital stock of a new member in society is
proportional to the level already attained by older members of the family. As Lucas
put it, “human capital accumulation is a social activity, involving groups of people
in a way that has no counterpart in the accumulation of physical capital” (Lucas
1988, p. 19). Much of the time, the group in which the accumulation happens is
the family, where children learn from parents both by imitating them and by being
actively taught.
Understanding the human capital accumulation process is an active research area.
Many open questions remain, but what is understood by now is that education
and skill formation are complex processes that involve many ingredients. Inputs
both in forms of time (own time, teacher time, parental time) and goods (textbooks,
school buildings) are important, as is the age at which specific investments take
place. For example, Jim Heckman and co-authors have emphasized the importance
of early childhood education for long-run outcomes (Heckman 2008). Citing Cunha
and Heckmann (2007), “The family plays a powerful role [. . . ] through parental
investments and through choice of childhood environments.” Recent research captures such links in formal models of human capital investments within families (e.g.,
Caucutt and Lochner 2012, Aizer and Cunha 2012). Del Boca, Flinn, and Wiswall
(2014) find that both paternal and maternal time input are essential inputs into child
development.
So far, we have motivated the importance of families for growth based on the intuitive argument that human capital and savings decisions are made in the family.
An equally compelling argument for the importance of families can be made on the
61

basis of empirical findings. As we will document in the next section, cross-country
data shows strong correlations between development indicators such as GDP per
capita and measures of family structure. While such findings constitute no proof of
causality, they suggest a close link between family structure and development. After documenting these facts, we will show in a sequence of simple growth models
how modeling increasingly complex family interactions can affect economic growth
in an economy. While the most straightforward link from families to growth concerns fertility decisions, we emphasize that there are many dimensions to families,
their role in producing new people being only one of them. Families typically consist of many family members (husband, wife, sons, daughters), who may differ in
preferences and skills. When preferences differ, the exact nature of the decision
process in the family becomes important. When skills differ, i.e., when men and
women are not perfect substitutes in production, then the details of how they enter
differently into the human capital and goods production functions will also matter
for growth. Further, families may have different attitudes towards sons and daughters, affecting human capital investment, and institutions such as polygyny may
also affect incentives for investing in human and physical capital.

3.1 Cross-Country Family Facts
In this section, we report strong correlations between indicators of economic development and measures of family structure. Perhaps the most well known example is the close link between the fertility rate and development. Figure 17 displays
a strong negative relationship between the total fertility rate and GDP per capita
across countries.45 Fertility, in turn, is strongly negatively correlated with measures
of schooling (Figure 18).
Many other measures of family structure are related to development as well. Figure 19 displays the fraction of teenage girls (15–19 years) that has ever been married.
The figure reveals a striking negative relationship between GDP per capita and early
marriage. In poor countries, such as Ghana and Malawi, almost 50 percent of 15–19
year old girls are married, compared to less than 5 percent in countries with a GDP
45
A similar relationship can be observed over time within countries: in most cases, the demographic transition took place during times of rapid economic growth. For the United States, the
decline in children ever born by birth cohort of mothers is shown in Figure 1.

62

TotalȱFertilityȱRate
8
6
4
2
0
400

4,000

40,000
GDPȱperȱcapita,ȱ2005

Figure 17: TFR and GDP per capita Across Countries (Sources: GID 2006 and World
Development Indicators 2005)
per capita of more than $25,000 (in 2005 PPP terms). Figure 20 plots the relationship
between female labor force participation and GDP per capita. Since rates of formal
employment are low for women and men alike in many poor countries, rather than
plotting the absolute participation rate, Figure 20 depicts the fraction of formal employment accounted for by women. In virtually all countries with a GDP per capita
higher than $20,000, women make up 40 or more percent of the paid labor force,
while in many poor countries women account for less than 20 percent.46
The figures discussed so far were chosen to highlight a few particularly interesting and pronounced relationships between family structure and development. Yet,
essentially all indicators of family structure are related to development, including
both measures of outcomes as well as measures of legal differences between men
and women. Table 3 gives correlations of family variables with two measures of
economic development, GDP per capita and the share of the agricultural sector in
GDP (which is typically low in developed countries). The first three rows are about
children: Fertility rates are high, child mortality is high, and schooling is low in
poor countries. The next two rows show that a preference for sons is systematically
related to development. First, people in poor countries are more likely to state that
46
The few rich countries with low female labor force participation are oil-rich countries such as
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.

63

TotalȱFertilityȱRate,ȱ2010
8
6
4
2
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

ExpectedȱYearsȱofȱSchooling,ȱ2010
Figure 18: Schooling and TFR Across Countries (Source: World Development Indicators)

EarlyȱMarriage,ȱ2014
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
400

4000

40000
GDPȱperȱcapitaȱ($PPP),ȱ2014

Figure 19: Early Marriage and GDP per capita Across Countries (Source: OECD
Gender Statistics 2014 and World Development Indicators)

64

Table 3: Correlations between Family Variables and GDP per capita and Share of
Agriculture Across Countries
Variable

GDP p.c.

Share Agric.

Total fertility rate, GID 2006

-0.49

0.71

Child mortality rate, WDI 2014

-0.54

0.75

Average years of schooling, WDI 2003

0.76

-0.79

Son preference in education, GID 2014

-0.26

0.33

Inheritance discrimination against daughters, GID 2014

-0.24

0.45

Female literacy relative to male, GID 2006

0.37

-0.65

Percent females in paid labor force, GID 2006

0.32

-0.52

Unpaid care work by women, GID 2014

-0.37

0.43

Year first woman in parliament, UN 2004

-0.58

0.36

Women’s access to land, GID 2014

-0.41

0.54

0.70

-0.60

Early marriage, GID 2014

-0.50

0.65

Agreement with wife beating, GID 2014

-0.42

0.57

Inheritance discrimination against widows, GID 2014

-0.21

0.42

Laws on domestic violence, GID 2014

-0.16

0.46

Gender empowerment measure, UN 2004

Notes: Data are from OECD Gender, Institutions and Development Data Base (GID 2006 and 2014),
the World Development Indicators (WDI 2003, 2005 and 2014) and the UN Development Report 2004.
Correlations are computed with GDP per capita and percent of value-added in agriculture from the
WDI in two different years: 2005 and 2014. See appendix for variable definitions and further details.

65

WomenȱinȱPaidȱLaborȱ(%)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000

GDPȱperȱcapitaȱ($PPP)ȱ2005
Figure 20: Women in Paid Labor and GDP per capita Across Countries (Source:
OECD Gender Statistics 2006 and World Development Indicators)
when resources are scarce, educating boys is more important than educating girls.
Second, inheritance laws favor sons over daughters. The next three rows are about
the education and work of women relative to men. Women are more likely to be
illiterate than men in poor countries. They work less in the market and provide a
larger burden of unpaid family care work, such as taking care of children and the elderly. The next set of indicators show that the legal position of women is negatively
related to development. Women obtained access to politics (through representation
in national parliaments) earlier in today’s rich countries. They also have better access to land ownership and usage. There is also a tight relationship between the
United Nations’ Gender Empowerment Measure and GDP per capita. The last set
of indicators show that the position specifically of married women is weaker in poor
countries. Women in poor countries marry earlier than in rich countries and wife
beating is more accepted. The legal position also favors men in poor countries: inheritance laws are more likely to favor widowers over widows, and laws against
domestic violence (if they exist in the first place) are less strict compared to developed countries.
A family structure that has long been illegal in most developed countries but is still
practiced in many poorer countries is polygyny, which is the practice of men being

66

Table 4: Differences Between Polygynous Countries and Monogamous Countries
close to the Equator
Polygynous

Monogamous

Total fertility rate

6.8

4.6

Husband-wife age gap

6.4

2.8

Aggregate capital-output ratio

1.1

1.9

GDP per capita (dollars)

975

2,798

28

58

Number of countries

Notes: Data is either from 1980 or an average for the 1960–1985 time period. Details and sources
are given in Tertilt (2005). Polygynous countries defined as countries with at least 10 percent of men
in polygamous unions. Monogamous countries are all other countries within 20 degrees of latitude
from the equator, to control for the fact that most polygynous countries are in sub-Saharan Africa.

married to multiple wives. Table 4 shows that polygynous countries are among
the poorest in the world, display extremely high fertility rates, invest little, and are
characterized by large age gaps between husbands and wives.

3.2 Parents and Children
The strong empirical association between economic development and measures
of family structure suggests that changes to the family are an integral part of the
growth process. We now analyze a series of simple growth models to highlight a
number of specific channels that tie development and families together.
We start with a simple view of the family. In this first version of the model, each
family consists of a parent and a child. Parents care about children in a warm-glow
fashion. Specifically, they derive utility from their children’s full income.47 Fertility
is exogenous. In other words, we start with a single sex model where each parent
has exactly one child. Since the children themselves will have children again, the
model is an overlapping generations model. The difference to the standard OLG
setup is that generations are explicitly linked through parent-child relationships.
47

Models with true altruism would yield qualitatively similar results, but are less tractable.

67

Preferences are given by the utility function
u(c) + γu(y ′ ),
where c is the parent’s consumption and y ′ is the child’s full income (as an adult
in the next period). For simplicity, we assume consumption goods are produced
at home with a production function that uses effective units of time as the only
input.48 Let H denote the human capital of the parent and ℓ the units of time the
parent devotes to production. Then consumption, or equivalently GDP (per adult),
is given by
c = AℓH,
where A is a technology parameter. We define full income as the income that would
be obtained if the parent was working full time:
y = AH.
Not all time will be devoted to production, because the parent will also spend some
time educating the child. Let e denote this education time. Human capital of the
child is given by the following production function:
H ′ = (Be)θ H,
where B and θ are technology parameters. Here θ is an especially important parameter as it captures the returns to education. Each parent is endowed with one unit
of time. Thus, the parent faces the following time constraint: ℓ + e ≤ 1. Assuming
log utility, we can write the objective function of the parent as follows:
max log(c) + γθ log(e).
The equilibrium is characterized by the optimal education choice e∗ =
48

γθ
.
1+γθ

The

This is isomorphic to a model with market production. The home production formulation has
the advantage that we do not need notation for wages and, later, interest rates.

68

equilibrium growth rate (for both human capital and consumption) is:
H′
=
H

(
)θ
γθ
B
.
1 + γθ

(12)

As in the simple Lucas model at the beginning of this section (Equation (11)), the
human capital accumulation technology in part determines the growth rate. What
is different from the Lucas model is that how much parents care about their children’s wellbeing also enters. In contrast, in standard growth models that abstract
from intergenerational links it is the individual’s discount factor that matters. There
is no reason for the rate of time preference across periods for a given person to coincide with the intergenerational discount factor. A related point is that the intergenerational elasticity of substitution may differ from the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution (IES). In other words, estimates of the IES in the business cycle context are not necessarily relevant for calibrating growth models based on tradeoffs
across generations.49 There is a need for empirical research in this area, as good estimates of the intergenerational discount factor and the intergenerational elasticity
of substitution are currently not available.
The model as written assumes that all families accumulate human capital independently from each other. An alternative vision of the process of human capital accumulation is that much of the increase in people’s productivity over time is due to the
dissemination of productive ideas, implying that exchange of knowledge between
different families is crucial for growth. In a setting that makes this engine of growth
explicit, de la Croix, Doepke, and Mokyr (2016) examine the role of institutions
that organize the exchange of knowledge for growth. They compare both familybased institutions (knowledge exchange within nuclear families or families/clans)
and market based institutions, and argue that institutions that facilitated the exchange of ideas across families were crucial for the economic ascendency of Western
Europe in the centuries leading up to industrialization.
49

See Cordoba and Ripoll (2014) for a formal treatment of this point.

69

3.3 Adding Fertility Choice
Next, we enrich the model by endogenizing fertility choice. The analysis of fertility choices in explicit dynamic growth models was pioneered by Becker and Barro
(1988) and Barro and Becker (1989). These papers assume an altruistic utility function (i.e., the children’s utility enters the parent’s utility), whereas we will stick to
the warm-glow motive for investing in children. This distinction makes no difference for most qualitative results and allows more closed form solutions. In contrast
to Barro and Becker (1989), which features exogenous technological progress, our
focus is on human capital as the engine of growth.
For simplicity (and in line with the majority of existing analyses of fertility in dynamic models), we stick with one-parent families. However, conceptually it is
straightforward to consider fertility decisions in a two-parent model; see Doepke
and Tertilt (2009) for an example.50
To give the parent a reason to want children, we modify the utility function as follows:
u(c) + γ n u(n) + γu(y ′ ),
where n is the number of children chosen by the parent. It takes ϕ units of time to
raise a child in addition to the e units of education time devoted to each child. Note
that ϕ is a fixed cost, while e is a choice variable. The time constraint is thus
ℓ + (ϕ + e)n ≤ 1.
We keep everything else (i.e., production and human capital accumulation) as before. Assuming log utility, the objective function can be written as
max log(c) + γ n log(n) + γθ log(e).
To guarantee that the problem is well-defined, we assume γ n > γθ.
50
Doepke and Kindermann (2015) document empirically that spouses often disagree about
whether to have another child and present a bargaining model of fertility decisions to analyze the
implications of this fact.

70

The equilibrium is characterized by the following education and fertility choices:
γθ
ϕ,
− γθ
(γ n − γθ)
=
.
ϕ(1 + γ n )

e∗ =
n∗

γn

The equilibrium growth rate is:
H′
=
H

)θ
(
γθϕ
.
B n
γ − γθ

(13)

Comparing the expression for n∗ and the equilibrium growth factor given in (13),
it becomes apparent that many of the same features leading to high fertility, such
as a low cost of children and low returns to education, also lead to a low growth
rate. The negative dependence of fertility on growth was already a feature in Barro
and Becker (1989), albeit in a model of exogenous growth. The importance of human capital as an engine for growth in a model with endogenous fertility was first
analyzed by Becker, Murphy, and Tamura (1990). While the exact expression is
different, they also derive a growth rate that depends positively on the returns to
education, the fixed cost of children, and an altruism parameter.
Comparing the growth rate given in (13) with the growth rate in the model without fertility choice (12), two points emerge. First, two types of intergenerational
preference parameters appear now: γ and γ n . In other words, how much parents
care about the quality versus the quantity of children is a determinant of the growth
rate. Second, the return to human capital enters positively into the optimal education choice and negatively into the optimal fertility choice.
These results may help in understanding some empirical regularities, such as the
negative relationship between fertility and schooling, on the one hand, and fertility
and GDP per capita, on the other hand (Figures 17 and 18). In the model, these
relationships would arise if countries differ in the return to skill θ or the cost of
children ϕ. Similarly, within most countries fertility decreased while education increased over time. The model can generate this pattern if the return to education
increases gradually from generation to generation. The resulting theory interprets
the demographic transition to low fertility as driven by a move from investing in
71

child quantity to emphasizing child quality (i.e., education).
There is a substantial literature aiming to account for the historical relationship between fertility and growth based on this mechanism. Before the onset of industrialization in the eighteenth century, living standards around the world were stagnant,
and fertility rates were high. In most countries, this “Malthusian” stage was followed by a transition to growing incomes and declining fertility rates. The first
theory to fully account for such a transition is Galor and Weil (2000), which is based
on the quantity-quality tradeoff, a Malthusian constraint due to the role of land
in agriculture, and human capital as an engine for growth. The role of structural
change in the transition is highlighted by Hansen and Prescott (2002), who model
the endogenous transition from a stagnant land-intensive technology to a capitalintensive growth technology. Population growth changes with growing incomes in
their model. However, rather than explicitly modelling fertility choice, the authors
assume a particular dependence of population growth on consumption. Greenwood and Seshadri (2002) introduce explicit fertility preferences when analyzing a
similar transition from an agricultural to a manufacturing society. Doepke (2004)
also models fertility preferences explicitly to analyze the importance of education
and child labor policies for the transition from stagnation to growth. Some authors
argue that the transition was triggered by declines in mortality, which increased the
incentive to educate children. Soares (2005) provides a model where gains in life
expectancy lead to reductions in fertility and increases in human capital accumulation, leading to an endogenous transition from a Malthusian to a long-run growth
equilibrium.51 However, Hazan and Zoabi (2006) show that the impact of increasing
longevity on human capital investment is mitigated by the fact that higher longevity
also raises the incentive to have more children, which works against human capital
investment through the quantity-quality tradeoff.
One could also use variants of this setup to understand cross-country fertility differences today. For example, Manuelli and Seshadri (2009) study international fertility
differences using a life-cycle version of the Barro-Becker model with human and
health capital. They find that differences in productivity, social security, and taxes
can go a long way in explaining the observed differences.
51

The importance of changes in mortality for development is also analyzed in Cervellati and Sunde
(2005).

72

The empirical regularities that characterize differences across countries are also visible across families. There is a sizeable empirical literature documenting that in
the cross section of families in a given country, quantity and quality of children are
negatively related.52 An augmented version of the model with heterogeneity across
families in γ n (or, similarly, γ) would deliver this empirical regularity. The overall economy-wide growth rate would then depend on how many parents of each
type exist, and also on whether such preferences are passed on from parents to children or randomly distributed in the population.53 De la Croix and Doepke (2003)
explore the association between inequality and growth based on the differential fertility channel, and argue that it explains a large part of the observed relationship
between inequality and growth across countries.54

Fertility Restrictions
The link between fertility and human capital accumulation suggests that countries
may be able to speed up economic development by limiting fertility rates. Out of
the many policies that can affect a country’s fertility rate, the most direct is a hard
limit on how many children a couple can have. Several countries have implemented
such fertility restrictions, the most famous example of which is the one-child policy
of China. Another example are forced sterilization policies implemented by the Indian government in the 1980s. Other countries have used more subtle family planning policies, either through monetary incentive schemes or in the form of media
campaigns, often advocating a two-child norm.
We can incorporate such policies into the model by adding a fertility limit n̄. When52

See for example Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) and Bleakley and Lange (2009). Vogl (2016) argues that the negative relationship of quantity and quality may be a relatively recent phenomenon.
He documents that in many developing countries there was a reversal in the education-fertility relationship from positive to negative. Baudin, de la Croix, and Gobbi (2015) provide an analysis that
also allows for the possibility of childlessness, and argue that childlessness is U-shaped as economies
develop.
53
Thus, whether differential fertility increases or decreases the growth rate depends on many factors. See Vogl (2016) for an analysis of this point. The specific role of preference transmission in the
context of the British Industrial Revolution is analyzed by Doepke and Zilibotti (2008).
54
De la Croix and Doepke (2004) and de la Croix and Doepke (2009) analyze the importance of this
mechanism in the context of education policies.

73

ever the constraint is binding, the optimal education decision is:
e∗ =

γθ[ n̄1 − ϕ]
.
1 + γθ

Education increases with a tighter fertility restriction. Thus, fertility restrictions do
speed up economic growth in our model. Yet, they are not the panacea one might
have hoped for, as fertility restrictions also come with a cost. Figure 21 illustrates
these effects in a computed example of our model.55 The top panels show how fertility and education change with different levels of fertility restrictions, while the
bottom panels depict the growth rate and steady state utility as a function of the
restrictions. The optimal (unrestricted) fertility rate in the example is 3. Thus, only
restrictions below 3 are binding. Tighter restrictions lead to higher levels of education and higher growth rates, but they lower equilibrium utility. In our simple
model, this negative effect on utility comes from parents being deprived of (part of)
the enjoyment they obtain from children.56 In more elaborate settings, such negative effects can also arise from the differential effect of the fertility constraint on a
heterogenous population. Also, with a public social security system, lower fertility
depresses future payouts, i.e., the demographic dividend declines, a problem that
is starting to become pressing in China right now.
These issues are analyzed in a small emerging literature. Liao (2013) analyzes how
the one-child policy in China increased human capital and output. She simulates
counter-factual experiments to analyze the effects of a relaxation of the policy. The
main findings are that results differ across generations and skill groups. In particular, the initial old would benefit from a sudden unexpected relaxation of the policy,
but future generations would be hurt. Moreover, such a policy would hurt unskilled
people more than skilled people. Choukhmane, Coeurdacier, and Jin (2014) conduct
a richer analysis using a life-cycle model and more detailed micro data. They argue
that a large part of the rise in aggregate savings in China can be attributed to the onechild policy. The focus in Banerjee et al. (2014) is on the importance of general equilibrium effects when estimating how fertility restrictions (and their removal) would
55
The parameters in the example are: γ n = 0.8, γ = 0.5, ϕ = 0.1, B = 1, θ = 0.5, A = 10. The initial
level of human capital is normalized at H = 1 and the fertility restriction ranges from 1 to 5.
56
The mechanism that lower fertility decreases utility is analyzed in Cordoba (2015), who finds
that, during the 1970-2005 period, world growth in wellbeing was lower than the growth rate in per
capita consumption precisely because fertility fell so dramatically during that period.

74

3
2
1
1

2
3
4
Fertility Limit

0.4
0.3
0.2
1

2
3
4
Fertility Limit

0.1
0
1

5

Utility

Growth Rate

0.2
Education

Fertility

4

5

2
3
4
Fertility Limit

5

2
3
4
Fertility Limit

5

1.8
1.6
1

Figure 21: Fertility Restrictions
impact savings. These authors argue that appropriately taking general equilibrium
effects into account reduces the size of such estimates. Coeurdacier, Guibaud, and
Jin (2014) focus on the interaction between fertility policies and social security reform.57 Since an expansion of social security lowers the incentives to have children
(and thereby lowers the number of contributors to the system), the relaxation of
the one child policy is likely to have smaller effects than typically anticipated. The
authors find that this effect is quantitatively important for China.

3.4

Two-Parent Families: Decision-Making

The vast majority of the literature on fertility and growth focuses on the interaction
between parents and children in one-gender models. In other words, reproduction
is asexual and differences between men and women in technology and preferences
are abstracted from. We now expand our analysis by introducing two-gender families. In this version of our growth model, children have two parents: a mother and
a father. For simplicity we return to exogenous fertility for now and assume that
57

Song et al. (2015) also analyze the consequences of low fertility for pension reform in China,
albeit in a model with exogenous fertility.

75

each couple has two children. Thus, families now consist of a husband, a wife, a
son, and a daughter. Suppose men and women disagree about how much they care
about their children’s wellbeing.58 As in Section 2.4, suppose that the couple solves
a Pareto problem with fixed bargaining weights, where λf is the bargaining weight
of the woman, and λm is the weight of the man. Then the objective function is:
λf [u(c) + γf u(y ′ )] + (1 − λf )[u(c) + γm u(y ′ )].
To keep the rest of the model comparable to the previous section, we assume all
consumption in marriage is public and the total time endowment (of the couple) is
still one. We also make no distinction between sons and daughters in the parent’s
objective function. We will relax these assumptions further below. Assuming log
utility, the objective function can be written as:
max λ[log(c) + γf θ log(e)] + (1 − λ)[log(c) + γm θ log(e)].
Equilibrium education now is
e∗ =

γ̃θ
,
1 + γ̃θ

where γ̃ ≡ λf γf + (1 − λf )γm . Thus, the equilibrium growth rate is:
H′
=
H

(
)θ
γ̃θ
B
.
1 + γ̃θ

(14)

A comparison of Equations (12) and (14) shows not only that gender preference
gaps matter for the growth rate, but also how such preferences make their way into
decisions within the family. Specifically, assuming mothers care more about children than fathers do (γf > γm ), the economy grows faster, the larger the bargaining
power of women. Doepke and Tertilt (2009) explore the endogenous evolution of
women’s rights based on such a mechanism (details will be discussed in Section 4).
However, whether female empowerment enhances growth depends on the details
of the bargaining process within the household. Doepke and Tertilt (2014) use a noncooperative model to show that what looks like gender differences in preferences
may ultimately be due to specialization in tasks within the household. Based on
58

There could be many reasons for such a disagreement, ranging from biological/evolutionary
arguments to cultural factors. See Alger and Cox (2013) for a survey.

76

this mechanism, Doepke and Tertilt (2014) show that monetary transfers to women
may reduce growth, even if women are more likely to spend transfers on children.
The reason is that the equilibrium is characterized by a division of labor in which
women are in charge of time-intensive tasks such as education, while men provide
money-intensive goods and hence are in charge of savings and physical capital accumulation. In such a world, exogenous transfers to women (financed by a tax on
men) increase human capital accumulation but reduce physical capital accumulation. Depending on the production function, such a reallocation may increase or
decrease growth. Specifically, when returns to physical capital relative to human
capital are high, then such a policy would lower growth. To assess whether this is
an issue in reality, more empirical research is needed. The current literature on the
effects of transfers to women largely focuses on child expenditures, but there is little
work analyzing effects on savings and investment.

3.5 Two-Parent Families: Technology
Empirical research (e.g., Del Boca, Flinn, and Wiswall 2014) has shown that mothers and fathers are both important factors in the human capital formation process
of their children. In most families, both mothers and fathers spend a significant
amount of time with children (Schoonbroodt 2015). Further, men and women may
not be perfect substitutes in market production.59 To address these issues, we now
extend our view of the family to include fathers and mothers explicitly in the human
capital formation process and also men and women as entering separately into production. To isolate the role of women in technology (versus their role as decisionmakers), we assume again that all consumption in families is public and that men
and women have the same preferences regarding their children. In other words, we
ignore here the additional complication that arises if fathers and mothers disagree
(which we analyzed in section 3.4). We also focus on the education decision (rather
than fertility choice); however, it would be straightforward to include both margins
in the same model.
59
Large and persistent gender wage differentials exist, see Blau and Kahn (2000) for a survey.
There is an extensive empirical literature trying to analyze their causes. We do not take a stand here
on what the ultimate cause is, but rather explore the implications of men and women being imperfect
substitutes in production. Whether the gap is due to different innate skills, different preferences, or
cultural factors leading to differences in skill acquisition is largely irrelevant for our analysis.

77

In contrast to the previous versions of the model, men and women enter differently
into technology. The consumption good is produced with a Cobb-Douglas production function using both male and female efficiency units of time as inputs,
c = A(ℓf Hf )α (Hm )1−α ,
where α ∈ (0, 1). For simplicity, we assume that only women raise children, while
men work full time. The female time constraint is ℓf + ef + em ≤ 1, where ef is the
time invested in educating daughters, and em is time devoted to the education of
sons. Full income is defined as the production function evaluated at ℓf = 1 and is
therefore given by:
1−α
y = AHfα Hm
.
Each couple has two children: a daughter and a son. Both mothers and fathers are
essential for their children’s human capital accumulation:
1−β
Hf′ = (Bef )θ Hfβ Hm
,

(15)

′
1−β
Hm
= (Bem )θ Hfβ Hm
,

(16)

with β ∈ (0, 1). In summary, there are two gender differences in this setup: the
relative importance of women versus men in transmitting own human capital to
children (β) and the relative importance of women versus men in production (α).60
Assuming log utility, the objective function can be written as:
max log(c) + γ[αθ log(ef ) + (1 − α)θ log(em )].
The equilibrium allocation is:
α
,
α + (1 − α)γθ + αγθ
(1 − α)γθ
=
,
α + (1 − α)γθ + αγθ
αγθ
=
.
α + (1 − α)γθ + αγθ

ℓ∗f =
e∗m
e∗f
60

A third asymmetry is that we have assumed that only women can spend time educating children. But this asymmetry is made for tractability and is not essential for the qualitative results.

78

The equilibrium ratio of female to male human capital is given by:
Hf
=
Hm

(

ef
em

(

)θ
=

α
1−α

)θ
.

Note that the asymmetry between mothers and fathers in the human capital production function captured by β does not appear in this expression. This is not a
fundamental result, but rather a feature of our warm-glow altruism. In an altruistic
model, parents would take into account that educating their children will turn the
children themselves into better parents, and hence enable them to provide grandchildren with more education. In such a formulation, the relative importance of
fathers versus mothers in child development will also enter the relative human capital of men and women in equilibrium.
This model features a gender education gap and accordingly a gender wage gap.61
w
α
Specifically, the wage ratio per unit of time is wmf = 1−α
. The more productive women are in production (higher α), the smaller is the gender education gap. Higher
female wage increase the opportunity cost of time and hence make children more
costly. In a variant of the model with endogenous fertility, this logic would lead to
fertility decline in response to rising female productivity. This mechanism is analyzed by Galor and Weil (1996), who explore how this channel contributed to the
demographic transition.
In a fully altruistic model, parents would further take into account that their sons
and daughters will be working different hours in the market (because of the childbearing obligations of mothers) and accordingly invest less in daughters.62 This
amplification channel is explored by Echevarria and Merlo (1999). Lagerlöf (2003)
further explores the effect of the marriage market in this context and stresses the
importance of multiple equilibria. If all families invest more into sons, then daughters on average expect high spousal income, which lowers the incentive for each
individual family to educate daughters. However, complete gender equality is also
an equilibrium in his model.
Plugging the ratio of human capital back into the human capital production func61
Strictly speaking there are no wages in our formulation with home production. However, the
model can be reinterpreted as one with market production and wages given by marginal products.
62
Our warm-glow altruism does not capture this channel, because parents care about the full income of their children and do not take into account the time daughters will spend on child-bearing.

79

tion, we get the following equilibrium growth rate (for both male and female human
capital, and hence also output and consumption):
H′
= B θ (em )(1−β)θ (ef )θβ =
H

{

Bγθ
(1 − α)1−β αβ
α + γθ

}θ
.

(17)

Equation (17) shows that the growth rate depends on many features of the family.
As before, the more parents care about their children, the higher the growth rate.
What is new is that gender differences in technology also matter for growth. This
is true both for the role women play in production (as captured by α) and the relative importance of fathers and mothers in human capital transmission (captured
by β). Moreover, the two dimensions of technology interact. For example, in a
world where men and women enter symmetrically into production (α = 0.5), the
relative importance of mothers and fathers in human capital transmission becomes
irrelevant. On the other hand, α always enters, even in a world where mothers and
fathers are equally important in human capital transmission (β = 0.5). Closer inspection of (17) shows that the growth rate is hump-shaped in α. Thus, whether
an increase in α is increases or decreases growth depends on the starting point.
Starting from a low role of women in production, an increase in α will lead to a
reduction in the gender education gap, an increase in relative female wages, an increase in female labor force participation, and an acceleration of economic growth.
This mechanism may well have been historically relevant: recall that Figure 20 displays a strong positive relationship between GDP per capita and the role of women
in paid labor. Similarly, recall that Table 3 showed a negative correlation between
the gender education gap and development.
Since World War II, all developed countries went through a period of increasing female labor force participation and declining gender wage gaps. How women’s role
for production evolved over longer historical time periods is less clear. Humphries
and Weisdorf (2015) construct measures of relative male and female wages in England dating back to 1270 and find large swings over the centuries. They also try
to measure the wages of married and single women separately, using the distinction between casual work (more relevant for married women) and annual contracts
(mostly used for unmarried women). Using their data and accepting their interpretation, we find that the relative wages of married versus single women over time

80

WomenȇsȱRelativeȱWage

1.0

casualȱcontracts

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

annualȱcontracts

0.0
1250

1350

1450

1550

1650

1750

1850

Figure 22: Historical Wage Gap in England (Source: Humphries and Weisdorf 2015,
Table A1)
have sometimes moved in opposite directions (Figure 22). There is also evidence
suggesting that in the long run, the relationship between development and female
market work is not always monotonic. Specifically, based on cross-country data,
Goldin (1995) argues that female labor supply is U-shaped in development.63 A
similar point is made by Costa (2000), who argues that female labor force participation is N-shaped if one goes back far enough in time. Establishing such historical
facts is difficult not only due to lack of reliable data, but also because of the lack of a
sharp distinction between market and home production in agricultural economies.64
A further complication arises when market production is made up of different tasks.
If individuals differ in their ability to perform different tasks, then the allocation of
talent to activities becomes important. Norms about gender roles (or other barriers)
can then be an obstacle to the optimal allocation of talent to tasks. Hsieh et al.
(2013) analyze the importance of this channel in the United States. They find that an
improved allocation of talent across genders (and also ethnic groups) accounts for
15–20 percent of U.S. growth during the 1960–2008 period. Lee (2015) explores the
63

See also Olivetti (2014) for evidence of a U-shape in time series data of 16 developed countries
(including the United States) and Mammen and Paxson (2000) for evidence from India and Thailand.
64
For example Goldin (1995) includes unpaid farm and family firm workers, while our Figure 20
includes only paid workers.

81

importance of misallocation of female talent for cross-country income differences.
The paper finds that entry barriers for women in the non-agricultural sector play a
large role for the observed low agricultural productivity in poor countries.

3.6 Two-Parent Families: Endogenous Bargaining
In Section 3.4, we have seen that who makes decisions in the household matters
for growth. Hence, an important question is what determines bargaining power
in marriage.65 Here we are interested in what changes bargaining weights across
generations, which is distinct from the analysis of endogenous bargaining over time
for a given couple (which we considered in Section 2). Initial bargaining power
should be determined at time of marriage, which we do not model here. It is often
assumed that relative educational attainments matter in the marriage market and
hence for bargaining power. Relative education between men and women may
itself be endogenous as we have seen in Section 3.5. In this section, we connect
these two forces. To do so, we impose that the bargaining weight is a function of the
gender education gap, which is itself chosen in the family. This assumption allows
us to analyze the feedback from a gender education gap to bargaining power in the
family.66
We use a model that combines the setup with a gender preference gap in Section 3.4
with gender differences in technology as explored in Section 3.5. First, consider
such a setup with exogenous bargaining power. Combining the features of the two
models, the couple solves the following maximization problem:
max u(c) + γ̃ {αθ log(ef ) + (1 − α)θ log(em )}

c,ef ,em
65

There is a sizeable literature estimating models of household decision-making. Key for identification is typically the existence of so-called distribution factors that affect bargaining weights but
are exogenous to the bargaining process, see for example Blundell, Chiappori, and Meghir (2005).
66
Basu (2006) also explores the implications of endogenous bargaining power, albeit in a different
context. We are interested in how bargaining power changes across generations, while Basu (2006)
analyzes the dynamic implications for a given couple. By adjusting labor supply, and thus income,
spouses may affect their bargaining power in the household.

82

subject to:
1 = ℓf + em + ef ,
1−α
c = A(ℓf Hf )α Hm
,

where γ̃ ≡ λf γf + (1 − λf )γm . As before, human capital evolves according to (15)
and (16). This is the same problem as in Section 3.5, but with a modified γ. Thus,
the equilibrium growth rate is:
{
1+g

exog

=

Bγ̃θ
(1 − α)1−β αβ
α + γ̃θ

}θ
.

Now we can explore how endogenous bargaining differs from exogenous bargaining in this setup by assuming that λ is a function of relative education. A simple
functional form assumption that captures this dependence and at the same time
ef
guarantees a bargaining weight between zero and one is λ(ef , em ) = ef +e
. Recall
m
that relative education is a function of the relative importance of female labor in the
ef
= α. Thus, we can replace λf by α and write the growth rate as:67
market: ef +e
m
{
1+g

end

=

B[αγf + (1 − α)γm ]θ
(1 − α)1−β αβ
α + [αγf + (1 − α)γm ]θ

}θ
.

(18)

Proposition 4. Assume γf > γm . If λf < α, then the growth rate is higher in the endogenous bargaining model, while λf > α implies a higher growth rate in the exogenous
bargaining model.
This result relates women’s role in technology to women’s role in decision-making.
Specifically when women’s power in decision-making is low relative to their importance for production, then endogenizing the link from education to bargaining
power increases the growth rate. The opposite is true when women have a lot of
bargaining power relative to their importance in production.
This result is illustrated in Figure 23 with a numerical example.68 As was discussed
67
Note that with our warm-glow altruism, parents do not take into account that when increasing
their daughter’s education, they also increase the daughter’s bargaining weight. De la Croix and
Vander Donckt (2010) analyze a model with altruism where parents explicitly consider the impact of
education choices on their children’s future bargaining power.
68
The parameters in the example are: β = 0.7, θ = 0.5, B = 10, γf = 0.5, γm = 0.2, λ = 0.2.

83

1.15

Growth Rate

1.1
1.05
1
0.95

exogenous bargaining
endogenous bargaining

0.9
0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25
0.3
alpha

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Figure 23: Growth Rate as Function of α, Exogenous versus Endogenous Bargaining
in Section 3.5, the growth rate of the exogenous bargaining model is hump-shaped
in α. This is not necessarily true in the endogenous bargaining model. In the example, growth monotonically increases in α. With fixed bargaining weights, an increase in women’s role in production can lower growth because the resulting rise in
female labor force participation decreases education time with children and thereby
slows down human capital accumulation. This effect is mitigated in the endogenous bargaining model, where the resulting increase in bargaining power pushes
towards more education (given that in the model women care more about children’s
education than men do). This example shows that the details of decision-making in
the family matter for growth and that asymmetries between men and women in
decision-making interact with asymmetries in technology.

3.7

Son Preferences

Many cultures are characterized by a preference for sons. This preference typically
has effects on fertility behavior, where families that have only daughters are more
likely to have another child (e.g., Anukriti 2014). Recently, sex-selective abortion
has also been a concern (Ebenstein 2010). Son preferences also manifest themselves
84

in boys being treated better than girls. For example, Jayachandran and Kuziemko
(2011) document gender differences in breast feeding rates and Tarozzi and Mahajan (2007) document better nutritional status for boys in India. Further, such a
preference is more pronounced in poorer countries (see Table 3).
We now investigate the growth consequences of such a son preference in an extension of our model.69 First, consider an economy with physical capital in which parents leave bequests to sons and daughters. As before, consumption in marriage is
public, fertility is exogenous, and each couple has one son and one daughter. Also
as before, parents care about their children in a warm-glow fashion. In this case,
parents derive utility from the bequest they give to their children. Output is produced using a linear technology in capital, i.e., output is given by y = AK, where
A is a parameter. All sons and daughters will be married. Without heterogeneity,
it is irrelevant who marries whom. The capital of any given couple is made up of
the sum of the bequests they each got, i.e., k = bs + bd , where s denotes sons and d
daughters.
Preferences are given by
u(c) + γs u(bs ) + γd u(bd ),
where γs > γd would capture a son preference. The budget constraint is c + bs + bd ≤
y.
Assuming log utility, equilibrium bequests are
γs
y,
1 + γs + γd
γd
bd =
y.
1 + γs + γd
bs =

The equilibrium growth rate of income is:
y′
A(γs + γd )
=
.
y
1 + γs + γd
The key result here is that the son preference is irrelevant for the growth rate. The
only thing that matters is how much parents care on average about their children,
69

Hazan and Zoabi (2015b) analyze endogenous son preferences in a related model with endogenous fertility.

85

i.e., only the sum γs + γd appears.
The finding changes if human capital accumulation is considered, as long as there
are decreasing returns to educating a given person. In contrast to physical capital
(where ownership does not matter for growth), it is plausible that total knowledge
in an economy will be larger if knowledge is shared by more people. We now show
how a son preference will interact with such decreasing returns in individual human capital.
The technologies for producing output and human capital are the same as in Section 3.5. Parents care only about their own children and hence they do not take
into account that educating their daughter/son will also benefit the future son-inlaw/daughter-in-law. Rather, they anticipate that their son-in-law will be endowed
′
with the average male human capital in the economy, which we denote by H̄m
, and
′
daughters-in-law are anticipated to have human capital H̄f . The optimization problem of a couple endowed with human capital (Hf , Hm ) is thus given by:
max u(c) + γd u(yd′ ) + γs u(ys′ )

ef ,em ,ℓf

subject to:
1−α
c = A(ℓf Hf )α Hm
,

1 ≥ ℓf + ef + em ,
′ 1−α
yd′ = A(Hf′ )α (H̄m
) ,
′ 1−α
ys′ = A(H̄f′ )α (Hm
) ,
1−β
Hf′ = (Bef )θ Hfβ Hm
,
′
1−β
Hm
= (Bem )θ Hfβ Hm
,
′
where H̄f′ and H̄m
are taken as given.

Assuming log utility, the maximization problem reduces to
max α log(ℓf ) + γd αθ log(ef ) + γs (1 − α)θ log(em )

ℓf ,ef ,em

subject to:
ℓf + ef + em ≤ 1.
86

The resulting optimal education choices are
γs (1 − α)θ
,
α + γs (1 − α)θ + αγd θ
γd αθ
=
.
α + γs (1 − α)θ + αγd θ

e∗m =
e∗f

As before, human capital, income, and consumption all grow at the same rate in the
balanced growth path. The equilibrium growth rate is:
{

Bθ
(γs [1 − α])1−β (γd α)β
α + [γd α + γs (1 − α)]θ

}θ
.

This expression shows how the effect of a son preference on the growth rate depends on the technology for goods production and human capital accumulation.
First, consider the symmetric case where men and women are equally important
in production (by setting β = α = 0.5). Fix the total weight parents put on children: γs + γd = 1. In this case, the growth rate is maximized at γs = γd = 0.5. In
other words, a son preference lowers growth. This is in contrast to the economy
with only physical capital, where a son preference is irrelevant. Hence, a son preference is only growth-reducing when knowledge is the engine of growth. But even
in a knowledge economy a son preference is not always disadvantageous. If men
have the comparative advantage in knowledge production (β < 0.5), the growthmaximizing weight on children will display a son preference, the strength of which
depends on the extent of men’s comparative advantage.
On the other hand, in a world where men have a comparative advantage in goods
production (α < 0.5), but we have β = 0.5, a slight daughter preference enhances
growth. The reason is that human capital is the engine of growth, implying that
educating sons and daughters equally is the growth-maximizing strategy. Parents,
on the other hand, do not maximize the growth rate, but rather output in the next
period, where sons have the comparative advantage in production. Thus, parents
overinvest in sons (compared to growth-maximizing solution). A son preference
amplifies this problem.
Empirical evidence also links son preferences to the increasingly asymmetric sex
ratios in some countries. In China, for example, in 2005 over 120 boys were born
87

for each 100 girls (Wei and Zhang 2011). Such asymmetries may have important
aggregate consequences, which are largely unexplored in the literature. A notable
exception is Wei and Zhang (2011), who find that rising sex ratios are an important
determinant of the high Chinese savings rate. Du and Wei (2010) take this idea a
step further and show in a calibrated model that this channel explains more than 50
percent of the current account surplus in China.

3.8 Polygyny
The role model for the family considered in most of this chapter is the Western
nuclear family. The dominance of the nuclear family consisting of a husband, a wife,
and the couple’s own children is a relatively recent phenomenon, and even today
typical families in some parts of the world do not follow this norm. Historically,
the extended family (with multiple generations living together) was more prevalent
than it is today.70 Moreover, many families today no longer include married couples,
as single parents are on the rise and many individuals no longer live in families at
all (see Figures 3 and 4 in Section 2.2).
Another important type of family structure is polygamy. In many parts of Africa
men marrying multiple wives (polygyny) is common to the present day.71 Does
such a family structure matter for macroeconomic outcomes? Tertilt (2005) suggests
it does. The paper builds a model of polygynous families in which men buy brides
and sell daughters to future husbands. The family structure reduces output (relative
to enforced monogamy) through two channels. The market for daughters turns women into a valuable asset. This has two implications. First, the revenues from selling
daughters become a useful way of financing old age, which depresses savings and
thus physical capital. Second, it increases fertility as men want many daughters.
This results in higher population growth rates, which depresses capital per person
and thus GDP per capita. The paper uses a calibrated general equilibrium model
to show that this effect is quantitatively important, and shows that the mechanism
70

Although, because of shorter life spans, perhaps not as prevalent as one might think. See Ruggles
(1994) for an extensive historical account of changing household structures in the United States over
the last 150 years.
71
Polyandry (women having multiple husbands) is extremely rare, but a few societies exist as well.

88

can account for a large part of the observed differences between polygynous and
monogamous countries shown in Table 4.
Polygyny matters for growth through its effect on brideprices. Thus, the marriage
market is essential for the mechanism. It is not the case that an individual polygynous couple would save less than a monogamous couple living in the same country.
Rather, if a large fraction of households is polygynous, the equilibrium price of women is high, which changes incentives for all families. In other words, polygyny
lowers output precisely because of the general equilibrium effects in the marriage
market. We thus turn to the importance of marriage markets for growth in the next
section.
A few papers attempt to understand why polygyny exists in some cultures and not
in others. Gould, Moav, and Simhon (2008) and Lagerlöf (2005) relate the disappearance of polygyny to economic development. Heterogeneity plays a key role in
both papers. Gould, Moav, and Simhon argue that the increasing skill premium has
led men to want fewer, higher quality children. To educate their children, they accordingly demand higher quality wives, but fewer of them, which naturally leads
to fewer wives per men. Lagerlöf relates the disappearance of polygyny to the decline in male inequality over time. Primitive societies are arguably more unequal,
which allows wealthy men to marry more wives and have more children. Over
time, this dilutes their wealth, making societies more equal, which eventually leads
to a more equal distribution of wives across men. In both papers, the decline in
polygyny goes hand in hand with fertility decline and economic growth. Both papers explain the decline polygyny prevalence, but are silent on the introduction of
formal restrictions.
Two recent papers analyze the political economy of the introduction of monogamy.
Lagerlöf (2010) proposes a theory related to inequality of wives across men. When
polygyny is allowed, the elites have many wives, while poor men have none. This
may lead to revolutions and thus creates an incentive for the elites to impose a formal ban on polygyny. De la Croix and Mariani (2015) provide a comprehensive
political economy analysis of the switch from polygyny to monogamy and then to
serial monogamy. The theory is based on the voting behavior of the entire population (including women), rather than the incentives of the elites. The transition
between regimes is endogenously generated by human capital accumulation that
89

changes the coalitions that stand to gain from a change in the marriage regime.

3.9 The Marriage Market
While there is a substantial literature on marriage choices within family economics,
incorporating a marriage market into macroeconomic models is no trivial undertaking. One approach was proposed by Tertilt (2005), who models a competitive
market for brides featuring an equilibrium brideprice that clears the market. However, such a formulation works only if there is no heterogeneity; if potential spouses
vary in “quality,” it matters who marries whom.
A number of recent contributions analyze marriage formation with heterogenous
agents within macro models. This allows the analysis of questions such as the impact of changes in the assortativeness of mating on income inequality. An early
example is Fernández, Guner, and Knowles (2005).72 The paper investigates the relationship between inequality, assortative mating, human capital accumulation, and
per capita GDP. Mating is modeled through a search model with random matching. The model also features an intergenerational transmission mechanism, because
parental income is used as collateral that children need when investing in education.
One main finding is that such a model can generate multiple steady states that differ in wage inequality. Across steady states, marital sorting and wage inequality are
positively related, while marital sorting and GDP per capita are negatively related.
Eika, Mogstad, and Zafar (2014) document empirically the importance of assortative mating for income inequality in the United States. While assortative mating is
found to be an important determinant of inequality, the study finds that changes
in inequality cannot be attributed to changes in sorting patterns. Greenwood et al.
(2016) analyze such a link in a structural quantitative model.
Beyond these few contributions, the importance of marriage for growth is largely
unexplored. In part, this may be due to the computational complexity of models
that feature sorting with heterogeneous agents. However, with recent advances
72

Fernández and Rogerson (2001), Choo and Siow (2006), and Greenwood et al. (2014, 2016) also
analyze the relationship between marital sorting and income inequality, but do not consider broader
macroeconomic implications.

90

in computational power allowing increasingly complex models to be analyzed, we
expect this to be an active research area in the near future.

4 The Family and the Political Economy of Institutional
Change
Long-run economic development is characterized not just by economic transformations, but also by a set of striking regularities in terms of political change. During
the development process, almost all of today’s rich countries went through a series
of similar policy reforms: for instance, democracy spread, public education systems
were built, and public pension systems were introduced. The only exception to this
pattern are countries that are rich primarily because of endowments with natural
resources such as oil. Among countries who owe their wealth to the productivity
of their citizens, these political transformations are a universal characteristic of the
development process.
The tight link between economic and political transformations raises the question
of how the causality runs between the two realms. Does economic growth trigger
political change, or is political change a precondition for growth? Can today’s poor
countries, many of which have implemented only a subset of the political reforms
that characterize rich countries, foster faster economic development by adopting
rich-country political institutions and reforms?
In this section, we argue that in answering such questions the family once again
plays a central role. Many of the political reforms that go along with development
are directly about the family (such as the introduction of child labor laws and the
expansion of women’s rights). In other cases (such as education and pension reforms), the political changes concern areas that originally were organized within
families but in which, over time, the state played an increasing role. We provide
a brief overview of the facts of political change during the development process.
We then discuss some of the political economy literature analyzing the causes and
consequences of political change, arguing that in many cases changes in family life
were driving reform. We illustrate the role of the family by zooming in on two spe-

91

cific reforms—the expansion of women’s rights and the introduction of child labor
laws.

4.1 Political Economy Facts
The main political transformations that go along with the development process are
the introduction of democracy, public and compulsory schooling, and child labor
regulation; the gradual expansion of women’s rights; and more generally the creation of large welfare states that raise a significant fraction of GDP in tax revenue
to provide welfare benefits and old-age pensions. Before the onset of modern economic growth (say, in 1750), no country in the world had any of these institutions.
Most poor countries today have some but not all of these features.
There is considerable variation across countries in the timing of reforms. For some
countries, the first transformation was the introduction of democracy, starting with
the founding of the United States of America in 1776 and then followed by a series
of franchise extensions in Britain. Other countries adopted other reforms first and
achieved democracy later. Some European countries democratized after World War
I, and others had to wait until after the fall of the Iron Curtain in the early 1990s. In
some countries (such as South Korea and Taiwan), democracy was introduced only
after most other political reforms had been implemented and after rapid economic
growth had been achieved.
Initially, democracy generally meant that men, but not women, obtained the right
to vote and run for office. In the United States, the first state to give women the
right to vote was Wyoming in 1869, and most other states had followed by World
War I.73 At the federal level, universal suffrage was introduced with the Nineteenth
Amendment in 1920. In many European countries women were able to vote after
World War I, but once again there is a lot of variation across countries. For example,
in Switzerland women received the right to vote in federal elections only in 1972,
and the last canton to allow women to vote was Appenzell Innerrhoden in 1990.74
73
See Doepke, Tertilt, and Voena (2012) for a detailed time line of the introduction of women’s
rights in the United States.
74
In fact, the last canton to voluntarily introduce the right to vote for women was Appenzell
Aussenrhoden in 1989. In Appenzell Innerrhoden women’s suffrage was mandated by a Supreme
Court decision in 1990.

92

Compared to the spread of political rights, the timing of education reforms is more
uniform across countries. In the United States, Canada, and the industrializing
Western European countries, public and compulsory education was widely introduced in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In many cases, these
reforms went along with significant restrictions of child labor.
The first country to introduce a public pension system was Germany in 1891. Mandatory health and accident insurance for workers were introduced around the same
time. Most other European countries, Canada, and the United States had followed
these steps before the middle of the twentieth century. The first unemployment
benefit scheme was introduced in the United Kingdom with the National Insurance
Act 1911. In the midst of the Great Depression, the U.S. Congress passed the Social
Security Act, which contained provisions for old age insurance, welfare, and unemployment insurance. Most European countries and Canada introduced similar
provisions during the first half of the twentieth century.
The timing of political reforms that affected families most directly (in particular
the regulation of child labor, the public provision of education, and the spread of
women’s rights) is closely associated with a major transformation of families themselves. As discussed in Section 3, as countries transition from a pre-industrial society to modern growth, they universally undergo a demographic transition from
high to low fertility. In North America and Western Europe, the main phase of fertility decline took place between the middle of the nineteenth century and World
War I. Access to primary education became near-universal during the same period.
Given that formal schooling moved children from the family home (where many
had been working from a young age) to schools, the rise of mass education implied
a transformation of family life on its own.

4.2 The Family as a Driver of Political Change
To understand the political economy of reforms, one needs to understand who
the winners and losers of a reform are. Political reforms happen if there is a constituency that stands to gain from the reform, and if this constituency has sufficient
political power to implement the desired policy. The trigger for a reform can either
be a change in how a policy affects specific groups, or an increase in the political
93

power of a group that stands to gain from a reform. One might expect that democratization, which increased the political power of broad parts of the population
at the expense of established elites, should be a major engine for political change.
While there are examples of democratization triggering reform, the introduction of
the major reforms associated with economic development described above is not
closely correlated with expansions in political rights. We therefore focus on mechanisms that change who gains and who loses from reforms, and take as given that
the relevant groups have sufficient political power to be heard.75
We argue that for most of the major political reforms associated with economic development, the reorganization of families is a key reason for why political incentives
changed. Technological and structural change affects fertility choices, education
choices, and the division of labor in the family, all of which determine how people
are affected by reforms. For example, reforms such as mandatory schooling laws
and public pensions move responsibilities from the family to the public sphere, and
affect the relationship between parents and children. How people feel about such
changes will depend in part on how many children they have, on whether they plan
to educate their children, and on whether they anticipate living with their children
in old age. Other reforms—such as the expansion of women’s rights—affect the interaction between spouses. How people are affected by such reforms depend in part
on the division of labor in the household and on women’s labor force participation,
both of which vary with development.
Consider the introduction of public schooling systems. Before public schooling,
most children were working with their parents from a young age. Hence, the spread
of public and compulsory education implied a major change of parent-child relations. Galor and Moav (2006) provide a theory that explains the public provision of
education as a consequence of a rising importance of human capital in the economy.
They consider a model economy populated by capitalists and workers. The model
features heterogeneity in wealth, and initially only capitalists are accumulating capital through bequests to their children. However, the model features complementary between physical and human capital, and as the stock of physical capital rises,
over time the capitalists stand to gain from higher education among the workers.
75

Key contributions examining the causes of expansions of political rights include Acemoglu and
Robinson (2000) and Lizzeri and Persico (2004).

94

Ultimately, both workers and capitalists support a tax on capitalists to support public education. The accumulation of physical and human capital within families is
central to this mechanism. The public provision of schooling was often followed
by mandatory schooling laws. Such laws affect the family even more directly by
forcing parents to send their children to school. A closely related policy is a child
labor ban, which we will analyze in Section 4.4.
In the case of schooling and child labor bans, who is a winner and who is a loser
from reform depends on people’s factor endowments (physical capital and human
capital) and also on fertility. Thus, potential conflicts arise between capitalists and
skilled workers on the one hand, and unskilled workers with large families and
no desire to educate their children on the other hand. For other types of reforms,
gender and marital status are the dividing lines. This point is emphasized in Edlund and Pande (2002), who analyze the importance of women as voters. The paper
shows that the political gender gap in the United States—women are more likely
to vote Democrat than men—is a relatively recent phenomenon. Up until the mid1960s, women voted more conservative than men on average. The paper argues that
the change in political preferences (which in turn may have impacted other reforms)
was due to a specific change in the family, namely the increase in divorce. A large
increase in divorce rates during the 1960s and 1970s (see Figure 6) increased the
fraction of relatively poor single women. These women tend to benefit from redistribution, which is typically favored by Democrats. The paper provides evidence in
support of the hypothesis by showing that marriage tends to make a woman more
Republican, while divorce tends to make her more Democrat.
There are also a few papers that emphasize the importance of women as policymakers. Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004) use gender quotas in India to empirically
analyze which public projects are implemented at the village level depending on
the gender of the leader. While the paper is not specifically about reforms, it shows
that the gender of the leader affects the types of public goods that are provided. A
related point is made by Washington (2008) and Oswald and Powdthavee (2010),
who show that the gender composition of children affects the voting behavior of
(male) legislators both in the United States and the United Kingdom: having more
daughters makes politicians take more liberal positions.

95

Another important reform is the introduction of public pension systems.76 Social
security programs transfer resources from young and middle-aged workers to the
elderly. Without public systems, such transfers typically happen within the family,
with altruistic children voluntarily taking care of elderly parents. Because of the
dramatic fertility decline during the nineteenth century (see Figure 1), more people
ended up without children caring for them during old age, increasing the risk of
poverty. This fact probably played an important role in the introduction of public
pension systems. At the same time, the existence of such systems further decreases
the incentive to have children, which leads to a two-way interaction between the
structure of the family and political reforms.
Finally, a large class of reforms affected the legal position of women. These include reforms affecting ownership rights of women (such as the Married Women’s
Property Act of 1870 in England), reforms affecting child custody laws, the introduction of suffrage for women, and also laws banning labor market discrimination
and removing occupational restrictions (such as allowing women to become judges
and soldiers). Reforming the legal position of women also impacts the position of
women in the household, e.g., by changing their outside options. And conversely,
changes in family structure (such as the decline in fertility and the increase in female
labor force participation) affected the gains from such reforms. We will discuss the
political economy of women’s economic rights (such as married women’s property
rights) in Section 4.3. Other types of women’s rights, such as suffrage or labor rights,
imply different political economy tradeoffs. While there is some empirical work on
these other rights, there is a lack of work that formally analyzes the political economy of other types of rights for women.77 We view this is an important issue to be
addressed by future research.

4.3

Voting for Women’s Rights

Throughout the course of development, all industrialized countries implemented
reforms that changed the legal position of women. Doepke and Tertilt (2009) propose a mechanism that provides a causal link between women’s rights and eco76
There is a large literature on social security systems, see for example Cooley and Soares (1996),
Boldrin and Montes (2005), Caucutt, Cooley, and Guner (2013).
77
See Duflo (2012) and Doepke, Tertilt, and Voena (2012) for two surveys.

96

nomic growth. The mechanism is based on women’s role in nurturing children.
In contrast, Geddes and Lueck (2002) argue that the initial expansion of women’s
rights was related to women’s role in the labor market. Given that the main phase
of expanding women’s economic rights was in the nineteenth century, a time when
female labor force participation was low, we argue that a mechanism related to a
women’s role in the family is more plausible.
We now illustrate the basic mechanism of Doepke and Tertilt (2009) in a simplified
framework. The setup is similar to that in Section 3.4 with a modified utility function. We now assume consumption is a private good, which allows for a stronger
conflict of interest between husbands and wives. We also introduce grandchildren
and assume that people derive utility from the human capital of children and grandchildren. This assumption introduces a conflict across generations: men want their
grandchildren to have as much human capital as possible, but it is the next generation that makes the decision. Since the next generation also cares about their own
consumption, fathers will not invest as much in their children’s education as desired by the grandfathers. We will now show how this conflict across generations
may induce men to vote for female empowerment.
Let the utility function of spouse of gender g be
log(cg ) + γg log(H ′ ) + γgG log(H ′′ ),
where γg is the weight spouse g attaches to the human capital of own children, while
γgG is the weight on grandchildren. As in Section 3.4, we assume that γf > γm .78
Given the private goods assumption, the budget constraint is
cm + cf = AℓH,
where ℓ is total working time of the couple. Assuming each spouse has a time
endowment of 1, the family time constraint is
ℓ + 2e ≤ 2,
78

G
While it may seem natural to assume the same for grandchildren, γfG > γm
, this assumption is
not needed for the analysis.

97

where e is education time for each of two children.
We now consider two political regimes. In the first one—patriarchy—only men make
decisions. In the second regime—empowerment—men and women make decisions
jointly, i.e., they solve a collective bargaining problem with equal weights. To find
the equilibrium allocation under patriarchy, one can solve the following maximization problem:
max log(cg ) + γg log(H ′ ) + γgG log(H ′′ )
ℓ,e

subject to:
ℓ + 2e ≤ 2,
H ′ = (Be)θ ,
cm + cf = AℓH,
cm , cf ≥ 0.
Note that H ′′ = (Be′ )θ , where e′ is determined by the next generation and is taken
as given by the grandparent. Given the technology, the choice of education for own
children e will not affect H ′′ , i.e., there is no interdependence between the choices
of different generations. Further, since a man does not derive utility form his wife’s
consumption, women’s consumption will be zero, and hence male consumption
equals production.79 The equilibrium allocation under patriarchy is:
γm θ
,
1 + γm θ
2
ℓP =
,
1 + γm θ
2AH
cPm =
.
1 + γm θ

eP =

In contrast, under empowerment, couples solve a joint maximization problem with
equal bargaining weights. The objective function then is
1
1
log(cm ) + log(cf ) + γ̃ log(H ′ ) + γ̃ G log(H ′′ ),
2
2
79

This counterfactual result can be easily modified by introducing altruism, as we do in Doepke
and Tertilt (2009).

98

γ +γ

γ G +γ G

where γ̃ = f 2 m and γ̃ G = f 2 m . Given the objective function, women and men
E
consume equal amounts, cE
f = cm . The optimal education and labor choices are:
γ̃θ
,
1 + γ̃θ
2
ℓE =
.
1 + γ̃θ

eE =

Consumption is equalized and depends on the initial human capital:
E
cE
m = cf =

AH
.
1 + γ̃θ

We are interested in understanding under what conditions men prefer to live in a
patriarchal world and when they prefer empowering women. We focus on men’s
preferences because women’s economic rights were expanded long before women
gained the right to vote. Hence, the expansion of women’s right can be viewed as
a voluntary sharing of power by men. To understand men’s political preferences,
we compare the indirect utility function of a man in both regimes starting from the
same initial human capital. Denote the indirect utility functions by U E and U P .
Plugging in the equilibrium allocations and simplifying, we see that U E > U P if
and only if:
(
)
(
)
γ̃ 1 + γm θ
2(1 + γ̃θ)
G
(γm + γm )θ log
> log
.
(19)
γm 1 + γ̃θ
1 + γm θ
From a man’s perspective, there is a tradeoff. Patriarchy implies strictly higher own
consumption, since resources do not need to be shared with one’s wife. On the other
hand, from the grandfather’s perspective, the son will underinvest in the education
of the grandchild. Empowering women will lead the future daughter in law to have
more bargaining power, and, given that women care more about children than men
do (γf > γm ), this will increase the education of the grandchildren.
We will now show how this tradeoff changes with development. Assume that the
human capital technology improves over time, i.e., θ increases. When the returns
to education are zero, i.e., θ = 0, men strictly prefer to live under patriarchy (this
follows from Equation (19)). The intuition is that with θ = 0, there is no reason to
educate children. With zero education, from a man’s perspective empowering women imposes a cost in terms of lost consumption, but does not bring any benefits.
99

Education

0.5

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

3

4

5

Male Utility

theta
12
10
8
6
4
0

Patriarchy
Empowerment

1

2
theta

Figure 24: Education and Male Utility as function of θ, patriarchy versus empowerment
However, As θ increases, the concern about the grandchildren’s education becomes
increasingly important. The next proposition shows that as long as the concern
about grandchildren is above a threshold, when θ becomes large enough the grandchild effect dominates and hence men gain from switching to the empowerment
regime.
G
Proposition 5. If the weight γm
men attach to grandchildren is above a threshold (given in
the proof), there is a threshold θ̄ such that men prefer empowerment if θ > θ̄.

Figure 24 illustrates the result with a numerical example.80 The equilibrium education choice e increases with θ in both regimes. Initially, for low levels of θ, men
prefer to live under patriarchy. However, as θ increases, patriarchy becomes too
costly for men. By introducing women’s empowerment, men gain because of the
positive effect on grandchildren.
The result is in line with what was observed during the nineteenth century in both
the United States and England. Primary education expanded rapidly at the same
80

G
The parameters used in the example are γm = 0.3, γf = 0.9, γm
= 1.2, A = B = 5. The initial
level of human capital is set to H0 = 10. The return to education θ varies between 0 and 5.

100

GDPȱperȱcapitaȱ($PPP),ȱ2005
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1
GEM,ȱ2004

Figure 25: Gender Empowerment Measure (GEM) and GDP per capita Across
Countries (Source: GEM is an index constructed by the UN (Human Development
Report, 2004), GDP numbers are from the World Development Indicators)
time when male legislators passed laws to grant property and other economic rights
to married women. Fertility rates also decreased quickly and economic growth increased. These features can be incorporated by adding fertility choice and assuming
that parental human capital is an input in children’s human capital. In Doepke and
Tertilt (2009), we analyze such an augmented model in a fully dynamic context. The
main result of the model is also in line with cross-country data. Figure 25 shows
that the position of women, as measured by the gender empowerment measure
(GEM) constructed by United Nations, is strongly positively correlated with GDP
per capita. Assuming that returns to education differ systematically across countries, the model reproduces the same relationship.
A complementary theory is proposed by Fernández (2014). As in Doepke and Tertilt (2009), father’s concern for their children is a central element. However, the key
issue is not investment in education, but fathers preferring a more equal outcome
between sons and daughters than what is produced under patriarchy. Economic
growth widens disparities between sons and daughters in the patriarchy regime,
which ultimately induces fathers to vote for empowerment. Fernández (2014) also
provides empirical evidence based on the variation in extensions of women’s economic rights across U.S. states, showing that per capita wealth is positively associ101

ated with reform, whereas the association with fertility rates is negative (which is
in line with the theories of both Doepke and Tertilt 2009 and Fernández 2014).

4.4

Voting for Children’s Rights

Another near-universal policy reform associated with long-run development is the
restriction of child labor. In pre-industrial societies, child labor was the norm. In
Western Europe and the United States, concern about child labor increased with
industrialization, and ultimately industrializing countries introduced a variety of
child labor restrictions such as minimum age laws and laws against working in
hazardous occupations. A closely related policy reform that often coincided with
child labor legislation is the introduction of compulsory schooling. This policy is
usually the most effective constraint on child labor (in part because enforcement is
straightforward). The close link between child labor and schooling is also part of the
reason why child labor reforms matter for growth, as rising educational attainment
is one engine of long-run development.
Whereas child labor bans are now in place in all industrial countries, in many developing countries child labor continues to be widespread. Child labor is especially
common among poorer families who depend on the additional income. In these
countries, public support for introducing restrictions is low.
What explains the passing of child labor reform in some countries, and persistent
failure to do so in others? These questions are addressed in Doepke and Zilibotti
(2005a), who present an analysis of the political economy of child labor legislation
within a dynamic framework that endogenizes skill premia as well as fertility and
education decisions.81 Here we use a simpler, static framework to highlight the
main tradeoffs. To understand political support for and opposition to child labor
laws, it is necessary to identify which groups stand to gain or lose from the introduction of regulation. Doepke and Zilibotti argue that the group that stands to gain
most from banning child labor consists of unskilled adult workers. To the extent
that these workers compete with children in the labor market, by banning child
81

An analysis of the welfare implications of banning child labor is contained in Doepke and
Krueger (2008).

102

labor they can reduce competition and potentially raise their own wages.82 However, the situation is complicated by the fact that the same workers may also have
working children themselves, so that the potential wage gains have to be traded
off against the loss of child-labor income. A family’s fertility and education choices
therefore also matter.
To analyze these tradeoffs more formally, consider an economy with NS skilled and
NU unskilled workers. We start under the assumption that each worker has n children, but that only the children of the unskilled workers are working. This is consistent with the observation that child labor is generally more prevalent among poorer
families, whereas richer, more highly educated families tend to send their children
to school rather than to work. The production technology is:
Y = AXSα XU1−α ,
where XS is skilled labor and XU is unskilled labor. Each working child supplies
λ units of unskilled labor, where λ < 1, reflecting that children are less productive
than adult workers. If child labor is legal (the laissez faire policy), labor supply is
given by:
XSlaissez faire = NS ,
XUlaissez faire = NU + λnNU ,
and, under the assumption of competitive production, wages are given by:
(

wSlaissez faire
wUlaissez faire

)1−α
(1 + λn)NU
= Aα
,
NS
(
)α
NS
= A(1 − α)
.
(1 + λn)NU

Workers seek to maximize their total income (i.e., consumption). Adding adult and
82

The feedback from regulation to wages is also central to the seminal analysis of Basu and Van
(1998), which focuses on the possibility of multiple equilibria.

103

child-labor income, total family income for the two types of workers is given by:
(
ISlaissez faire
IUlaissez faire

= wS = Aα

)1−α

(1 + λn)NU
NS

= (1 + λn)wU = (1 + λn)

,
(
1−α

A(1 − α)

NS
NU

)α
.

Let us now see who would gain or lose if child labor were to be banned. Under a
child labor ban, no children are working, so that labor supply is simply XSBan = NS
and XUBan = NU , and wages are:
(
wSBan
wUBan

= Aα

NU
NS

)1−α
(

= A(1 − α)

NS
NU

,
)α
.

The ratios of wages under the two policies are:
wSBan

(

1
1 + λn

)1−α

=
< 1,
wSlaissez faire
wUBan
= (1 + λn)α > 1.
wUlaissez faire
Thus, the skilled wage falls and the unskilled wage increases. This happens because
child labor is a substitute for unskilled but a complement for skilled adult labor.
The result suggests that unskilled workers may be in favor of banning child labor.
However, this is no longer clear when we look at what happens to total family
income:
(
ISBan
IUBan

=

wSBan

=

wUBan

= Aα

NU
NS

= A(1 − α)

104

)1−α
(

NS
NU

,
)α
.

The income ratios are:
(

ISBan
ISlaissez faire
IUBan
IUlaissez faire

=
(
=

1
1 + λn
1
1 + λn

)1−α
< 1,
)1−α
< 1.

We see that, in fact, income falls for both groups, including the unskilled. The reason is that the unskilled workers’ gain in terms of higher wages is more than offset
by the loss of child labor income. Intuitively, the loss of child labor income is proportional to the total reduction in the supply of unskilled labor, whereas the increase
in the unskilled wage is less than proportional to the decline in labor supply.
The analysis suggests that in a country where unskilled workers’ children are working as well, public support for introducing child-labor restrictions should be low.
The support for child labor restrictions should rise, however, if there is a group of
unskilled workers whose children are not working (say, because they send their
children to school). Assume that fraction s of unskilled workers send their children
to school, while only fraction (1 − s) has working children. The wages then become:
(

wSlaissez faire
wUlaissez faire

)1−α
(1 + λ(1 − s)n)NU
= Aα
,
NS
(
)α
NS
= A(1 − α)
(1 + λ(1 − s)n)NU

Income is now given by:
(
ISlaissez faire

= wS = Aα

(1 + λ(1 − s)n)NU
NS

)1−α
,
(

NS
Children) = (1 + λn)wU = (1 + λn)A(1 − α)
(1 + λ(1 − s)n)NU
(
)α
NS
laissez faire
(Children in School) = wU = A(1 − α)
.
IU
(1 + λ(1 − s)n)NU
IUlaissez faire (Working

105

)α
,

If child labor is now banned, incomes are:
(
ISBan
IUBan (Working

=

Children) =

wSBan

= Aα

NU
NS

IUBan (Children

)1−α
,

in School) = A(1 − α)

(

NS
NU

)α
.

Thus, for the unskilled workers with children in school, the introduction of a child
labor ban unambiguously increases income. This result explains why child labor
reform tends to happen in times when child labor is already declining for other
reasons, such as an increased demand for human capital and a higher propensity
among unskilled workers to send children to school. It is unskilled workers who
do not depend on child labor themselves who should be the strongest advocates of
reform.
Notice that the basic mechanism outlined so far is similar to our analysis of the
political economy of women’s rights in Section 4.3. First, technological change (not
modeled explicitly here) increases the demand for human capital; next, the higher
demand for human capital induces families to start educating their children; and
finally, the families who now send their children to school become supporters of a
child labor ban, triggering reform.
So far, we have focused on the case of a country in which child labor is initially legal.
Our results show that as long as child labor is widespread among unskilled workers,
support for introducing a child-labor ban will remain low. In cross-country data, we
observe that differences in child-labor regulations are highly persistent over time,
which suggests the existence of a status-quo bias. To examine whether such a bias
can arise in our model, let us now consider the opposite situation of a country where
a child labor ban is already in place. Are there any reasons why people might be
more supportive of banning child labor if a child labor ban is already in place? As
we will see, a status-quo bias can indeed arise in our theory, but only if fertility
decisions are endogenous and depend on the current political regime.
We would like to find conditions under which the electorate would be willing to
abandon an already existing child-labor ban. Consider first the case where fertility
is independent of the policy, i.e., every household continues to have n children as
before. In this case, the tradeoff that arises from abandoning an existing ban is ex106

actly the reverse of the tradeoff following from introducing a ban described above.
In particular, if all unskilled households would actually send their children to work
once the ban is abandoned, they would stand to gain from introducing child labor
and abandoning the ban. In other words, the preferred policy is independent of the
current policy, and a status-quo bias does not arise.
The situation is different, however, if the number of children depends on the current state of the law. It is a common observation that parents face a quantity-quality
tradeoff in their decisions on children: Parents who invest a lot in their children in
terms of education tend to have fewer children than parents who send their children
to work. We would therefore expect that once a child labor ban is in place (which
effectively makes children more expensive), fertility would be lower. For concreteness, assume that fraction o of unskilled workers has already chosen their number
of children under the assumption that the child-labor ban will stay in place, and that
their fertility rate is nBan < n. The remaining families choose their family size later;
in particular, if the ban is abandoned, they will optimally choose the larger fertility
size n to maximize child labor income. What are now the relevant tradeoffs? As
above, in the presence of a ban, workers’ incomes are ISBan = Aα (NU /NS )1−α and
IUBan = A(1 − α) (NS /NU )α , respectively. If the ban is now abandoned, income is:
(
ISlaissez faire

= Aα

(1 + λ(onBan + (1 − o)n))NU
NS

)1−α

for the skilled,
(
IUlaissez faire (old)

Ban

= (1 + λn

)A(1 − α)

NS
Ban
(1 + λ(on + (1 − o)n))NU

)α

for the “old” unskilled with small families, and:
(
IUlaissez faire (young)

= (1 + λn)A(1 − α)

NS
Ban
(1 + λ(on + (1 − o)n))NU

)α

for the “young” unskilled with larger families. Comparing incomes, we can see that
the old unskilled can now lose from the introduction of child labor. Their income
ratio is:
1 + λnBan
IUlaissez faire (old)
=
,
(1 + λ(onBan + (1 − o)n))α
IUBan (old)
107

TotalȱFertilityȱRate,ȱ1990
8
6
4
2
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

ChildȱLaborȱRate,ȱ1990
Figure 26: The Child Labor Rate (Percent of Children Aged 10–14 Economically
Active) and Total Fertility Rate Across Countries (Source: World Bank Development
Indicators)
which is smaller than one if nBan is sufficiently small relative to n. These families
made their low fertility choice under the assumption that child labor would not be
an option. Given that they cannot change fertility ex post, they have little to gain
from making their own children work, but lose from the lower wages due to other
families’ children entering the labor force.
This mechanism induces policy persistence: Once a ban is in place, families start to
make decisions that in the future increase political support for maintaining the ban.
This mechanism can explain why differences in child labor and its regulations can
be highly persistent across countries. In particular, the theory predicts that some
countries can get locked into steady state equilibria featuring high fertility, high
incidence of child labor, and little political support for the introduction of child
labor regulation. In contrast, other countries with otherwise identical economic
fundamentals have low fertility, no child labor, and widespread support for the ban
of child labor.
Consistent with these predictions, we observe large cross-country differences in
child labor rates, even among today’s developing countries that are at similar levels
of income per capita. The theory also predicts a positive correlation between fertility and child labor rates, even after controlling for other variables that might affect
108

child labor or fertility. As Figure 26 shows, there is a strong positive relationship
between fertility rates and child labor rates across countries in contemporary data.
Doepke and Zilibotti (2005) examine the prediction more formally using an international panel of 125 countries from 1960 to 1990. They regress child labor rates on
fertility rates, controlling for time dummies, GDP per capita, the Gini coefficient,
and the share of agriculture in employment (arguably an independent factor affecting child labor), and find a positive and highly significant coefficient on the fertility
rate, implying that a one standard deviation increase in fertility is associated with
an increase in the child labor rate of 2.5 percentage points. The results are robust to
the inclusion of country fixed-effects.
The preceding analysis shows that the key feature of the political economy of childlabor regulation is that the group that most stands to gain from banning child labor
(unskilled workers) is often simultaneously economically invested in child labor
(because their own children are working). This observation leads to an explanation
of why child labor was banned only after an increasing share of parents sent their
children to school instead of work, and why differences in child labor and childlabor regulation across countries can be highly persistent over time. The analysis
can also be used to help in designing policies that facilitate the passing of child labor
regulations in developing countries today. Doepke and Zilibotti (2009, 2010) examine interventions such as international labor standards and trade restrictions aimed
at reducing child labor from this perspective, and argue that such well-intentioned
policies can backfire and reduce the likelihood of comprehensive action of child labor within developing countries.

5 Conclusion
In this chapter, we have argued that accounting for the family should be an integral
part of macroeconomics. The family is where many of the key decisions that are
relevant for macroeconomics are made. Since families have been changing, with
fewer marriages, more single households, lower fertility, and higher female labor
supply, the answers to standard macroeconomic questions concerning, say, how
labor supply and savings react to the business cycle have likely changed, too. Family structure also differs across countries. Developing countries are characterized by
109

higher fertility, more traditional gender roles, often a son preference, and sometimes
polygyny. These differences matter for the decisions that families make, and hence
for the size and age structure of the population, for the accumulation of human and
physical capital, and ultimately for the rate of economic growth.
The family matters not just for its role in household-level decisions, but also through
its effect on the evolution of institutions. Long-run economic development is characterized by a strikingly universal process of political change. Almost all of today’s
rich countries went through a series of similar reforms: democracy spread, public
education systems were built, women and children gained rights, and public pension systems and the welfare state were introduced. We argue that many of these
reforms transfer responsibility from the household to the public sphere, and that
the ultimate triggers behind the reforms were often related to changes in the family.
There are additional ways in which the family matters for macroeconomics which
we did not cover in this chapter. For example, the issues we discussed here are
largely positive in nature. We touched only briefly on normative questions in a
few places, for example the discussion of the one child policy. We purposely did
not talk about efficiency in this context, since this is not straightforward to do. The
regular notion of Pareto efficiency is not defined in models where population size
is endogenous, which includes all models with endogenous fertility. To evaluate
policies that may affect fertility—such as education policies, child labor laws, policies banning abortion, or subsidies for single mothers—new concepts are required.
Golosov, Jones, and Tertilt (2007) propose two new notions—A- and P-efficiency—
and show how they can be used in standard fertility models. Schoonbroodt and
Tertilt (2014) use the concepts to explore under what conditions fertility choice may
be inefficiently low and hence pronatalist policies may be desired.
There is also a burgeoning literature on the on the role of the family for the transmission of preferences, cultural values, and attitudes, which can also feed back into
macroeconomic outcomes. Theoretical models of the transmission of preferences
and values in the family are developed by Bisin and Verdier (2001) and Doepke
and Zilibotti (2005b, 2008). Empirical evidence for the intergenerational transmission of risk attitudes is provided by Dohmen et al. (2012). In Fernández, Fogli,
and Olivetti (2004), men’s preferences for working versus stay-at-home wives are
formed in childhood by the work behavior of their mothers. This leads to a dy110

namic process affecting female labor supply over time. Cultural transmission may
also occur in society more generally. For example, in Fogli and Veldkamp (2011)
and Fernández (2013), women learn from others about the costs of working. Both
papers argue that a reduction in the perceived cost of working through this learning process is key to understanding the increase in female labor supply. The cultural
transmission of fertility and female labor supply decisions is established empirically
using data from second generation immigrants to the United States by Fernández
and Fogli (2006). Alesina and Giuliano (2010, 2014) argue that the strength of family
ties varies across countries, and that these differences matter for cultural attitudes
and macroeconomic outcomes. Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013) take a historical perspective and trace unequal gender norms back to plough agriculture (and
ultimately to soil type).83 Doepke and Zilibotti (2015) expand theories of preference
transmission in the family to account for different parenting styles, and link changes
in parenting to macroeconomic trends such as increasing demand for human capital
and increasing occupational differentiation in society.
Another important research area focuses on the importance of the family for understanding inequality. For example, de Nardi (2004) emphasizes the importance
of bequest motives for the wealth distribution. Scholz and Seshadri (2009) build on
this insight by investigating more generally the importance of children and fertility
choice for the U.S. wealth distribution. The interaction between parents and children is also analyzed for insights into the causes of intergenerational persistence
of earnings.84 For example, parental inputs may amplify persistence if high-skill
parents spend more resources and time on their children than low-skill parents.
Other authors have emphasized the role of differences between women and men
(and their interactions as couples) for understanding the distribution of earnings
(and changes in earnings inequality over time). For example, Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2010) explicitly include male and female labor supply in their
analysis of the U.S. rising wage inequality. Other authors take this a step further
and analyze how sorting, and changes in sorting pattern, have impacted inequality.85 Recent research also makes an explicit distinction between individual and
83
This hypothesis was first put forth by Boserup (1970), but had not been tested empirically until
recently.
84
See for example Restuccia and Urrutia (2004), Lee and Seshadri (2015) and Yum (2015).
85
See for example Fernández and Rogerson (2001), Fernández, Guner, and Knowles (2005), Choo
and Siow (2006), and Greenwood et al. (2014, 2016).

111

household inequality.86 True consumption inequality may be lower than what is
measured based on individual income data if the family plays a role in providing
insurance (Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston 2008). Conversely, if family members do
not provide full insurance to each other, true consumption inequality may be higher
than what is measured based on household expenditure data (Lise and Seitz 2011).
Further, the mapping between individual and household inequality may change
over time if the structure of the family is changing.
In our view, the intersection of family economics and macroeconomics offers many
promising avenues for future research. Throughout this chapter, we have pointed
out a number of particular questions that are in need of answers, and which could
be addressed with the data, models, and methods available today. There is also a
need to push out the frontier of theoretical modeling; in particular, we see a strong
potential for intellectual arbitrage by applying methods of dynamic modeling that
are common in macroeconomics to better understand the dynamics of household
bargaining under commitment and private information frictions. Finally, there are
promising applied topics that have barely been explored yet. For example, an important topic in recent macroeconomics concerns house price dynamics (see the
chapter by Piazzesi and Schneider in this volume). Changes in family structure—
such as the rise in single households—have a direct impact on housing demand.
Further, singles are more eager to live in cities (where they can meet other singles)
compared to families, who place higher value on space. Hence, changes in family formation and family structure should matter for the housing market. We hope
that this and other research topics will be picked up by more researchers as family
economics continues to become an integral part of macroeconomics.

A

Proofs for Propositions

Proof of Proposition 1: As yf approaches zero, the density f (ηg ) = F ′ (ηg ) approaches zero, so that the elasticity of labor supply approaches zero also. In contrast, for married women, the fact that wm > 0 guarantees that the elasticity of labor
supply is bounded away from zero.
2
86

See Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010).

112

Proof of Proposition 2: The first part follows from the fact that aggregate labor
supply elasticity for single households equals one, whereas for married households,
it is strictly smaller than one.
For the second part, for any wf > 0, we have η̂u > η̂e , which implies that the elasticity is smaller than one. As wf converges to zero, η̂e and η̂u both converge to zero.
Since F (0) = 0 and F is continuous, we then have that F (η̂e ) and F (η̂u ) both converge to zero, which implies that the elasticity of labor supply converges to one.
Conversely, as wf converges to infinity, η̂e and η̂u both converge to infinity, implying
that F (η̂e ) and F (η̂u ) both converge to one and once again resulting in an elasticity
of one.
2
Proof of Proposition 3: If λ̃f ≤ λf and λ̃m ≤ λm , neither participation constraint (9)
and (10) is binding. Hence, it is optimal to stay married, D = 0, and the consumption allocation follows from maximizing (7) subject to the budget constraint (8). If
λ̃f > λf and λ̃f + λ̃m ≤ 1, the wife’s participation constraint is binding. Staying married (D = 0) continues to be optimal, however, because it is possible to increase the
wife’s consumption share to make her indifferent between marriage and divorce,
with the husband continuing to be better off married. The wife’s consumption can
then be solved from solving for cf in her participation constraint (9) (imposed as
an equality) while setting D = 0. The husband’s consumption then follows from
the budget constraint (8). The case where the husband’s participation constraint is
binding is parallel. Finally, when there is no allocation of ex-post bargaining power
that keeps both spouses at least as well off married compared to being divorced,
divorce (D = 1) is the optimal choice, and consumption follows from the individual
budget constraints in the divorced state.
2
Proof of Proposition 4: The ratio of the growth factors is
1 + g end
=
1 + g exog

{(

αγf + (1 − α)γm
λf γf + (1 − λf )γm

)(

α + [λf γf + (1 − λf )γm ]θ
α + [αγf + (1 − α)γm ]θ

)}θ

Thus the result follows trivially, given the assumption γf > γm and θ < 1.

.
2

Proof of Proposition 5: Take the limit as θ → ∞ on both sides of equation (19)

113

separately. The limit of the left-hand side can be written as:
lim (γm +

θ→∞

G
γm
)

lim

mθ
log( γγ̃m 1+γ
)
1+γ̃θ

θ→∞

1
θ

.

Note that both numerator and denominator converge to zero. Applying L’Hopital’s
Rule, canceling terms and rearranging, the limit can be written as:
(
(γm +

G
γm
)

lim

θ→∞

(γ̃ − γm )
1
( θ + γ̃)( 1θ + γm

)
.

From this expression, we can see that the limit exits and is equal to:
(
(γm +

G
γm
)

γ̃ − γm
γ̃γm

)
.

The limit of the right hand side of (19) is log( γ2γ̃m ). Thus, in the limit U E > U P if and
)
(
G
m
only if (γm + γm
> log( γ2γ̃m ). Using the definition of γ̃ and rearranging, this
) γ̃−γ
γ̃γm
can be expressed as:
G
γm

γf + γm
> log(
)
γm

(

(γf + γm )γm
γf − γm

)
− γm .

G
Hence, as long as γm
is large enough, the equation is satisfied.

B

2

Data Definitions and Sources

The data used in Table 3 are from two different editions of the OECD Gender, Institutions and Development Data Base (GID 2006 and 2014), the World Development
Indicators (WDI 2003, 2005, and WDI 2014) and the United Nations Human Development Report 2004. Here we give the definition of each variable and its source.
GDP per capita: GDP data was used from two different years. The variables from
GID 2014 and WDI 2014 were correlated with GDP p.c. from the WDI 2014. The
variables from WDI 2003, UN 2004, and GID 2006 were correlated with GDP p.c.
from the WDI 2005.
Share of agriculture: Measured as the value-added share of agriculture in GDP.
114

Data was used from two different years. The variables from GID 2014 and WDI
2014 were correlated with percent agriculture from the WDI 2014. The variables
from WDI 2003, UN 2004, and GID 2006 were correlated with percent agriculture
from the WDI 2005.
Total fertility rate: Source: GID 2006.
Child mortality rate: Under-five mortality rate. Source: WDI 2014.
Average years of schooling: Source: WDI 2003.
Boy/girl sex ratio at birth: Measured as boys born per girl. Source: GID 2006.
Son preference in education: Percentage of people agreeing that university is more
important for boys than for girls. GID 2014
Inheritance discrimination against daughters: Whether daughters have the same
inheritance rights as sons. Reported in 3 categories between 0 (“equal”) and 1 (“unequal”). Source: GID 2014.
Female literacy relative to male: Female literacy as percentage of male literacy.
Source: GID 2006.
Percent females in paid labor force: Percentage of women among wage and salaried
workers. Source: GID 2006.
Unpaid care work by women: Female to male ratio of time devoted to unpaid care
work. Source: GID 2014.
Year first woman in parliament: Source: Human Development Report 2004.
Women’s access to land: Whether women and men have equal and secure access
to land use, control and ownership. Categorical (3 categories = 0, 0.5, 1), where 1
(“full”) and 0 (“impossible”). Source: GID 2014.
Gender Empowerment Measure: Measures inequality between men’s and women’s
opportunities, combining measures of inequality in political participation and decision making, in economic participation and decision making, and in power over
economic resources. The level is between 1 (”full equality”) and 0 (”no equality”).
Source: UN 2004.
Early marriage: Share of female population between ages 15 and 19 ever married.
GID 2014.
Agreement with wife beating: Percentage of women who agree that a husband/partner
is justified in beating his wife/partner under certain circumstances. Source: GID
2014.
Inheritance discrimination against widows: Whether a widow has the same inher115

itance rights as a widower. Reported in 3 categories (0, 0.5, 1), where 0 means equal
rights. Source: GID 2014.
Laws on domestic violence: Whether the legal framework offers women legal protection from domestic violence. Reported in 5 categories = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, where
1 means no protection and 0 full protection. Source: GID 2014.

References
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Why Did the West Extend
the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (4): 1167–99.
Adda, Jérôme, Christian Dustmann, and Katrien Stevens. 2016. “The Career Costs
of Children.” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Aguiar, Mark, and Eric Hurst. 2007. “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation
of Time over Five Decades.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 969–1006.
Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (3): 659–684.
Aizer, Anna, and Flavio Cunha. 2012. “The Production of Child Human Capital:
Endowments, Investments and Fertility.” NBER Working Paper No. 18429.
Albanesi, Stefania. 2014. “Jobless Recoveries and Gender Biased Technological
Change.” Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Albanesi, Stefania, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2013. “The Gender Unemployment Gap.”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 613.
Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2009. “Home Production, Market Production, and the Gender Wage Gap: Incentives and Expectations.” Review of
Economic Dynamics 12 (1): 80–107.
. 2014. “Maternal Health and the Baby Boom.” Quantitative Economics 5 (2):
225–69.
. 2016. “Gender Roles and Medical Progress.” Journal of Political Economy,
forthcoming.

116

Alderman, Harold, Pierre-André Chiappori, Lawrence Haddad, John Hoddinott,
and Ravi Kanbur. 1995. “Unitary versus Collective Models of the Household:
Is It Time to Shift the Burden of Proof?” World Bank Research Observer 10 (1):
1–19.
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2010. “The Power of the Family.” Journal of
Economic Growth 15 (2): 93–125.
. 2014. “Family Ties.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Philippe
Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, Volume 2A, 177–215. North Holland.
Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn. 2013. “On the Origins of
Gender Roles: Women and the Plough.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2):
469–530.
Alger, Ingela, and Donald Cox. 2013. “The Evolution of Altruistic Preferences:
Mothers versus Fathers.” Review of Econonomics of the Household 11 (3): 421–446.
Ambler, Kate. 2015. “Don’t Tell on Me: Experimental Evidence of Asymmetric
Information in Transnational Households.” Journal of Development Economics
113:52–69.
Anderson, Siwan, and Jean-Marie Baland. 2002. “The Economics of Roscas and
Intrahousehold Resource Allocation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3):
963–995.
Anukriti, S. 2014. “Financial Incentives and the Fertility-Sex Ratio Trade-off.”
Unpublished Manuscript, Boston College.
Ashraf, Nava. 2009. “Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An
Experimental Study in the Philippines.” American Economic Review 99 (4): 1245–
1277.
Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, and Jean Lee. 2014. “Household Bargaining and Excess
Fertility: An Experimental Study in Zambia.” American Economic Review 104
(7): 2210–37.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Robert E. Lucas Jr. 1992. “On Efficient Distribution With
Private Information.” Review of Economic Studies 59 (3): 427–453.
Attanasio, Orazio, and Valérie Lechene. 2002. “Tests of Income Pooling in Household Decisions.” Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (4): 720–748.
117

. 2014. “Efficient Responses to Targeted Cash Transfers.” Journal of Political
Economy 122 (1): 178–222.
Attanasio, Orazio, Peter Levell, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos. 2015.
“Aggregating Elasticities: Intensive and Extensive Margins of Female Labour
Supply.” NBER Working Paper No. 21315.
Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos. 2005. “Female
Labor Supply as Insurance Against Idiosyncratic Risk.” Journal of the European
Economic Association 3 (2/3): 755–64.
. 2008. “Explaining Changes in Female Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle
Model.” American Economic Review 98 (4): 1517–52.
Attanasio, Orazio P., and Martin Browning. 1995. “Consumption over the Life
Cycle and over the Business Cycle.” American Economic Review 85 (5): 1118–
1137.
Bachmann, Rüdiger. 2012. “Understanding the Jobless Recoveries After 1991 and
2001.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Notre Dame.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Xin Meng, Tommaso Porzio, and Nancy Qian. 2014. “Aggregate
Fertility and Household Savings: A General Equilibrium Analysis with Micro
Data.” NBER Working Paper No. 20050.
Barro, Robert J., and Gary S. Becker. 1989. “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic
Growth.” Econometrica 57 (2): 481–501.
Basu, Kaushik. 2006. “Gender and Say: A Model of Household Behaviour with
Endogenously Determined Balance of Power.” Economic Journal 116 (511): 558–
580.
Basu, Kaushik, and Pham Hoang Van. 1998. “The Economics of Child Labor.”
American Economic Review 88 (3): 412–427.
Baudin, Thomas, David de la Croix, and Paula E. Gobbi. 2015. “Fertility and
Childlessness in the United States.” American Economic Review 105 (6): 1852–
1882.
Becker, Gary S. 1988. “Family Economics and Macro Behavior.” American Economic
Review 78 (1): 1–13.

118

Becker, Gary S., and Robert J. Barro. 1988. “A Reformulation of the Economic
Theory of Fertility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103 (1): 1–25.
Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Tamura. 1990. “Human Capital,
Fertility, and Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 98 (5): 12–37.
Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1991. “Homework in
Macroeconomics: Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Journal of Political Economy 99 (6): 1166–1187.
Bick, Alexander. 2015. “The Quantitative Role of Child Care for Female Labor
Force Participation and Fertility.” Journal of the European Economic Association,
forthcoming.
Bick, Alexander, and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln. 2014. “Taxation and Labor Supply
of Married Couples across Countries: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Unpublished Manuscript, Arizona State University.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2001. “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of Preferences.” Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2): 298–
319.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2000. “Gender Differences in Pay.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (4): 75–99.
. 2007. “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of Married Women: 1980–
2000.” Journal of Labor Economics 25 (3): 393–438.
Bleakley, Hoyt, and Fabian Lange. 2009. “Chronic Disease Burden and the Interaction of Education, Fertility, and Growth.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
91 (1): 52–65.
Blundell, Richard, Pierre-André Chiappori, and Costas Meghir. 2005. “Collective
Labor Supply with Children.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (6): 1277–1306.
Blundell, Richard, and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of
Alternative Approaches.” Chapter 27 of Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, Volume 3. Elsevier.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008. “Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance.” American Economic Review 98 (5): 1887–1921.

119

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2016. “Consumption
Inequality and Family Labor Supply.” American Economic Review 106 (2): 387–
435.
Boldrin, Michele, and Ana Montes. 2005. “The Intergenerational State, Education
and Pensions.” Review of Economic Studies 72 (3): 651–664.
Boserup, Ester. 1970. Womans Role in Economic Development. London: George Allen
and Unwin Ltd.
Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Min Qiang Zhao. 2013. “The Rise of
Services: the Role of Skills, Scale, and Female Labor Supply.” NBER Working
Paper No. 19372.
Castilla, Carolina, and Thomas Walker. 2013. “Is Ignorance Bliss? The Effect of
Asymmetric Information between Spouses on Intra-Household Allocations.”
The American Economic Review 103 (3): 263–268.
Caucutt, Elizabeth, Thomas F. Cooley, and Nezih Guner. 2013. “The Farm, the City,
and the Emergence of Social Security.” Journal of Economic Growth 18 (1): 1–32.
Caucutt, Elizabeth, and Lance Lochner. 2012. “Early and Late Human Capital Investments, Borrowing Constraints, and the Family.” Unpublished Manuscript,
University of Western Ontario.
Cervellati, Matteo, and Uwe Sunde. 2005. “Human Capital Formation, Life Expectancy, and the Process of Development.” American Economic Review 95 (5):
1653–1672.
Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Robert Östling.
2015. “The Effect of Wealth on Individual and Household Labor Supply: Evidence from Swedish Lotteries.” Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Chade, Hector, and Gustavo Ventura. 2005. “Income Taxation and Marital Decisions.” Review of Economic Dynamics 8 (3): 565–599.
Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra, and Esther Duflo. 2004. “Women as Policy Makers:
Evidence from a Randomized Policy Experiment in India.” Econometrica 72 (5):
1409–43.

120

Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber. 2011. “Are Micro
and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the
Intensive and Extensive Margins.” American Economic Review 101 (3): 471–475.
. 2012. “Does Indivisible Labor Explain the Difference between Micro and
Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin Elasticities.” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 27:1–56.
Chiappori, Pierre-André. 1988. “Rational Household Labor Supply.” Econometrica
56 (1): 63–90.
. 1992. “Collective Labor Supply and Welfare.” Journal of Political Economy
100 (3): 437–467.
Chiappori, Pierre-André, Murat Iyigun, and Yoram Weiss. 2009. “Investment in
Schooling and the Marriage Market.” American Economic Review 99 (5): 1689–
1713.
Cho, Jang-Ok, and Richard Rogerson. 1988. “Family Labor Supply and Aggregate
Fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary Economics 21 (2–3): 233–45.
Choo, Eugene, and Aloysius Siow. 2006. “Who Marries Whom and Why.” Journal
of Political Economy 114 (1): 175–201.
Choukhmane, Taha, Nicolas Coeurdacier, and Keyu Jin. 2014. “The One Child
Policy and Household Savings.” Unpublished Manuscript, London School of
Economics.
Clarke, Sally C. 1995. “Advance Report of Final Marriage Statistics, 1989 and
1990.” Monthly Vital Statistics Report 43 (12): 3–5.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Stephane Guibaud, and Keyu Jin. 2014. “Fertility Policies
and Social Security Reforms in China.” IMF Economic Review 62 (3): 371–408.
Cooley, Thomas F., and Edward C. Prescott. 1995. “Economic Growth and Business
Cycles.” Chapter 1 of Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, edited by Thomas F.
Cooley. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cooley, Thomas F., and Rodrigo R. Soares. 1996. “Will Social Security Survive the
Baby Boom?” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 45:89–121.
Cordoba, Juan Carlos. 2015. “Children, dynastic altruism and the wealth of Nations.” Review of Economic Dynamics 18 (4): 774–791.
121

Cordoba, Juan Carlos, and Marla Ripoll. 2014. “The Elasticity of Intergenerational Substitution, Parental Altruism, and Fertility Choice.” Unpublished
Manuscript, University of Pittsburgh.
Costa, Dora L. 2000. “From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women’s Paid
Labor.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (4): 101–122.
Cubeddu, Luis, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. 2003. “Families as Shocks.” Journal of
the European Economic Association 1 (2-3): 671–682.
Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckmann. 2007. “The Technology of Skill Formation.”
American Economic Review 97 (2): 31–47.
Da Rocha, José Marı́a, and Luisa Fuster. 2006. “Why are Fertility Rates and Female
Employment Ratios Positively Correlated Across OECD Countries?” International Economic Review 47 (4): 1187–222.
de Laat, Joost. 2014. “Household Allocations and Endogenous Information: The
Case of Split Migrants in Kenya.” Journal of Development Economics 106:108–117.
de Nardi, Mariacristina. 2004. “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links.”
Review of Economic Studies 71 (3): 74–768.
Del Boca, Daniela, Christopher Flinn, and Matthew Wiswall. 2014. “Household
Choices and Child Development.” Review of Economic Studies 81 (1): 137–185.
de la Croix, David, and Matthias Doepke. 2003. “Inequality and Growth: Why
Differential Fertility Matters.” American Economic Review 93 (4): 1091–113.
. 2004. “Public versus Private Education when Differential Fertility Matters.” Journal of Development Economics 73 (2): 607–29.
. 2009. “To Segregate or to Integrate: Education Politics and Democracy.”
Review of Economic Studies 76 (2): 597–628.
de la Croix, David, Matthias Doepke, and Joel Mokyr. 2016. “Clans, Guilds, and
Markets: Apprenticeship Institutions and Growth in the Pre-Industrial Economy.” Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University.
de la Croix, David, and Fabio Mariani. 2015. “From Polygyny to Serial Monogamy:
A Unified Theory of Marriage Institutions.” Review of Economic Studies 82 (2):
565–607.

122

de la Croix, David, and Marie Vander Donckt. 2010. “Would Empowering Women
Initiate the Demographic Transition in Least Developed Countries?” Journal of
Human Capital 4 (2): 85–129.
Doepke, Matthias. 2004. “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition
to Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 9 (3): 347–83.
Doepke, Matthias, Moshe Hazan, and Yishay D. Maoz. 2015. “The Baby Boom and
World War II: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Review of Economic Studies 82 (3):
1031–1073.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabian Kindermann. 2015. “Bargaining over Babies: Theory, Evidence, and Policy Implications.” Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Doepke, Matthias, and Dirk Krueger. 2008. “Origins and Consequences of Child
Labor Restrictions: A Macroeconomic Perspective.” Chapter 1 of Frontiers of
Family Economics, edited by Peter Rupert. Emerald Press.
Doepke, Matthias, and Michèle Tertilt. 2009. “Women’s Liberation: What’s in It
for Men?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1541–91.
. 2014. “Does Female Empowerment Promote Economic Development?”
NBER Working Paper No. 19888.
. 2015. “Asymmetric Information in Couples.” Unpublished Manuscript,
Northwestern University.
Doepke, Matthias, Michèle Tertilt, and Alessandra Voena. 2012. “The Economics
and Politics of Women’s Rights.” Annual Review of Economics 4:339–372.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2005a. “The Macroeconomics of Child
Labor Regulation.” American Economic Review 95 (5): 1492–524.
. 2005b. “Social Class and the Spirit of Capitalism.” Journal of the European
Economic Association 3 (2-3): 516–24.
. 2008. “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 123 (2): 747–93.
. 2009. “International Labor Standards and the Political Economy of Child
Labor Regulation.” Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2–3): 508–518.

123

. 2010. “Do International Labor Standards Contribute to the Persistence of
the Child Labor Problem?” Journal of Economic Growth 15 (1): 1–31.
. 2015. “Parenting with Style: Altruism and Paternalism in Intergenerational
Preference Transmission.” Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2012. “The
Intergenerational Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes.” Review of Economic
Studies 79 (2): 645–677.
Du, Qingyuan, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2010. “A Sexually Unbalanced Model of Current Account Imbalances.” NBER Working Paper No. 10498.
Duflo, Esther. 2012. “Women Empowerment and Economic Development.” Journal
of Economic Literature 50 (4): 1051–1079.
Duflo, Esther, and Christopher Udry. 2004. “Intrahousehold Resource Allocation
in Cote d’Ivoire: Social Norms, Separate Accounts and Consumption Choices.”
NBER Working Paper No. 10498.
Dyrda, Sebastian, Greg Kaplan, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. 2016. “Business Cycles
and Household Formation.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Ebenstein, Avraham. 2010. “The ‘Missing Girls’ of China and the Unintended
Consequences of the One Child Policy.” Journal of Human Resources 45 (1): 87–
115.
Echevarria, Cristina, and Antonio Merlo. 1999. “Gender Differences in Education
in a Dynamic Household Bargaining Model.” International Economic Review 40
(2): 265–86.
Eckstein, Zvi, and Osnat Lifshitz. 2011. “Dynamic Female Labor Supply.” Econometrica 79 (6): 1675–1726.
. 2015. “Household Interaction and the Labor Supply of Married Women.”
International Economic Review 56 (2): 427–455.
Edlund, Lena, and Rohini Pande. 2002. “Why Have Women Become Left-Wing?
The Political Gender Gap and the Decline in Marriage.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (3): 917–61.

124

Eika, Lasse, Magne Mogstad, and Basit Zafar. 2014. “Educational Assortative
Mating and Household Income Inequality.” NBER Working Paper No. 20271.
Erosa, Andrés, Luisa Fuster, and Diego Restuccia. 2010. “A General Equilibrium
Analysis of Parental Leave Policies.” Review of Economic Dynamics 13 (4): 742–
58.
Fernández, Raquel. 2013. “Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female
Labor Force Participation over a Century.” American Economic Review 103 (1):
472–500.
. 2014. “Women’s Rights and Development.” Journal of Economic Growth 19
(1): 37–80.
Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2006. “Fertility: The Role of Culture
and Family Experience.” Journal of the European Economic Association 4 (2-3):
552–561.
Fernández, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. “Mothers and
Sons: Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4): 1249–99.
Fernández, Raquel, Nezih Guner, and John Knowles. 2005. “Love and Money:
A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Household Sorting and Inequality.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (1): 273–344.
Fernández, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson. 2001. “Sorting and Long-Run Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4): 1305–1341.
Fernández, Raquel, and Joyce Wong. 2014a. “Unilateral Divorce, the Decreasing
Gender Gap, and Married Women’s Labor Force Participation.” American Economic Review 104 (5): 342–47.
Fernández, Raquel, and Joyce Cheng Wong. 2014b. “Divorce Risk, Wages and
Working Wives: A Quantitative Life-Cycle Analysis of Female Labour Force
Participation.” The Economic Journal 124 (576): 319–58.
. 2014c. “Free to Leave? A Welfare Analysis of Divorce Regimes.” Unpublished Manuscript, NYU.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, and Dirk Krueger. 2007. “Consumption over the

125

Life Cycle: Facts from Consumer Expenditure Survey Data.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 89 (3): 552–565.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesus, and Dirk Krueger. 2011. “Consumption and Saving
over the Life Cycle: How Important are Consumer Durables?” Macroeconomic
Dynamics 15 (11): 725–770.
Fogli, Alessandra, and Laura Veldkamp. 2011. “Nature or Nurture? Learning
and the Geography of Female Labor Force Participation.” Econometrica 79 (4):
1103–38.
Galı́, Jordi, and Luca Gambetti. 2009. “On the Sources of the Great Moderation.”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1): 26–57.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2006. “Das Human-Kapital: A Theory of the Demise
of the Class Structure.” Review of Economic Studies 73 (1): 85–117.
Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil. 1996. “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth.”
American Economic Review 86 (3): 374–87.
. 2000. “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian Stagnation
to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic Review 90 (4):
806–28.
Geddes, Rick, and Dean Lueck. 2002. “The Gains from Self-Ownership and the
Expansion of Women’s Rights.” American Economic Review 92 (4): 1079–92.
Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
. 1995. “The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic Development and Economic History.” In Investment in Women’s Human Capital and
Economic Development, edited by T. P. Schultz, 61–90. University of Chicago
Press.
Goldin, Claudia, and Claudia Olivetti. 2013. “Shocking Labor Supply: A Reassessment of the Role of World War II on Women’s Labor Supply.” American
Economic Review 103 (3): 257–62.
Goldstein, Markus, and Christopher Udry. 2008. “The Profits of Power: Land
Rights and Agricultural Investment in Ghana.” Journal of Political Economy 116
(6): 981–1022.
126

Golosov, Mikhail, Larry E. Jones, and Michèle Tertilt. 2007. “Efficiency with Endogenous Population Growth.” Econometrica 75 (4): 1039–1071.
Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Ivan Werning. 2006. “New Dynamic Public Finance: A User’s Guide.” In NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2006, edited by
D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford, Volume 21, 317 – 388. MIT Press.
Gould, Eric, Omer Moav, and Avi Simhon. 2008. “The Mystery of Monogamy.”
American Economic Review 98 (1): 333–57.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner, Georgi Kocharkov, and Cezar Santos. 2014.
“Marry Your Like: Assortative Mating and Income Inequality.” American Economic Review 104 (5): 348–353.
. 2016. “Technology and the Changing Family: A Unified Model of Marriage, Divorce, Educational Attainment and Married Female Labor-Force Participation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (1): 1–41.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Zvi Hercowitz. 1991. “The Allocation of Capital and
Time over the Business Cycle.” Journal of Political Economy 99 (4): 1188–1214.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1995. “Household
Production in Real Business Cycle Theory.” In Frontiers of Real Business Cycle
Theory, edited by Thomas F. Cooley. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Ananth Seshadri. 2002. “The U.S. Demographic Transition.” American Economic Review 92 (2): 153–159.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2005. “The
Baby Boom and Baby Bust.” American Economic Review 95 (1): 183–207.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2005. “Engines of
Liberation.” Review of Economic Studies 72 (1): 109–33.
Greenwood, Jermey, Nezih Guner, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2016. “Family
Economics Writ Large.” Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Groshen, Erica L., and Simon Potter. 2003. “Has Structural Change Contributed
to a Jobless Recovery?” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York 9 (8): 1–7.
Guidolin, Massimo, and Elizabeth A. La Jeunesse. 2007. “The Decline in the U.S.

127

Personal Saving Rate: Is It Real or Is It a Puzzle?” Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis Review 89 (6): 491–514.
Guler, Bulent, Fatih Guvenen, and Gianluca Violante. 2012. “Joint-Search Theory:
New Opportunities and New Frictions.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (4):
352–369.
Guner, Nezih, Remzi Kaygusuz, and Gustavo Ventura. 2012a. “Taxation and
Household Labour Supply.” Review of Economic Studies 79:1113–1149.
. 2012b. “Taxing Women: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 59 (1): 111–28.
. 2014. “Childcare Subsidies and Household Labor Supply.” Unpublished
Manuscript, University of Arizona.
Guvenen, Fatih, Greg Kaplan, and Jae Song. 2014. “The Glass Ceiling and The Paper Floor: Gender Differences among Top Earners, 1981–2012.” NBER Working
Paper No. 20560.
Guvenen, Fatih, and Michelle Rendall. 2015. “Women’s Emancipation through
Education: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Review of Economic Dynamics 18 (4):
931–956.
Hansen, Gary D., and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. “Malthus to Solow.” American
Economic Review 92 (4): 1205–17.
Hazan, Moshe, and Hosny Zoabi. 2006. “Does Longevity Cause Growth? A Theoretical Critique.” Journal of Economic Growth 11 (4): 363–376.
. 2015a. “Do Highly Educated Women Choose Smaller Families?” Economic
Journal 125 (587): 1191–1226.
. 2015b. “Sons or Daughters? Sex Preferences and the Reversal of the Gender Educational Gap.” Journal of Demographic Economics 81 (2): 179–201.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. “Unequal
We Stand: An Empirical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States,
1967-2006.” Review of Economic Dynamics 13 (1): 15–51.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2009. “Quantitative Macroeconomics with Heterogeneous Households.” Annual Review of
Economics 1 (1): 319–354.
128

. 2010. “The Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the
United States.” Journal of Political Economy 118 (4): 681–722.
Heckman, James J. 2008. “Schools, Skills, and Synapses.” Economic Inquiry 46 (3):
289–324.
Heim, Bradley T. 2007. “The Incredible Shrinking Elasticities: Married Female
Labor Supply, 1978-2002.” The Journal of Human Resources 42 (4): 881–918.
Hoel, Jessica B. 2015. “Heterogeneous Households: A Within-subject Test of Asymmetric Information between Spouses in Kenya.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 118:123–135.
Hong, Jay H., and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2012. “Life Insurance and Household
Consumption.” American Economic Review 102 (7): 3701–30.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow. 2013. “The
Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic Growth.” Unpublished Manuscript,
Stanford University.
Humphries, Jane, and Jacob Weisdorf. 2015. “The Wages of Women in England,
1260-1850.” Journal of Economic History 75 (2): 405–447.
Hyslop, Dean R. 2001. “Rising U.S. Earnings Inequality and Family Labor Supply:
The Covariance Structure of Intrafamily Earnings.” American Economic Review
91 (4): 755–777.
Iyigun, Murat, and Randall P. Walsh. 2007a. “Building the Family Nest: Premarital
Investments, Marriage Markets, and Spousal Allocations.” Review of Economic
Studies 74 (2): 507–535.
. 2007b. “Endogenous Gender Power, Household Labor Supply, and the
Quantity-Quality Tradeoff.” Journal of Development Economics 82 (1): 138–155.
Jaimovich, Nir, Seth Pruitt, and Henry E. Siu. 2013. “The Demand for Youth: Explaining Age Differences in the Volatility of Hours.” American Economic Review
103 (7): 3022–3044.
Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry E. Siu. 2009. “The Young, the Old, and the Restless:
Demographic and Business Cycle Volatility.” American Economic Review 99 (3):
804–826.

129

. 2014. “The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless Recoveries.”
Unpublished Manuscript, USC.
Jayachandran, Seema, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2011. “Why Do Mothers Breastfeed
Girls Less Than Boys: Evidence and Implications for Child Health in India.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3): 1485–1538.
Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Manuelli, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2015. “Why are
Married Women Working so Much?” Journal of Demographic Economics 81 (1):
75–114.
Jones, Larry E., and Alice Schoonbroodt. 2015. “Baby Busts and Baby Booms: The
Fertility Response to Shocks in Dynastic Models.” Unpublished Manuscript,
University of Minnesota.
Jones, Larry E., and Michèle Tertilt. 2008. “An Economic History of the Relationship Between Occupation and Fertility - U.S. 1826-1960.” In Frontiers of Family
Economics, Volume 1. ed. Peter Rupert, Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing
Limited.
Juhn, Chinhui, and Simon Potter. 2007. “Is There Still an Added-Worker Effect?”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 310.
Kaplan, Greg. 2012. “Moving Back Home: Insurance against Labor Market Risk.”
Journal of Political Economy 120 (3): 446–512.
Karaivanov, Alexander, and Robert M. Townsend. 2014. “Dynamic Financial
Constraints: Distinguishing Mechanism Design From Exogenously Incomplete
Regimes.” Econometrica 82 (3): 887–959.
Keane, Michael, and Richard Rogerson. 2012. “Micro and Macro Labor Supply
Elasticities: A Reassessment of Conventional Wisdom.” Journal of Economic Literature 50 (2): 464–476.
Kinnan, Cynthia. 2014, December. “Distinguishing Barriers to Insurance in Thai
Villages.” Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Knowles, John A. 2013. “Why are Married Men Working So Much? An Aggregate
Analysis of Intra-Household Bargaining and Labour Supply.” The Review of
Economic Studies 80 (3): 1055–85.

130

Konrad, Kai A., and Kjell Erik Lommerud. 1995. “Family Policy with Noncooperative Families.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 97 (4): 581–601.
Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter. 2003. “Gender Equality and Long-Run Growth.” Journal of
Economic Growth 8 (4): 403–426.
. 2005. “Sex, Equality, and Growth.” The Canadian Journal of Economics 38
(3): 807–831.
. 2010. “Pacifying Monogamy.” Journal of Economic Growth 15 (3): 235–262.
Lee, Munseob. 2015. “Allocation of Female Talent and Cross-Country Productivity
Differences.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Lee, Tim, and A. Seshadri. 2015. “On the Intergenerational Transmission of Economic Status.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Mannheim.
Liao, Pei-Ju. 2013. “The One-child Policy: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Journal of
Development Economics 101:49–62.
Lise, Jeremy, and Shannon Seitz. 2011. “Consumption Inequality and IntraHousehold Allocations.” Review of Economic Studies 78:328–355.
Lise, Jeremy, and Ken Yamada. 2015. “Household Sharing and Commitment: Evidence from Panel Data on Individual Expenditures and Time Use.” Unpublished Manuscript, University College London.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico. 2004. “Why Did the Elites Extend the
Suffrage? Democracy and the Scope of Government, with an Application to
Britain’s ‘Age of Reform’.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 705–63.
Love, David A. 2010. “The Effects of Marital Status and Children on Savings and
Portfolio Choice.” Review of Financial Studies 23 (1): 385–432.
Lucas, Robert E. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 22 (1): 3–42.
Lundberg, Shelly. 1985. “The Added Worker Effect.” Journal of Labor Economics 3
(1): 11–37.
Lundberg, Shelly, and Robert A. Pollak. 1993. “Separate Spheres Bargaining and
the Marriage Market.” Journal of Political Economy 101 (6): 988–1010.
. 1994. “Noncooperative Bargaining Models of Marriage.” American Economic Review 84 (2): 132–137.
131

Mammen, Kristin, and Christina Paxson. 2000. “Women’s Work and Economic
Development.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (4): 141–164.
Mankart, Jochen, and Rigas Oikonomou. 2015. “Household Search and the Aggregate Labor Market.” Unpublished Manuscript, UC Louvain.
Manser, Marilyn, and Murray Brown. 1980. “Marriage and Household DecisionMaking: A Bargaining Analysis.” International Economic Review 21 (1): 31–44.
Manuelli, Rodolfo, and Ananth Seshadri. 2009. “Explaining International Fertility
Differences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2): 771–807.
Mazzocco, Maurizio. 2007. “Household Intertemporal Behaviour: A Collective
Characterization and a Test of Commitment.” Review of Economic Studies 74 (3):
857–895.
. 2008. “Individual Rather Than Household Euler Equations: Identification and Estimation of Individual Preferences Using Household Data.” Unpublished Manuscript, UCLA.
Mazzocco, Maurizio, Claudia Ruiz, and Shintaro Yamaguchi. 2013. “Labor Supply,
Wealth Dynamics, and Marriage Decisions.” Unpublished Manuscript, UCLA.
McElroy, Marjorie B., and Mary Jean Horney. 1981. “Nash-Bargained Household
Decisions: Toward a Generalization of the Theory of Demand.” International
Economic Review 22 (2): 333–349.
Mennuni, Alessandro. 2015. “Labour Force Composition and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Southampton.
Miles, David. 1999. “Modelling the Impact of Demographic Change upon the
Economy.” Economic Journal 109 (452): 1–36.
Miller, Amalia R. 2011. “The Effects of Motherhood Timing on Career Path.” Journal of Population Economics 24 (3): 1071–1100.
Ngai, L. Rachel, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2014. “Gender Gaps and the Rise of the
Service Economy.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 8134.
Olivetti, Claudia. 2014. “The Female Labor Force and Long-run Development:
The American Experience in Comparative Perspective.” In Human Capital in
History: The American Record, edited by L. Platt Boustan, C. Frydman, and R.A.
Margo. University of Chicago Press.
132

Olivetti, Claudia, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2016. “The Evolution of Gender Gaps
in Industrialized Countries.” Forthcoming, Annual Review of Economics.
Ortigueira, Salvador, and Nawid Siassi. 2013. “How Important is Intra-household
Risk Sharing for Savings and Labor Supply?” Journal of Monetary Economics 60
(6): 650–666.
Oswald, Andrew J., and Nattavudh Powdthavee. 2010. “Daughters and Left-Wing
Voting.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2): 213–227.
Pistaferri, Luigi. 2003. “Anticipated and Unanticipated Wage Changes, Wage Risk,
and Intertemporal Labor Supply.” Journal of Labor Economics 21 (3): 729–754.
Rendall, Michelle. 2010. “Brain versus Brawn: The Realization of Womens Comparative Advantage.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Zurich.
. 2015. “Female Market Work, Tax Regimes, and the Rise of the Service
Sector.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Zurich.
Restuccia, Diego, and Carlos Urrutia. 2004. “Intergenerational Persistence of Earnings: The Role of Early and College Education.” The American Economic Review
94 (5): 1354–1378.
Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor. 1993. “Working in the Market, Working at Home, and the
Acquisition of Skills: A General-Equilibrium Approach.” American Economic
Review 83 (4): 893–907.
. 1996. “Life-Cycle Economies and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Review of Economic Studies 63 (3): 465–489.
. 2001. “Population Changes and Capital Accumulation: The Aging of the
Baby Boom.” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics: Advances in Macroeconomics 1 (1):
Article 7.
Robinson, Jonathan. 2012. “Limited Insurance Within the Household: Evidence
from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4): 140–164.
Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 1980. “Testing the Quantity-Quality
Fertility Model: The Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment.” Econometrica 48
(1): 227–240.

133

Ruggles, Steven. 1994. “The Transformation of American Family Structure.” The
American Historical Review 99 (1): 103–128.
Salcedo, Alejandrina, Todd Schoellmann, and Michèle Tertilt. 2012. “Families as
Roommates: Changes in U.S. Household Size from 1850 to 2000.” Quantitative
Economics 3 (1): 133–175.
Schaner, Simone G. 2015. “Do Opposites Detract? Intrahousehold Preference
Heterogeneity and Inefficient Strategic Savings.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, forthcoming.
Scholz, John Karl, and Ananth Seshadri. 2009. “Children and Household Wealth.”
Unpublished Manuscript, University of Wisconsin.
Schoonbroodt, Alice. 2015. “Parental Child Care During and Outside of Typical
Work Hours.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Iowa.
Schoonbroodt, Alice, and M. Tertilt. 2014. “Property Rights and Effciency in OLG
Models with Endogenous Fertility.” Journal of Economic Theory 150:551–582.
Shore, Stephen H. 2010. “For Better, For Worse: Intrahousehold Risk-Sharing over
the Business Cycle.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (3): 536–548.
. 2015. “The Co-movement of Couples Incomes.” Review of Economics of the
Household 13 (3): 569–588.
Soares, Rodrigo. 2005. “Mortality Reductions, Educational Attainment, and Fertility Choice.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 580–601.
Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, Yikai Wang, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2015. “Sharing
High Growth Across Generations: Pensions and Demographic Transition in
China.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (2): 1–39.
Tarozzi, Alessandro, and Aprajit Mahajan. 2007. “Child Nutrition in India in the
Nineties.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 55 (3): 441–486.
Tertilt, Michèle. 2005. “Polygyny, Fertility, and Savings.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (6): 1341–71.
Townsend, Robert. 2010. “Financial Structure and Economic Welfare: Applied
General Equilibrium Development Economics.” Annual Review of Economics 2
(1): 507–546.

134

Udry, Christopher. 1996. “Gender, Agricultural Production, and the Theory of the
Household.” Journal of Political Economy 104 (5): 1010–46.
Voena, Alessandra. 2015. “Yours, Mine, and Ours: Do Divorce Laws Affect the
Intertemporal Behavior of Married Couples?” American Economic Review 105
(8): 2295–2332.
Vogl, Tom. 2016. “Differential Fertility, Human Capital, and Development.” Review
of Economic Studies 83 (1): 365–401.
Washington, Ebonya. 2008. “Female Socialization: How Daughters Affect Their
Legislator Fathers.” American Economic Review 98 (1): 311–32.
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2011. “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China.” Journal of Political
Economy 119 (3): 511–564.
Yum, Minchul. 2015. “Parental Time Investment and Intergenerational Mobility.”
Unpublished Manuscript, University of Mannheim.

135

