NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GAINS FROM TRADE WITH FLEXIBLE EXTENSIVE MARGIN ADJUSTMENT
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Nicholas Li
Ralph Ossa
Mu-Jeung Yang
Working Paper 22069
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22069

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016, Revised April 2020

Financial support from IGM at Chicago Booth is gratefully acknowledged. The results of this
paper have been screened by Statistics Canada and the US Census Bureau to ensure that no
confidential data are revealed. This paper replaces our earlier paper titled “Accounting for the
New Gains from Trade Liberalization”. The research in this paper was conducted while one of
the authors was a Special Sworn Status researcher of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Chicago
RDC. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper
has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Chang-Tai Hsieh, Nicholas Li, Ralph Ossa, and Mu-Jeung Yang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gains from Trade with Flexible Extensive Margin Adjustment
Chang-Tai Hsieh, Nicholas Li, Ralph Ossa, and Mu-Jeung Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 22069
March 2016, Revised April 2020
JEL No. F10,F12,F14
ABSTRACT
We propose a new sufficient statistic to measure the gains from trade in models where the
extensive margin trade elasticity is not necessarily constant. This statistic is a function of one data
moment, the market share of continuing domestic products, and one parameter, the elasticity of
substitution between products. It measures the gains from trade in a Ricardian model with any
productivity distribution or a Melitz model with any productivity distribution and any pattern of
selection into production and exporting. We apply our statistic to measure Canada's gains from
the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement and find that they are smaller than suggested by statistics
that assume a constant extensive margin response of trade.

Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu

Ralph Ossa
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schoenberggasse 1
8001 Zuerich
Switzerland
ralph.ossa@econ.uzh.ch

Nicholas Li
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
nick.li@utoronto.ca

Mu-Jeung Yang
David Eccles School of Business
Salt Lake City, UT
USA
mjyang@eccles.utah.edu

1

Introduction

A seminal paper by Arkolakis et al. (2012) (henceforth ACR) shows that a country’s welfare
gain from trade can be measured with two simple statistics: the country’s own trade share
and the trade elasticity. The ACR formula can be derived from many widely used trade
models. This includes the Armington (1969) model, the Krugman (1980) model, the Eaton
and Kortum (2002) model, and a special case of the Melitz (2003) model in which the firm
productivity distribution is Pareto.
These models share a key property crucial for delivering the ACR formula, which is that
the import demand system is iso-elastic: the elasticity of bilateral trade flows with respect
to bilateral trade costs is a constant parameter, and the cross-elasticity is zero. While this
follows immediately from Dixit-Stiglitz preferences in models such as Armington (1969) and
Krugman (1980) where trade flows only adjust at the intensive margin, it requires strong
supply-side assumptions in models where there is also adjustment at the extensive margin.
In particular, selection into exporting has to be exactly such that the extensive-margin trade
elasticity is also constant. In a Ricardian model, this is true when productivity follows an
i.i.d. Fréchet distribution, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002). In a Melitz (2003) model, this
holds when productivity follows a Pareto distribution and when there is strict selection into
production and exporting. Obviously, both are knife-edge cases that are unlikely to hold
empirically.
In this paper, we propose a new formula to measure the gains from trade that does not
assume that the extensive margin trade elasticity is constant. Our proposed formula is based
on one data moment, the domestic market share of continuing domestic products, and one
parameter, the elasticity of substitution between products. The key advantage of our formula
is that it does not require knife-edge supply-side restrictions. It is therefore consistent with a
much wider range of trade models - for example, a generalized Eaton and Kortum (2002) model
with any productivity distribution or a generalized Melitz (2003) model with any productivity
distribution and any pattern of selection into production and exporting.
Our approach is essentially an application of the well-known Feenstra (1994) formula,
albeit one that is different from what is typically done in the literature. While prior papers

2

such as Broda and Weinstein (2006) use the Feenstra (1994) method to measure the import
variety gains from trade, we apply it to measure the overall gains from trade. For example,
in a Melitz (2003) model, the gains from trade come from lower prices for existing imported
products and access to new imported products net of the loss from domestic products that
exit. The intuition behind our application of Feenstra (1994)’s formula is that new foreign
products and lower prices of existing imported products take away the market of incumbent
domestic firms, while the exit of domestic firms increases their market share. The change in
the market share of domestic incumbent firms therefore captures the net effect of all three
sources of gains from trade in the Melitz (2003) model. Our formula boils down to the ACR
statistic when the extensive margin elasticity of trade is constant, but it holds even when this
condition is not met.
We illustrate the empirical importance of our proposed approach by measuring Canada’s
gains from the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA) of 1988. Since this application is
on the US and Canada, for which intra-industry trade is more important than inter-industry
trade, we focus our analysis on firm-level data and Melitz (2003) models. As a first step,
we apply our sufficient statistic in a simple before-after analysis using micro-data from US
and Canadian manufacturing. This analysis suggests that CUSFTA boosted Canada’s real
income by about 5% from 1988 to 1996. When we apply ACR’s formula with a trade elasticity
calibrated to match to Canadian and US micro-data, we get much larger gains from trade,
an increase in real income of at least 7.76%. Our gains are smaller primarily because many
large Canadian firms exited the market after 1988.
Our simple before-after analysis is only completely valid if the observed change in our
sufficient statistic between 1988 and 1996 is entirely driven by CUSFTA. As a second step, we
therefore calibrate a generalized Melitz (2003) model to isolate the causal effect of CUSFTA.
Our model does not impose iso-elastic import demand, but allows for it as a special case. We
choose the parameters of this model using macro moments on trade as well as micro moments
on firm size distributions and their overlap between non-exporters and exporters and between
exiting and incumbent firms. The estimated parameters suggest that the model that best
fits the data is not likely to feature iso-elastic import demand. We then use the model to
estimate Canada’s welfare gains from CUSFTA. This exercise suggests that about 90% of the
3

gains measured in our earlier before-after analysis are due to the reduction in trade costs from
CUSFTA.
The paper proceeds as follows. We first derive a new sufficient statistic for the gains from
trade that holds for all Ricardian or Melitz models of trade with Dixit-Stiglitz preferences,
including ones where the import demand elasticity is not constant. We then use micro-data
from Canadian and US manufacturing to calculate Canada’s gains from trade in 1988-1996
after CUSFTA was signed. The last section calibrates the welfare effect of CUSFTA in
a generalized two-country Melitz model that does not impose the assumption of iso-elastic
import demand.

2

A New Sufficient Statistic for the Gains from Trade

This section derives our sufficient statistic for the gains from trade liberalization. In anticipation of our later application, we derive this statistic in the context of a generalized Melitz
(2003) model where import demand is not necessarily iso-elastic. We do this by allowing
the productivity distribution to take any form and by not imposing any restriction on selection into production and exporting. But it will become clear that our sufficient statistic
also measures the gains from trade in a Ricardian model with an arbitrary distribution of
productivity.
Consumers have constant elasticity of substitution preferences over differentiated varieties
sourced from many countries. These varieties are produced by monopolistic firms with heterogeneous productivities at constant marginal costs using labor only and trade is subject
to iceberg costs. We remain agnostic about the determinants of entry into production and
exporting and simply say that Mij firms from country i serve country j. Hence, there may
or may not be fixed market access costs and firms may or may not sort into production and
exporting according to productivity cutoffs.
In this environment, a country i firm with productivity ϕ faces a demand qij (ϕ) =
pij (ϕ)−σ
Yj
Pj1−σ

in country j, where pij is the delivered price in country j, Pj is the price in-

dex in country j, Yj is the income in country j, and σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution. As
a result, it adopts a constant markup pricing rule pij (ϕ) =

4

σ wi τij
σ−1 ϕ ,

where wi is the wage

in country i and τij > 1 are the iceberg trade costs. Bilateral trade flows can therefore be
 1−σ
p̃
expressed as a function of average prices, Xij = Mij Pijj
Yj , where average prices are in
turn a function of average productivities, p̃ij =

σ wi τij
σ−1 ϕ̃ij ,

where ϕ̃ij is a weighted harmonic

mean of productivity.1
Consider now a shock to the economy, which causes some firms to exit and others to
enter. We focus on trade liberalization in our application but our method really applies to
any shock. We denote by Mijc the subset of continuing firms, defined as firms which are active
both before and after the shock. Bilateral trade flows associated with continuing firms can be
 p̃c 1−σ
Yj , where average prices and average productivity are defined
written as Xijc = Mijc Pijj
only over this subset of firms, p̃cij =

σ wi τij
σ−1 ϕ̃cij .

By definition, there are no changes in the set of

continuing firms so that Mijc remains unchanged and ϕ̃cij changes only if there are within-firm
productivity effects (i.e. there are no Melitz-type selection effects on ϕ̃cij ).
We derive our sufficient statistic by focusing on the domestic market share of continuing
domestic firms, λcjj ≡

c
Xjj
Yj .

Using our expression for Xijc above, we can express price index

changes as ∆ ln Pj = ∆ ln p̃cjj +

1
c
σ−1 ∆ ln λjj .

From our expression for p̃cij above, we know

that ∆ ln p̃cjj = ∆ ln wj − ∆ ln ϕ̃cjj so that we can write changes in the domestic real wage as
∆ ln

wj
Pj

1
− ∆ ln ϕ̃cjj = − σ−1
∆ ln λcjj . Changes in the domestic real wage are equal to changes

in per-capita welfare if labor income is proportional to total income since then ∆ ln
∆ ln

Yj /Lj
Pj

wj
Pj

=

≡ ∆ ln Wj . This holds, for example, under free entry and we impose this assumption

henceforth. We can thus write:

∆ ln Wj − ∆ ln ϕ̃cjj = −

1
∆ ln λcjj
σ−1

(1)

This equation says that anything that affects welfare, other than the productivity of continuing
domestic firms, shows up as changes in λcjj . One implication of this is that the effect of
changes in trade costs on welfare, including the effect of any reallocation and entry and exit
induced by the change in trade costs, can be measured by one simple statistic, the change
in the domestic market share of continuing domestic firms ∆ ln λcjj , and one parameter, the
1

Specifically, ϕ̃ij ≡

R
ϕ∈Φij

ϕσ−1 dGi (ϕ|ϕ ∈ Φij )



1
σ−1

, where Φij is the set of productivities corresponding

to all country i firms serving country j and Gi (ϕ|ϕ ∈ Φij ) is their cumulative distribution.

5

elasticity of substitution σ.
To gain intuition behind (1), we can rewrite it as:2

∆ ln Wj − ∆ ln ϕ̃cjj

N
X

!
ϕ̃cij
wj
=
+ ∆ ln c
λ̄ij −∆ ln τij + ∆ ln
wi
ϕ̃jj
i=1,i6=j
|
{z
}
“Intensive” Import Margin
!
ϕ̃jj
1
∆ ln Mjj + ∆ ln c
+ λ̄jj
σ−1
ϕ̃jj
|
{z
}
∆ Domestic Varieties
!
N
X
ϕ̃ij
1
+
∆ ln Mij + ∆ ln c
λ̄ij
σ−1
ϕ̃ij
i=1,i6=j
{z
}
|

(2)

∆ Imported Varieties

where

wj
wi

is the wage of country j relative to country i, ϕ̃cij is the average productivity of

continuing firms from country i in market j, and λij is the Sato-Vartia average of the share of
firms from country i in country j’s market.3 The left hand side of equation (2) is the change
in welfare (net of the growth rate of productivity among continuing domestic firms), which
is exactly what the sufficient statistic in equation (1) measures. So the sufficient statistic
1
∆ ln λcjj is the sum of the three terms in equation (2).
− σ−1

The first term captures the direct effect of changes in τ , productivity growth in the country’s trading partners relative to domestic firms, and the change in the relative wage weighted
by the trade shares λ̄ij . For lack of better terminology, we call this the “intensive” margin of
imports. In a model such as Krugman (1980) where the trade adjustment is entirely on the
intensive margin, the gain from trade will only come from this term. However, in a model
where there is also adjustment on the extensive margin, this language is not entirely accurate
because the change in the relative wage and the Sato-Vartia weights are endogenous objects
that vary with the adjustment on the extensive margin.
The second term in equation (2) captures the direct effect of changes in the set of domestic
firms in the domestic market, which is the sum of the change in the number of domestic
varieties ∆ ln Mjj (adjusted by

1
σ−1 )

and the change in average productivity due to selection

2

To derive equation (2), take the difference in the log of the CES market share equation for all countries
that sell in market j, and aggregate across all countries using
weights of
 the Sato-Vartia
 P
 each source country.
∆λ
∆λmj
N
3
Sato (1976)-Vartia (1976) weights are defined as λ̄ij ≡ ∆ ln λijij /
m=1 ∆ ln λmj .

6

ϕ̃

∆ ln ϕ̃jj
c . If the set of domestic varieties does not change, this term is zero. Similarly, the last
jj

term captures the direct effect of changes in the set of foreign firms selling into the domestic
market, which is a function of the change in the number of foreign firms and their average
productivity. Again, if the set of foreign varieties sold in the domestic market does not change,
this term is also zero.
It is straightforward to quantify the extensive margin terms in equation (2). In particular,
the net effect of domestic exit can be expressed as:
1
−
∆ ln
σ−1



c
Xjj
Xjj


=

ϕ̃jj
1
∆ ln Mjj + ∆ ln c
σ−1
ϕ̃jj

(3)

This says that the second term in equation (2) can be measured by the inverse of the change
in the share of incumbent domestic firms in sales of all domestic firms. Note that

c
Xjj
Xjj

in

equation (3) is not equal to λcjj in equation (1). Exit of domestic firms lowers both terms,
the more so if more firms exit and if the exiting firms are more productive. But entry of new
foreign firms lowers λcjj but has no effect on

c
Xjj
Xjj .

The empirical counterpart of the effect of new foreign varieties in equation (2) (third term)
is:
1
∆ ln
−
σ−1



Xijc
Xij


=

ϕ̃ij
1
∆ ln Mij + ∆ ln c
σ−1
ϕ̃ij

(4)

Adding equation (4) across all foreign countries that sell in the domestic market with the
relevant Sato-Vartia market share weights, this says the empirical counterpart of the net
effect of new imports is the inverse of the change in the market share of continuing foreign
firms relative to all foreign firms in the domestic market. This is essentially what Broda and
Weinstein (2006) measure as the new variety gains from trade, and it is increasing in the
number of new foreign varieties and in the quality of these varieties.4
Equation (2) provides a useful perspective on some important results in the empirical gains
from trade literature. Many empirical studies (such as Pavcnik (2002)) emphasize that the
exit of the least productive domestic firms leads to higher average productivity. This effect is
ϕ̃

captured by ∆ ln ϕ̃cjj , but obviously one cannot only take into the account the effect of exit
jj

4

As is well-known, productivity and quality are isomorphic in the Melitz (2003) model so we sometimes
refer to quality instead of productivity.

7

on selection without also accounting for the direct effect of exit on the number of varieties.
Similarly, papers such as Broda and Weinstein (2006) focus on the change in the number and
quality of imported varieties due to trade liberalization, but again such analyses ignore the
effect of trade liberalization on the loss of domestic varieties. Our proposed sufficient statistic
in equation (1) captures the net effect of all three terms in equation (2).
We want to make clear two points about our proposed statistic for the gains from trade
in equation (1). First, we assume that all the three forces in equation (2) – the reduction in
the price of existing foreign products, the net effect of domestic entry and exit, and the net
effect of new foreign varieties – are driven by trade. This may not be true. For example, in a
closed economy the first and third terms in equation (2) are zero but the second does not have
to be. Specifically, in a closed economy our sufficient statistic boils down to
1
σ−1 ∆ ln Mjj

1
c
σ−1 ∆ ln λ

=

ϕ̃

+ ∆ ln ϕ̃jj
c , which is simply the gains from entry of new varieties net of the losses
jj

from exit.
Second, even when all three forces in equation (2) are driven by trade, we do not know
whether they are due to changes in trade costs. For example, differential productivity growth
(domestic vs. foreign) or changes in the fixed cost of exporting can also change the gains from
trade. There is no model-free sufficient statistic to measure the welfare effect of changes in
trade costs. This question, we believe, can only be answered by specifying a full-blown model,
which we do in section 5.
We end this section by comparing our sufficient statistic in equation (1) with two widely
used statistics by Feenstra (1994) and ACR. First, our formula can be thought of as an
application of Feenstra (1994), albeit one that is very different from what is typically done in
the literature. While prior papers such as Broda and Weinstein (2006) use Feenstra (1994) to
measure the import variety gains from trade, we apply it to measure the overall gains from
trade. Feenstra (1994) decomposes price index changes (∆ ln P ) into a term capturing changes
P
in the prices of continuing goods ( i∈I c µ̄ci ∆ ln pi , where I c is a subset of continuing goods
and µ̄ci are Sato-Vartia weights) and a residual commonly thought of as capturing changes
in the set of available goods (the Feenstra ratio

1
c
σ−1 ∆ ln λ ).

However, the set I c can really

include any subset of continuing goods in which case the Feenstra ratio then also captures

8

changes in the prices of the remaining continuing goods.5 Our approach essentially boils down
to choosing continuing domestic goods. Intuitively, the market share of continuing domestic
goods measures the net effect of all the margins of adjustment triggered by a change in trade
costs. In a model with only adjustment on the intensive margin, the share of continuing
domestic goods falls when a reduction in trade costs lowers the prices of foreign goods. In
models that also have adjustment on the extensive margin, the share of continuing domestic
goods also falls with more and better entering foreign varieties and rises with more and better
exiting domestic varieties.
Our sufficient statistic in equation (1) is also a generalization of the formula by ACR. While
we derived this sufficient statistic in a generalized Melitz (2003) model, it should be clear from
 1−σ
wτ
p̃
Yj , p̃ij ∝ ϕ̃i ijij , and
our derivations that it holds in all models satisfying Xij ∝ Mij Pijj
wj Lj ∝ Yj . For example, it also holds in a generalized Eaton and Kortum (2002) model
that allows for an arbitrary productivity distribution if Mij is reinterpreted as the number of
goods shipped from country i to country j. Recall that ACR require four “model primitives”
- (i) Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, (ii) one factor of production, (iii) linear cost functions, and
(iv) perfect or monopolistic competition - and three “macro-level restrictions” - (i) trade
is balanced, (ii) aggregate profits are a constant share of aggregate revenues, and (iii) the
import demand system is iso-elastic. Their model primitive (i) immediately implies our first
 1−σ
p̃
Yj , while their model primitives (i)-(iv) together yield our
key equation Xij ∝ Mij Pijj
second key equation p̃ij ∝

wi τij
ϕ̃ij .

Our third key equation wj Lj ∝ Yj follows from their macro-

level restrictions (i) and (ii) so that we effectively relax their macro-level restriction (iii). In
the appendix (section A1), we elaborate further on the link between our formula and ACR’s
(as well as a related formula by Melitz and Redding (2015)).6,7
5
Note that in principle this also allows us to choose a set of continuing goods that experience no change
in productivity, eliminating the “continuing firm productivity term” in equation (1). Any changes in the
productivity of other continuing firms, foreign or domestic, is then captured by the Feenstra ratio. We provide
an illustrative example in the appendix (section A7) where we restrict the set of continuing domestic firms in
I c to only those in sectors that had initially low tariffs and hence experienced minimal tariff decreases due to
CUSFTA.
6
In the appendix (section A2), we analyze a special case of our generalized Melitz model which also satisfies
ACR’s macro-level restriction (iii) (the version of Melitz (2003) considered by Arkolakis et al. (2008)). In this
special case, we can show that the last two terms in equation (2) sum to zero, which is a prediction that we
can test. Foreshadowing our results, we will show that the gains from new import varieties to Canada from
the Canada-US free trade agreement in 1988 do not offset Canada’s losses from domestic exit.
7
In a previous working paper version of our paper (Hsieh et al. (2018)), we explore in detail how our
decomposition in (2) (and thus also our formula (1)) generalizes to richer economic environments. In particular,

9

3

Data

The free trade agreement between Canada and the United States was signed on January 2,
1988. It mandated the elimination of bilateral import tariffs in manufacturing, phased-in over
a ten-year period starting on January 1, 1989. By 1996, Canadian tariffs on US imports had
fallen from an average of 8% (equivalent to a 16% effective tariff rate) to about 1%. US tariffs
on Canadian imports fell from about 4% in 1988 to below 1% during this period. Bilateral
manufacturing trade between the two countries roughly doubled in nominal terms during this
period. For Canada, the free trade agreement was a large shock, as trade with the US accounts
for about 70% of Canadian trade in manufacturing. In addition, as discussed in Trefler (2004),
CUSFTA was not accompanied by other macroeconomic reforms or implemented in response
to a macroeconomic crisis.
We need information on domestic sales of continuing firms in Canada before and after
CUSFTA came into force. We use the micro-data from Canada’s Annual Survey of Manufacturing Establishments.8 This survey covers all but the very smallest Canadian manufacturing
establishments with sales below $30,000 Canadian dollars. We focus on the 1978-1988 and
1988-1996 time periods. We consider the 1978-1988 period as the “pre-CUSFTA” and the
1988-1996 period as “post-CUSFTA” period.9 The information we use from this data is the
establishment’s id, exports, and sales. In each of the two time periods, we use the establishment’s id to identify firms as entrants, exiters, and continuing firms. We define an entrant
as an establishment not in the data at the beginning of the time period, an exiter as an
establishment not in the data at the end of the time period, and a continuing establishment
as one that was present in the data at the beginning and at the end of a time period. We
supplement these data on domestic sales by Canadian firms with data on total manufacturing
exports to Canada from the United States.
Equation (1) says that all we need to measure the gains from trade is the change in the
we consider non-traded and intermediate goods, endogenous markups, tariff revenue, multiproduct firms, and
heterogeneous quality. The bottom line is that only minor (if any) adjustments are needed to accommodate
these extensions so we do not elaborate on this here.
8
This survey was initially called the Census of Manufactures and is now known as Annual Survey of Manufactures.
9
We also chose these time periods because Statistics Canada officials indicated to us that the years with
the best sampling frame are 1978, 1988, and 1996.

10

Canadian market share of continuing Canadian firms, which we can calculate using only the
Canadian firm data together with data on aggregate US manufacturing exports to Canada. We
will also measure the importance of the different margins behind the gains from trade (using
equation (2)), for which we also need the share of new foreign firms in the Canadian market.
We use micro-data from the quinquennial US manufacturing census, which provides data on
exports at the establishment level starting in 1987, so we focus on the 1987-1997 period.
From the US manufacturing micro-data, we impute the share of new imported varieties in
total Canadian imports (the third term in equation (2)) using total exports of US firms that
export for the first time in the 1987-1997 time period as a share of total US exports in 1997.10
Likewise, we impute the share of exiting imported varieties in total Canadian imports as
total exports of US firms that stop exporting over the 1987-1997 period as a share of total
US exports in 1987. The last thing we need is the elasticity of substitution, and we use the
estimates from Oberfield and Raval (2014) based on firm markups in US manufacturing.11
The elasticities at the two-digit level range from 3.3 to 4.4 and average to 3.7. Since we only
use aggregate data, we simply work with the average elasticity of 3.7.12

4

Canada’s Gain during CUSFTA

In this section, we apply our sufficient statistic (1) to measure Canada’s gains from CUSFTA
in a simple before-after analysis. As we discussed earlier, this analysis is only identified if
the observed change in the sufficient statistic is also entirely driven by CUSFTA. We will
investigate this question in detail in the next section with the help of a quantitative model.
Our conclusion will be that around 90% of the gains from CUSFTA implied by our simple
before-after analysis can be causally attributed to CUSFTA.
We begin by showing key summary statistics from the Canadian and US micro-data. Table
1 shows the domestic sales of exiting (row 1) and entering (row 2) Canadian firms as a share
10
The US census does not report establishment level exports by destination country so this imputation
assumes that all US exporters in manufacturing also export to Canada. Canadian customs collects transactionlevel data on imports from the US, but this data is only available after 1992 and cannot be reliably matched
to US firms. US customs does not separately collect transaction-level data on exports to Canada.
11
See Table VII of Oberfield and Raval (2014)’s online appendix. We used the concordance from Peter
Schott’s website to match them to 2-digit Canadian SIC codes.
12
This value is also consistent with mean elasticities estimated using panel import data for the US (Broda
and Weinstein (2006)) and Canada (Chen and Jacks (2012)) at similar levels of aggregation.

11

of domestic sales of all Canadian firms in 1978-1988 (column 1) and 1988-1996 (column 2).
The share of exiting firms is defined as the ratio of revenues of firms that exit between t and
t + 1 to total revenues at time t. And the share of entrants is the ratio of revenues of firms
that enter between t and t + 1 to total revenues in period t + 1. To compare the numbers
across the two time periods we study, we convert the share of entrants and exiters in the
1978-1988 period into shares over an 8 year period.13 A key fact is that the share of exiting
firms increased, from 24.41% to 28.01% between 1978-1988 and 1988-1996, while the same
share for entrants declined from 21.55% to 18.81%.
Row 3 in Table 1 shows the change in the share of continuing domestic firms as a share of
all domestic firms implied by the change in the share of exiters in row 1 and entrants in row
2. Specifically, the third row shows that the change in the sales of continuing domestic firms
as a share of sales of all domestic firms increased from 2.97% before CUSFTA (1978-1988) to
12.03% after CUSFTA (1988-1996).
Table 1: Revenue Shares in Canadian Market
Canadian Firms
1978–1988
1988–1996
Exiter Revenue Share 1
Entrant Revenue

1

Share 2

US Exporters
1987–1997

24.41%

28.01%

35.47%

21.55%

18.81%

38.73%

∆ ln Xijc /Xij 3
∆ ln λ 4

2.97%

12.03%

-4.14%

-1.36%

-23.86%

–

∆ ln λc 5

1.61%

-11.83%

–

Total domestic revenues of exiting Canadian firms/total domestic revenues of all Canadian firms (columns

1-2) or total exports of exiting US exporters/total US exporters (column 3) at beginning of each period.
2

Total domestic revenues of entrant Canadian firms/total domestic revenues of all Canadian firms (columns

1-2) or total exports of entrant US exporters/total US exporters (column 3) at end of each period.
3

Change in domestic revenues of continuing Canadian firms/all Canadian firms (columns 1-2) or total exports

of continuing US exporters/all US exports (column 3).
4

Change in total domestic sales of all Canadian firms/total sales in Canadian market.

5

Change in total domestic revenues of continuing Canadian firms/total sales in Canadian market.

Sources: Columns 1 and 3 impute the shares or changes over 8 years based on the change over 10 years.
Calculated from micro-data of Canada’s Annual Survey of Manufacturing or US Manufacturing Census. See
text for details.
13

We multiply the share of entrants and exiters in 1978-1988 by 8/10.

12

Equation (1) says that the key statistic is the change in domestic sales of continuing
domestic firms as a share of total sales in the domestic market. This is simply the sum of the
change in sales of continuing domestic firms as a share of all domestic firms shown in row 3
and the share of domestic firms in total sales. The latter, shown in the fourth row, indicates
that the market share of domestic Canadian firms fell massively after CUSFTA. The last row
shows ∆ ln λcjj as the sum of row 3 and 4. The share of continuing domestic firms in total
sales in the Canadian market fell by 11.83% in 1988-1996, compared to an increase of 1.61%
in the period prior to CUSFTA.
1
∆ ln λcjj , where the latter is meaTable 2 shows the gains from trade calculated as − σ−1

sured as the difference between ln λcjj before and after CUSFTA and assuming σ = 3.7. The
first row in the table says that CUSFTA increased Canada’s real wage by almost 5% over the
1988-1996 period. The next three rows decompose this number into the components in equation (2). To do this, we need to know two more numbers: the share of exiting Canadian firms
in total domestic sales of Canadian firms and the share of new foreign firms in the Canadian
market as a share of total sales of foreign firms in Canada. The former is simply the statistic
in row 3 in Table 1. For the latter, the third column in Table 1 shows the shares of exiting
and entering US exporters in the 1987-1997 time period.14 As can be seen, the revenue share
of new exporters (row 2) exceeded that of exiting exporters (row 1). As a result, the share
of continuing US exporters fell by 4.14% over the 1987-1997 period. If we assume that the
share of continuing US exporters is the same as the share of continuing Canadian imports
from the US, then this statistic is the data counterpart of the third term in equation (2). It is
also the key statistic for the variety adjustment term used by Feenstra (1994) and Broda and
Weinstein (2006) to calculate bias in the import price index due to new foreign varieties.15
The last three rows in Table 2 use these data moments to show the magnitude of the three
terms in equation (2). The second row says that exit of domestic varieties lowered real wage
14
The table shows the imputed shares of US exporters over 8 years (by multiplying the shares over ten years
by 8/10) to compare with the numbers in columns 1 and 2.
15
4.14% from 1988-1996 is 0.52% per year which implies a “lambda ratio” of 0.95 for 1987-1997. This number
is similar to the median number reported by Broda and Weinstein (2006) for US imports between 1990-2001
in their Table 7. It is a bit higher than the 0.91 mean figure reported in Table 5 of Chen and Jacks (2012)
for Canadian imports over the longer 1988-2007 period. Our independent estimates for Canada over the same
period using HS10 imports from the US line up well with our estimates using US firm data over the same
period.

13

Table 2: Effect of CUSFTA on ∆ Canadian Real Wage from 1988 to 1996
Total ∆ ln Wj

4.98%

∆ Domestic Varieties

-2.40%

∆ Foreign Varieties

0.44%

∆ “Intensive” Margin

7.90%

Notes: Row 1 shows change in Canada’s gain from trade in 1988-1996 compared to 1978-1988
using equation (1). Rows 2-4 show change in the components of Canada’s gain from trade in
equation (2) in 1988-1996 compared to 1978-1988. All calculations are based on data moments
in Table 1.
growth by 2.40% over 1988-1996. The third row says that the entry of new foreign varieties
raised real wage growth by 0.44% over the same period. The direct welfare effect of new
foreign varieties is positive but it does not offset the direct welfare loss from fewer domestic
varieties. Finally, there is no empirical counterpart to the “intensive” margin, so we calculate
it as a residual. The intensive margin real wage gains are significantly larger than the overall
gains because they do not take into account the effect of the exit of domestic varieties.
Table 3 further decomposes the last two terms in equation (2) into the change in the
number of varieties (“variety” margin in the top panel) and in the average productivity of
these varieties (“productivity” margin, in the bottom panel). The first two rows in Table 3
show the number of exiting and entering plants as a share of all plants, and the third row
shows the implied change (over an 8-year period) in the number of plants. So the key fact here
is that the number of Canadian plants decreased and the number of US exporters increased
during 1988-1996. Viewed through the lens of equation (2), the fact that ∆ ln Mjj < 0 lowers
the real wage and ∆ ln Mij > 0 raises the real wage.
But entry and exit also potentially change average productivity. This effect is shown in
the bottom panel in Table 3. The first two rows show the raw data, namely sales of exiting
firms relative to all firms and sales of entering firms relative to all firms. As expected, exiting
and entering firms are smaller than the average firm. The net effect of entry and exit on




1
c /r̃
average productivity is then given by ∆ ln ϕ̃ij /ϕ̃cij = σ−1
∆ ln r̃ij
where r̃ denotes
ij
average revenues. This number is shown in the last row in bottom panel of Table 3. Net
entry of new US exporters lowered the average productivity of US exporters, and net exit

14

Table 3: Variety and Productivity Margins of Entry and Exit

Canadian Firms
1978–1988 1988–1996
Variety Margin
Exiters (% of All Plants)1

51.68%

49.56%

54.69%

64.46%

43.76%

72.87%

24.57%

-10.90%

41.04%

47.23%

56.52%

64.86%

Entrants (Size relative to all plants)5

33.44%

42.99%

53.14%

∆ ln ϕ̃ij /ϕ̃cij 6

-10.20%

-0.42%

-13.67%

Entrants (% of All

Plants)2

∆ ln Mij 3
Productivity Margin
Exiters (Size relative to all plants)4

1

US Exporters
1987–1997

# exiting plants/total # of plants (columns 1-2) or exiting exporters/total # of exporters (column 3) at

beginning of each period.
2

# new plants/total # of plants (columns 1-2) or new exporters/total # of exporters (column 3) at end of

each period.
3

% change in total # of plants (columns 1-2) or exporters (column 3).

4

Average domestic revenues of exiting plants/all plants (columns 1-2) or average exports of exiting exporters/all

exporters (column 3) at beginning of period.
5

Average domestic revenues of new plants/all plants (columns 1-2) or average exports of new exporters/all

exporters (column 3) at end of period.
6

Productivity growth of all plants/continuing plants (columns 1-2) or all exporters/continuing exporters

1
(column 3), measured as ∆ ln ϕ̃ij /ϕ̃cij = − σ−1
∆ ln

c
r̃ij
r̃ij

where r̃ denotes average revenues.

Notes: Columns 1 and 3 impute 8-year change from 10-year changes. Calculated from micro-data of Canada’s
Annual Survey of Manufacturing and US Manufacturing Census. See text for details.

of Canadian firms increased average productivity of Canadian firms relative to the numbers
observed before CUSFTA (in 1978-1988).
However, we re-emphasize the point that what matters for welfare is the net effect of the
extensive and the intensive margins, and the sufficient statistic for this net effect is the share
of exiting or entering firms in total revenues shown in Table 1. So in a sense, once we have
data on shares of exiting and entering firms, we do not need to know the contribution of
the intensive and extensive margins to these shares. Put differently, exit is always welfare
reducing and entry is always welfare enhancing, and how much they matter is measured by
the revenue shares of the two types of firms relative to continuing firms.
Table 4 compares our estimates of Canada’s gains from trade with alternative approaches

15

that exclusively focus on foreign variety gains or domestic productivity gains. The first row
replicates our estimate of a real wage gain of 4.98% in the 8 years after CUSFTA. The second
row shows the gains if we were to consider new import varieties only as in Broda and Weinstein
(2006). This number is simply the third term in equation (2) and is much smaller at 0.44%.
The third row shows the gains if we only consider the effect of domestic exit on average
productivity of domestic firms as in Pavcnik (2002). The welfare gain from the increase in
average productivity of domestic firms is 6.87%, but this number is obviously misleading as
it does not take into account the welfare loss from fewer domestic varieties. Remember from
Table 2 that the net effect of domestic exit, which is what led to the improvement in average
productivity, lowers welfare by 2.4%.
More generally the last two effects are just partial effects so our last two estimates consider all the effects in equation (2) but with more structure, specifically assuming iso-elastic
import demand. In particular, we can use ACR’s sufficient statistic if we assume that firm
productivity follows a Pareto distribution and there is strict productivity-based sorting into
production and exporting. With these two assumptions, the gain from trade is given by:
1
∆ ln Wj − ∆ ln ϕ̃cjj = − ∆ ln λjj
θ

(5)

where θ is the trade elasticity, which happens to be the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution in this particular model. There are two differences between (5) and (1). First, λjj
in equation (5) is the share of all domestic firms while λcjj in equation (1) is the share of
continuing domestic firms. The former is the number in row 4 in Table 1 and the latter in
row 5. Second, the elasticity in equation (5) is a function of the shape parameter of the Pareto
distribution, while the elasticity in equation (1) is a function of the elasticity of substitution
across varieties.
So the only additional number we need to estimate equation (5) is θ. There are at
least three ways to estimate this parameter. The first two involve data moments from a
trade shock. First, we can use the fact that with an (untruncated) Pareto distribution,


Mij /Mjj
θ = −∆ ln ϕ̃ij
/ϕ̃jj . A second approach is to use the trade elasticity implied by the model.
In particular, Melitz and Redding (2015) propose the “arc elasticity” θ = ∆ ln

16

(1−λjj )/λjj
(1+τij )

.

Table 4: Alternative Estimates of Canada’s Welfare Gains from Trade after CUSFTA
∆ Welfare
1
∆ ln λcjj
Our statistic: − σ−1

Foreign Varieties only

0.44%

Domestic Productivity only
ACR with θ = 2.9

3

ACR with θ = 2.63

4.98%

1
2

6.87%
7.76%

4

8.56%

1

Welfare gain from new foreign varieties (copied from Table 2).
Welfare effect of change in average productivity calculated as λ̄jj ∆ ln ϕ̃ij /ϕ̃cij in table 3.


3 ACR welfare statistic (5) using θ = −∆ ln Mij /Mjj
or using Zipf’s Law calculated as
ϕ̃ij /ϕ̃jj
θ = ξ · (σ − 1) where ξ is the elasticity of firm rank with respect to firm employment.
4 ACR welfare statistic (5) with arc-elasticity proposed by Melitz and Redding (2015) and
(1−λjj )/λjj
measured as θ = ∆ ln (1+τ
ij )
Note: Table shows the gains from trade for Canada from 1988 to 1996 based on the data
moments in Table 1 and 3.
2

A third way is to use the distribution of firm size in the steady state. Specifically, if the
distribution of firm productivity follows a Pareto distribution, θ is the product of σ − 1 and
the elasticity of the rank of firm size with respect to firm size.
We use our micro-data from Canada and the US to estimate θ using these three methods.
For the first method, we use the ∆ ln M and ∆ ln ϕ̃ from 1978-1988 to 1988-1996 (shown in
Table 3), which gives us θ = 2.9. This estimate for θ is almost identical to that obtained
from the cross-sectional distribution of firm size. Specifically, the elasticity of firm rank with
respect to firm size is 1.06, which combined with σ = 3.7 yields θ = 2.86. Finally, we estimate
θ from the “arc-elasticity” proposed by Melitz and Redding (2015) as θ = ∆ ln

(1−λjj )/λjj
(1+τij )

.

As we will describe later, CUSFTA lowered the iceberg trade cost of shipping goods from
the US to Canada by 23%, which combined with the change in λjj (shown in Table 1) yields
θ = 2.63.
The last two rows in Table 4 calculate the ACR statistic using these two values of θ. Using
θ=2.9, ACR’s statistic suggests that CUSFTA increased welfare by 7.76%. Using θ = 2.63,
ACR’s gains are even larger, at 8.56%. These numbers are 50%-70% larger than our estimate
of 4.98%, shown in the first row of the table.

17

5

Simulation of welfare effects of CUSFTA

In this section, we use a quantitative trade model to isolate the causal effect of CUSFTA
on our sufficient statistic (1). This is meant to complement our simple before-after analysis
from the previous section which simply attributed the entire change observed in the data to
CUSFTA. We build on a standard Melitz-Pareto model but want to relax the strong supply
side assumptions necessary to generate an iso-elastic import demand system. Therefore, we
consider two generalized Melitz-Pareto models, both of which have as a special case the model
with iso-elastic import demand. We then calibrate these models to the data, and let the data
tell us about the extent of the departure from a model with iso-elastic import demand.
Our first model follows Melitz and Redding (2015). Specifically, we assume two countries
populated by representative consumers with CES preferences, firms pay a common fixed cost
to produce in each period and another fixed cost to export, and the steady-state distribution of
firm productivity follows a truncated Pareto distribution.16 In this model then the truncation
parameter determines the extent of the departure from an iso-elastic import demand. With
a large truncation parameter, the model boils down to a Melitz-Pareto model with iso-elastic
import demand.
Our second generalization drops the assumption that all firms face the same fixed cost
of production and exporting. We do this for two reasons. First, there is abundant evidence
that strict sorting into exporting may not hold empirically. Eaton et al. (2011) and Armenter
and Koren (2015) show that there is a substantial overlap in the size distribution between
exporters and non-exporters in France and the US. Figure 1 (top panel) plots the distribution
of employment for exporters and non-exporters in our Canadian and US data, and shows that
a similar fact holds in Canada and the US We can capture the fact that many exporters are
smaller than non-exporters, and vice versa, by allowing the fixed cost of exporting to differ
across firms. Specifically, we assume that export fixed costs in each country are i.i.d. Pareto,
as in Armenter and Koren (2015).
Second, the bottom panel in Figure 1 plots the ex-ante distribution of plant size for exiting
vs. continuing firms in US and Canadian manufacturing. As can be seen, many exiting plants
16
We also assume free entry (after paying the fixed cost of entry), balanced trade, and that firm productivity
is subject to a shock that follows a mean zero log normal distribution.

18

Figure 1: Distribution of Employment
US

Canada

Exporters vs. Non-Exporters

Exiting vs. Continuing Establishments
Note: Top panel shows the distribution of log employment of exporting and non-exporting establishments
in Canada in 1996 and the US in 1997. Bottom panel shows distribution of log employment of exiting and
continuing establishments in Canada in 1988 and US in 1987. Exiting plants leave the data between 1988 and
1996 (Canada) or between 1987 and 1997 (US). Continuing plants are in the data in the initial and final years.
Statistics calculated from the micro-data of manufacturing firms in Canada and the US

are ex-ante substantially larger than continuing plants, and vice versa. We will also allow our
model to reproduce this pattern, this time by relaxing the assumption that the fixed cost of
domestic production are the same across firms. Specifically, we allow production fixed costs
to vary with firm productivity according to fd + β ln ϕ (note that we do not impose β 6= 0 but
calibrate it using the data). The appendix (section A3) provides more detail on our models
and our solution algorithm.

19

5.1

Model Calibration

Table 5 summarizes the key parameters of the two models. In both models, we assume
σ = 3.7 and θ = 2.9 and take as given employment in manufacturing in the two countries.
In the model where all firms have common fixed production and exporting cost (Melitz and
Redding (2015)), we then choose the parameters in the first column in Table 5 to fit the trade
share, the number and relative employment of exporting and non-exporting firms, and the
exit rate in the two countries.17 The first column in Table 5 shows the resulting estimates of
these parameters for this model.18
Table 5: Parameters for Canada
Melitz-Redding
truncated
Pareto only

Full model
truncated Pareto
+ fixed cost heterogeneity

3.8
2.15
0.83
0.65
0.6
0.07

4.3
2.15
0.83
0.2
3
0.09
0.17
0.051

Productivity Pareto truncation
Trade friction τ
Entry fixed cost
Production fixed cost intercept fd
Production fixed cost slope β
Export fixed cost location fx
Export fixed cost shape α
Exit shock standard deviation

Notes: Column 1 shows the model parameters for the model with a truncated Pareto distribution and common fixed costs (the Melitz and Redding (2015) model). Column 2 shows
the calibrated parameters for the model a truncated Pareto distribution and heterogeneity
in fixed costs of production and exporting. See Table 9 in the appendix (section A5) for US
parameters.
Our second model, which features heterogeneity in fixed production and export costs, has
two more parameters: the elasticity of production fixed costs with respect to firm productivity
β and the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution of export fixed cost α. We choose these
additional parameters using data on the overlap in firm size between exporting and non17

Table 8 in the appendix (section A4) shows the values of the moments we target.
Table 5 only shows the model parameters for Canada. Table 9 in the appendix (section A5) shows the
parameters for the US
18

20

exporting firms and exiting vs. continuing firms in Canada and the US19 The second column
in Table 5 reports the parameters of the model that allows for overlap in the distribution of
exporters and non-exporters and exiters and continuing firms. We need a very high level of
dispersion in the fixed exporting costs to match the degree of overlap in employment between
exporters and non-exporters in the data, with a (Pareto) shape parameter of α = 0.17 for
Canada. In addition, we need a positive elasticity of fixed operating cost with respect to
productivity to match the overlap in the distribution of exiters vs. continuing firms. The
appendix (sections A4 and A5) provides more detail on our calibration.
Figure 2 shows the trade elasticity for varying levels of changes in trade costs implied by
the estimated parameters in the two models. As can be seen, the estimated model parameters
imply significant departures from an iso-elastic import demand structure. So the gains from
trade in our two models will not be measured accurately by ACR’s formula. Of course, this
observation alone does not tell us the degree of bias if we use ACR’s statistic in these two
models, which is a question we address in section 5.3.

5.2

Predicted welfare effects of CUSFTA

We now simulate the effect of the reduction in trade costs due to CUSFTA on Canada in
the two models. We assume that Canadian trade costs for US imports fell by 23% due to
CUSFTA. This includes a 16% decline in tariffs and the elimination of non-tariff barriers
equivalent to about a 7% tariff.20 On the US side, CUSFTA lowered US tariffs on Canadian
imports by about 58% of the decline in Canadian tariffs on US imports. So we assume that
US trade costs for Canadian imports fell by 13.3% due to CUSFTA.21
The first panel in Table 6 shows the predicted change of the key data moments in response
19
Specifically, we target the 20th, 50th, and 80th percentiles of the employment distribution of exporting
versus non-exporting firms, and continuing versus exiting firms. Table 8 in the appendix (section A4) shows
the precise moments of the firm size distribution we target.
20
See Trefler (2004) for the reduction in tariffs and Head and Ries (2001) for the tariff equivalent of non-tariff
barriers.
21
In Table 10 in the appendix (section A6) we also consider a simulation where fixed exporting costs fall by
a similar magnitude as tariffs, i.e. the fixed cost of exporting to Canada falls by 23% and the fixed cost of
exporting to the US falls by 13%. Unsurprisingly, this results in larger changes in all of the table entries for
both models except the “intensive margin” term. It has a much larger effect in the Melitz-Redding model than
our full model because the dispersion of export fixed costs is so large in our model that there are many fewer
marginal firms induced to export due to falling export fixed costs relative to a truncated Pareto model with
strict sorting. We focus our analysis on changes in variable trade costs as we are not aware of direct evidence
or previous studies that quantify changes in fixed exporting costs during this period.

21

Figure 2: Heterogeneous Trade Elasticities in Simulated Models

Note: Figure shows the simulated trade elasticity for different values of changes in trade cost in the model
with a truncated Pareto distribution only and the model that also has heterogeneity in production and export
costs. See text for details.

to the change in trade costs due to CUSFTA in the two models. For comparison, the table
also replicates the same moments in the data in column 1.22 Recall that we are using the
models to isolate the effect of trade cost reductions so these are not moments we are trying to
match. In the first row, we show that the growth in the domestic market share of incumbent
Canadian firms is lower in both models than in the data. This is because the share of exiting
firms is lower in both models than in the data. The second row shows the change in the
share of all domestic firms. The model with only a truncated Pareto distribution predicts a
change in the domestic spending share almost exactly in line with the data, while the model
that also allows for heterogeneity in export and production fixed costs predicts a lower fall
in the domestic spending share. The third row, the share of continuing domestic firms in
domestic spending, is simply the sum of the previous two rows and the key summary statistic
in equation (1). So, the model with only the truncated Pareto distribution (column 2) predicts
higher gains from CUSFTA than our earlier before-after comparison based on the raw data
22

Specifically, “data” refers to the difference between 1988-1996 and 1978-1988 shown in Table 1.

22

Table 6: Simulated effects of CUSFTA: Data vs. Model

1

Data
1988-1996

Melitz-Redding
Truncated
Pareto Only

Full model
Truncated Pareto
+ Fixed Cost Het.

Market Shares:
c /X 1
∆ ln Xjj
jj
∆ ln λ 2
∆ ln λc 3

9.04%
-22.50%
-13.44%

6.68%
-22.55%
-15.87%

5.91%
-18.04%
-12.13%

Total Welfare Change 4
∆ “Intensive” Margin
∆ Domestic Varieties
∆ Foreign Varieties

4.98%
7.90%
-2.40%
0.44%

5.88%
5.51%
-1.76%
2.14%

4.49%
5.46%
-1.59%
0.63%

Percentage change in domestic revenues of continuing Canadian firms/all Canadian firms. (Difference to

1978-1988 pre-trend.)
2

Percentage change in total domestic sales of all Canadian firms/total sales in Canadian market. (Difference

to 1978-1988 pre-trend.)
3

Percentage change in total domestic revenues of continuing Canadian firms/total sales in Canadian market.

(Difference to 1978-1988 pre-trend.)
4

Gains from trade calculated from equation (2) from simulated data. Note: Simulated effect of a 23% (13%)

reduction in Canadian (US) tariffs in model with a truncated Pareto distribution of productivity and common
fixed costs (column 2) and heterogeneous fixed costs (column 3). “Data” in top panel is the difference between
the annualized change in 1988-1996 compared to 1978-1988 shown in Table 1, accumulated over 8 years. See
text for details.

moments, while the model that also allows for heterogeneity in fixed costs (column 3) predicts
slightly lower welfare gains.
The bottom panel in Table 6 shows the change in welfare implied by the moments in the
top panel. The first row shows the change in welfare. In the data, this is about 5%. The
Melitz-Redding model predicts that CUSFTA increased welfare by 5.9%, while the predicted
gains in the model that also allows for heterogeneity in fixed costs are closer to the gains
suggested by the raw data, at 4.5%. So the full model suggests that CUSFTA “explains”
about 90% of the gains reported in our earlier before-after analysis, while the model that only
allows for truncation in the Pareto distribution suggests that CUSFTA accounts for about
120% of the observed gains.
The last three rows in the bottom panel decompose the welfare gain into the three terms
in equation (2): the “intensive” margin, the loss from exit of domestic varieties, and the gains
23

from entry of new foreign varieties. In the data, the welfare loss from the exit of domestic
Canadian varieties is significantly more negative (-2.40%) than the gain from entry of new
foreign varieties (+0.44%) in the Canadian market. The model with only a truncated Pareto
distribution in column 2 cannot capture this pattern. In our calibration of this model, the
gain from new foreign varieties is larger than in the data, and is also larger than the losses
from exit of domestic varieties (+2.14% vs -1.76%). In contrast, our full model with fixed cost
heterogeneity in column 3 predicts that the gains from new foreign varieties due to CUSFTA
are significantly smaller than the losses due to exit of Canadian varieties. And this is exactly
what we see in the data.

5.3

Comparing welfare statistics

The last thing we do is compare alternative welfare statistics in our two calibrated models.
Remember that the estimated parameters for our two models imply that the import demand
is not iso-elastic. The question then becomes, how large is the bias if we were to use welfare
statistics that assume iso-elasticity?
The answer depends on what the two models predict in terms of the change in λ, as well
as the elasticity θ. In section 4, the numbers we use for θ are 2.9 and 2.65. Table 7 shows the
gains from trade liberalization due to CUSFTA in the simulation of the two models. The first
row repeats the simulated gains from CUSFTA calculated from the formula in equation (1)
shown earlier in Table 6. The second and third rows show ACR’s statistic calculated from the
simulated data with the two estimates of θ. In both models, the gains from trade calculated
ACR’s formula are larger than that obtained from equation (2) shown in row 1.
The last two estimates in Table 7 show the gains from trade calculated from formulas
that do not rely on iso-elastic import demand functions. The first formula, from Melitz and
Redding (2015) and Head et al. (2014), is a local approximation to the gains from trade that
holds for any productivity distribution:

∆ ln Wj = −

λjj
1
∆ ln e
L
Mj

(6)

where M e is the number of potential entrants and L is the local trade elasticity. Note that

24

Table 7: Welfare Measurement in Simulated Data

Welfare Statistic

Melitz-Redding
Truncated
Pareto Only

Full model
Truncated Pareto
+ Fixed Cost Het.

5.9%
7.8%
8.5%
6.2%
6.0%

4.5%
6.2%
6.8%
3.8%
0%

1
Our statistic: − σ−1
∆ ln λcjj
ACR, θ = 2.9 1
ACR, θ = 2.65 2
Melitz and Redding (2015), local elasticity 3
Melitz and Redding (2015), ∆ lowest prod.4
1

ACR welfare statistic with extensive-margin based estimate of trade elasticity θ =
Mij /Mjj
−∆ ln ϕ̃ij
or using Zipf’s Law calculated as θ = ξ · (σ − 1) where ξ is the elastic/ϕ̃jj
ity of firm rank with respect to firm employment.
2 ACR welfare statistic with arc-elasticity proposed by Melitz and Redding (2015) and defined
(1−λjj )/λjj
by θarc = ∆ ln (1+τ
ij )
3

Local welfare statistic (6) with elasticity estimation using L = (1 − σ) + X̄

1
M IN
jj /Xjj

· ∆ ln

Mjj
τij

from Bas et al. (2017)
4 Welfare statistic based on change in minimum productivity ∆ ln W = ∆ ln ϕ , where ϕ is
j
d
d
the productivity of the marginal firm.
Note: Simulated effect of a 23% (13%) reduction in Canadian (US) tariffs in model with a
truncated Pareto distribution of productivity and common fixed costs (column 1) and heterogeneous fixed costs (column 2). See text for details.
the number of potential entrants M e is not something that can be observed empirically, but
we can use our models’ predictions of this variable. As for the local trade elasticity, Bas et al.
(2017) estimate it as L = (1 − σ) +

1
M IN
X̄jj /Xjj

·

d ln Mjj
d ln τij ,

M IN denotes the ratio
where X̄jj /Xjj

of the sales of the average firm to the smallest firm. In our simulated data, this formula gives
us L = 3.75 and L = 2.74 for the models in columns 1 and 2 in Table 7, respectively.
The local approximation of the gains from trade given by equation (6) is shown in row 4
in Table 7. As can be seen, the gains from trade calculated from the local approximation are
very similar to those obtained from equation (2) (shown in the first row). The difference of
course is that equation (6) is valid only for small changes in trade costs, while we simulate
a 23% (13%) tariff cut in Canada (the US). However, note that in our full model with fixed
cost heterogeneity, the local approximation is strongly downward biased relative to formula
(1), mostly driven by the fact that Mje falls in this model.

25

The last row in Table 7 shows the gains from trade calculated as the change in the minimum
productivity of surviving firms. Head et al. (2014) and Melitz and Redding (2015) show that
the minimum productivity is a sufficient statistic for the gains from trade for any change in
trade costs and for any productivity distribution, but the statistic is only valid if all firms face
the same fixed cost of production and exporting. In contrast to M e which is unobservable,
the productivity of the smallest surviving firm can be imputed from the size of the smallest
surviving firm. Not surprisingly, the gain from trade calculated from this statistic in the
simulated data in the Melitz and Redding (2015) model (column 1) is almost identical to that
obtained from our formula in equation (1). This is not the case in the full model that also
features heterogeneity in fixed costs. In the simulation of that model, shown in column 2, the
productivity of the smallest surviving firm does not change due to CUSFTA so the gains from
trade from CUSFTA predicted by that statistic is zero. The reason is of course heterogeneity
in fixed costs, where some low productivity firms survive when trade costs fall because some
of these firms face low fixed costs.

6

Conclusion

We propose a new sufficient statistic to measure the gains from trade that is valid for models
where the import demand system is not necessarily iso-elastic. This includes a Ricardian
model of trade with an arbitrary distribution of productivity and a Melitz model with any
pattern of selection into exporting and production as well as any distribution of productivity.
The statistic is simple to calculate, as it is just a function of one data moment, the market
share of continuing domestic firms, and one parameter, the elasticity of substitution across
varieties.
There are however some limitations of our proposed statistic. First, it does not measure
the potential effect of trade liberalization on productivity growth among incumbent domestic
firms (except when applied as described in the appendix (section A7)). Second, the statistic
by itself does not tell us what fraction of the implied welfare change is due to changes in trade
costs. And third, the approach can be applied to measure the gains from past trade reforms,
but it cannot tell us the potential gains from a future change in trade costs.

26

There is no sufficient statistic that will allow one to address the last two issues. The only
way to do this is to adopt a specific model. We calibrate a generalized Melitz model that does
not impose iso-elastic import demand to answer these questions in the context of Canada’s
gain from the trade due to CUSFTA.
We raise one point for future research. In our calibrated model, we interpret the overlap
in size between exporters and non-exporters as due to heterogeneity in fixed exporting costs.
Similarly, we model the overlap in size between survivors and exiters as reflecting heterogeneity
in fixed production costs. That is obviously a simplification, and perhaps not a good one.
Our proposed sufficient statistic does not rely on a specific interpretation of this fact, but we
hope that future work will provide richer models for this important stylized fact.

References
C. Arkolakis, S. Demidova, P. Klenow, and A. Rodriguez-Clare. Endogenous variety and the
gains from trade. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 98(2):444–450, 2008.
C. Arkolakis, A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare. New trade models, same old gains?
American Economic Review, 102(1):94–130, 2012.
R. Armenter and M. Koren. Economies of scale and the size of exporters. Journal of the
European Economic Association, 13(3):482–511, 2015.
P. Armington. A theory of demand for products distinguished by place of production. International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 16(1):159–178, 1969.
M. Bas, T. Mayer, and M. Thoenig. From micro to macro: Demand, supply and heterogeneity
in the trade elasticity. Journal of International Economics, 108:1–19, 2017.
C. Broda and D. Weinstein. Globalization and the gains from variety. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 121(2):541–585, 2006.
B. Chen and D. Jacks. Trade, variety, and immigration. Economic Letters, 117:243–246, 2012.
J. Dixon and A.-M. Rollin. Firm dynamics: Employment growth rates of small versus large
firms in canada. Statistics Canada Research Paper, 11-622-M(25), 2012.
27

J. Eaton and S. Kortum. Technology, geography and trade. Econometrica, 70(5):1741–1779,
2002.
J. Eaton, S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz. An anatomy of international trade: Evidence from
french firms. Econometrica, 79(5):1453–1498, 2011.
R. Feenstra. New product varieties and the measurement of international prices. American
Economic Review, 84(1):157–177, 1994.
K. Head and J. Ries. Increasing returns versus national product differentiation as an explanation for the pattern of u.s.-canada trade. American Economic Review, 91(4):858–876,
2001.
K. Head, T. Mayer, and M. Thoenig. Welfare and trade without pareto. American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 104(5):310–316, 2014.
C. Hsieh, N. Li, R. Ossa, and M. Yang.
trade liberalization.

Accounting for the new gains from

NBER Working Paper 22069, This version is available at

https://www.nber.org/papers/w22069.rev2.pdf, 2018.
I. Kondo, L. Lewis, and A. Stella. On the u.s. firm and establishment size distributions.
Federal Reserve Board, working paper, 2019.
P. Krugman. Scale economies, product differentiation and the pattern of trade. American
Economic Review, 70(5):950–959, 1980.
M. Kugler and E. Verhoogen. Prices, plant size, and product quality. Review of Economic
Studies, 79(1):307–339, 2012.
M. Melitz. The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity. Econometrica, 71(6):1695–1725, 2003.
M. Melitz and S. Redding. New trade models, new welfare implications. American Economic
Review, 165(3):1105–46, 2015.
M. Melitz and D. Trefler. Gains from trade when firms matter. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(2):91–118, 2012.
28

E. Oberfield and D. Raval. Micro data and macro technology. Working Paper, Princeton
University, 2014.
N. Pavcnik. Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evidence from chilean
plants. Review of Economic Studies, 69(1):245–276, 2002.
K. Sato. The ideal log-change index number. Review of Economics and Statistics, 58(2):
223–228, 1976.
J. Sutton. Sunk costs and market structure. MIT Press, 1991.
D. Trefler. The long and short of the canada-us free trade agreement. American Economic
Review, 94(4):870–895, 2004.
Y. Vartia. Ideal log-change index numbers. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 3(3):121–126,
1976.

29

