                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INTERNATIONAL COMPARATIVE HOUSEHOLD FINANCE

                                       Cristian Badarinza
                                       John Y. Campbell
                                       Tarun Ramadorai

                                      Working Paper 22066
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22066


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016




Forthcoming in the Annual Review of Economics DOI 10.1146/annurev-economics-
080315-015425. We thank Tim Bresnahan, Laurent Calvet, Andreas Fuster, Matti Keloharju,
Karen Pence, James Vickery, Paolo Sodini and Jonathan Zinman for many useful comments, and
the Sloan Foundation for financial support. We are grateful to Vimal Balasubramaniam, Daniel
Fang, Wen Zhe Lim, Pranath Sisodiya, and Kevin Wang for able and dedicated research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22066.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Cristian Badarinza, John Y. Campbell, and Tarun Ramadorai. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Comparative Household Finance
Cristian Badarinza, John Y. Campbell, and Tarun Ramadorai
NBER Working Paper No. 22066
March 2016
JEL No. D14,G11

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the literature on international comparative household finance. The paper
presents summary statistics on household balance sheets for 13 developed countries, and uses
these statistics to discuss common features and contrasts across countries. The paper then
discusses retirement savings, investments in risky assets, unsecured debt, and mortgages.


Cristian Badarinza                           Tarun Ramadorai
Department of Real Estate                    University of Oxford
National University of Singapore             Said Business School
4 Architecture Drive, Singapore 117566       Park End St.
cristian.badarinza@nus.edu.sg                Oxford OX1 1HP
                                             United Kingdom
John Y. Campbell                             tarun.ramadorai@sbs.ox.ac.uk
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
1        INTRODUCTION
Household nance studies the ways in which households use nancial instruments to attain their

objectives.       The eld has grown rapidly in recent years, with considerable emphasis on mistakes

household nancial behavior that deviates from the prescriptions of standard nance theory in ways

that are hard to rationalizeand on the characteristics of households and of the nancial systems

in which they operate that either exacerbate or mitigate such mistakes.

        This type of research requires high-quality microeconomic data on household nancial decisions,

and the growth of the eld has been driven in part by the increasing availability of such data.

Traditional household surveys have been augmented by administrative data from governments, -

nancial institutions, and most recently technology companies that aggregate nancial information

for households.        As elsewhere in applied microeconomics, there is also great interest in identication

through discontinuities, natural experiments, and sometimes randomized controlled trials.

        A particularly vibrant subeld of household nance studies international data.                    One reason to

do this is to exploit the best data that are available anywhere in the world, without presuming

that households behave any dierently in one country versus another.                            A second reason is to

measure dierences in nancial behavior across countries, and across regions within countries, and

to understand their cultural and institutional determinants.
                                                                            1

        The rst motivation for international household nance research is powerful because often better

data are available internationally than in the US.                Notably, Scandinavian governments collect data

on the wealth portfolios of their citizens (a prerequisite to the taxation of wealth), and are far more

willing than the US government to merge dierent types of administrative data on households and

to make the combined datasets available to academic researchers.                     As another example, electronic

registries of equity ownership are available in countries as dierent as Finland and India, and have

been used for academic research on household behavior in equity markets.

        Beyond simple data quality, institutional dierences across countries allow more precise measure-

ment of certain eects of interest.          For example, the mortgage system in Denmark allows renancing

to lower the interest rate even by borrowers with negative home equity and impaired credit records.

Thus, if one observes sluggish renancing in Denmark one can be condent that it is not the result

of renancing constraints that have bedeviled US research on this subject (Andersen et al. 2015).

Similarly, unique features of the UK and Singapore housing markets allow Giglio et al.                              (2015)

to estimate discount rates for real estate over extremely long horizons.                     Related to this, dierent

countries' and states' nancial systems have dierent regulatory discontinuities, and abrupt legal

changes that occur at dierent times.                Each of these may provide a new natural experiment to

provide      identication.
                           2

    1
        We note also a third reason for an international perspective: that some important aspects of household nance are
inherently global.    When investing in risky asset markets, households have the opportunity to diversify internationally
but many appear reluctant to do so, a phenomenon known as the home bias puzzle.               Home bias has often been
studied using consolidated national balance sheets (see Cooper et al. 2013 for a survey), but recent work in this area
drills down to the household level (Bekaert et al. 2015).         Even domestic assets such as housing can be aected by
external shocks such as ows of capital and people across state and national borders (Saiz & Wachter 2011, Badarinza
& Ramadorai 2016).        For reasons of space, in this review we devote relatively little attention to this third aspect of
international household nance.
    2
        For example, Bajo et al. (2014) study a reform of the mortgage system in Italy that unexpectedly removed barriers
to renancing.      Campbell et al. (2015) study discrete regulatory changes in India and trace out their eects on risky
mortgage lending in that country.        Anagol et al.   (2015, 2016) study Indian IPOs in which there are randomized




                                                              2
       Even in the absence of natural experiments, dierent countries have dierent histories of macroe-

conomic shocks.         Research on household responses to these shocks can progress more rapidly when

the data available are a multi-country panel rather than a single-country time series.                      As an exam-

ple, Badarinza et al. (2015) use international data to shed light on the determinants of xed- versus

adjustable-rate mortgage choice.

       The second motivation for international household nance research is explicitly comparative.                     At

the level of basic facts it is important to understand which microeconomic facts hold true broadly

across the world and which appear specic to the US or to countries with similar characteristics.
                                                                                                                        3

       Certain patterns across households do appear to be universal.                  In all countries households with

higher education, income, and wealth tend to participate more actively in formal nancial markets

and conform more closely to the predictions of standard nance theories.                           The eect of age is

also broadly similar across countries, with benecial eects of increasing nancial experience in

early adulthood ultimately overwhelmed by the deleterious eects of declining cognitive capacity

(Agarwal et al. 2009a).

       However there are also persistent and somewhat mysterious dierences across countries.                          We

explore some of these in Section 2 of this review, using household survey data to compare house-

hold balance sheets across 13 developed countries. We document large cross-country dierences in

participation rates (the fraction of households that own a particular type of asset or have a par-

ticular type of liability), in the average magnitudes of gross assets and liabilities, and in portfolio

composition (the average share of a household's gross assets held in each asset class, and the average

share of gross liabilities accounted for by each type of debt).                   For example, homeownership rates

are particularly high in southern Europe and low in Germany; and both the equity participation

rate and the average share of equities in household assets are larger in Anglo-Saxon countries than

in continental European countries.

       An important question is what causes these dierences in household nancial behavior.                          One

possibility is that they result from deep cross-country dierences in culture.                     Guiso et al. (2008),

for example, claim that trust, a cultural attribute with deep historical roots, determines house-

holds' willingness to use the formal nancial system.                  The importance of culture is reinforced by

evidence that households moving across borders retain the investment habits of their country of

origin and are slow to adjust to the investment norms of their new home country (Haliassos et al.

2015).      However there is also evidence for the importance of institutions, such as the prevalence of

dened-contribution (DC) or dened-benet (DB) pensions.                       In addition, it is possible that histor-

ical experiences, for example with ination volatility, can have long-lasting eects given inertia in

household nance systems.              To the extent that institutions and inertia are important, it may be

possible to identify global best practices that can be imported into countries that have inherited

inferior systems.

       The remainder of this review is organized as follows.            Section 2 presents a systematic comparison

of household balance sheets across 13 developed countries, based on household surveys conducted

allocations of shares to particular applicants, and identify a range of treatment eects of randomly experienced gains
and losses on investment decision-making.
   3
       Guiso et al. (2002) is a notable early contribution in this spirit.   There is an analogy here to the recent concern
that academic psychology has relied too heavily on experiments with US college students.             The acronym WEIRD
(white, educated, from industrialized, rich democracies) has been used to describe these experimental subjects who
may indeed be unusual in a global context (Henrich et al. 2010).




                                                               3
in each of these countries.          This comparison reveals many similarities and some notable cross-

country dierences that should be kept in mind when interpreting the literature.                        After this the

paper considers in turn the assets and liabilities on the balance sheet.                  Section 3 explores cross-

country evidence on retirement savings systems, and section 4 considers households' investments in

risky non-retirement assets.        Section 5 studies short-term unsecured household debt, and section 6

studies mortgages.        Section 7 concludes.      A companion website, www.household-nance.net, hosts

a repository of international metadata and research, with the goal of reducing barriers to entry for

new researchers.




2 INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON HOUSEHOLD BALANCE
  SHEETS
In this section we compare simple summary statistics on household balance sheets across countries.

We focus on three types of statistics.        Participation rates give the fraction of households in a country

that own a particular type of asset or liability in any amount.              Mean and median assets, liabilities,

and net worth summarize the overall size of household balance sheets.                    Finally, average asset and

liability shares reveal the typical composition of balance sheets.

       Accurate measurement of these statistics is a notoriously dicult challenge.                    Administrative

data may exist on particular assets and liabilities, but are hard to merge to obtain a complete

picture of the balance sheet.         Household surveys provide a top-down view, but there is increasing

concern about non-response rates either to the survey or to important individual questions (Meyer

et al.    2015), and about inaccurate responses inuenced by imperfect recall, illiquidity of assets

leading to inaccurate valuations, and a tendency to overestimate asset values (Bucks and Pence

2015).      It is particularly dicult to get informative responses from wealthy households, and some

surveys oversample this group (Kennickell 2008).                Recent eorts to improve data quality compare

and combine administrative and survey micro-data, and reconcile these household-level data sources

with national accounts data (Bricker et al. 2015, Cynamon & Fazzari 2015, Koijen et al. 2014).

       Cross-country balance sheet comparisons are even more dicult because of cross-country varia-

tion in nancial systems, regulations, survey design, and survey response rates.                     A relatively new

trend is the development of household surveys that are implemented simultaneously in many coun-

tries with questions that are designed to elicit comparable responses.                 We use one such survey for

the Eurozone, the Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS), and several

other national surveys that are broadly comparable to the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) in

the US.
           4   Together, these surveys allow us to compare household balance sheets in 13 developed

countries.




   4
       The SCF, the HFCS, the Canadian Survey of Financial Security (SFS), and the UK Wealth and Assets Survey
(WAS) capture the balance sheets of representative cross-sections. The Australian Household, Income and Labour
Dynamics survey (HILDA) is a longitudinal panel.       These surveys have varying release schedules, so our data span
the years 2008 (Spain), 2009 (Greece, Netherlands and Finland), 2010 (Australia, Germany, France, Italy, Slovenia,
Slovakia and the US), and 2012 (UK and Canada).         Fortunately, participation rates and portfolio shares are quite
stable over time.   Asset holdings and liabilities are measured using current market values.   All surveys use regression-
based imputation methods to correct for non-response, missing or unreliable values, but only the SCF and the HFCS
release multiple replicates.



                                                            4
       Participation rates

       Table 1 reports participation rates in particular assets (Panel A) and liabilities (Panel B).
                                                                                                                      5

We distinguish nancial assets from nonnancial assets such as real estate and consumer durables.

Unsurprisingly, at the highest level of aggregation into nancial and nonnancial assets, participation

rates are very high.         In all but one country, for example, over 90% of households report holding

nancial assets in some form.
                                     6

       Within nancial assets, the highest participation rate is for bank deposits and transaction ac-

counts.
           7   However, the academic literature in household nance has devoted relatively little attention

to simple banking transactions, despite their prevalence and the possibility of household mistakes

in managing payments mechanisms.              Examples of work in this area include Schuh & Stavins (2010)

on the relative convenience, costs, and usage of dierent payment instruments across consumers;

Agarwal & Qian (2014) on the eects of unanticipated income shocks in Singapore on household

spending behavior through bank checking accounts as well as debit and credit cards; and Bakker et

al. (2014) on the large fees incurred by households on account of bank overdrafts.

       In most countries, the second highest nancial asset participation rate is for retirement assets

held in dened-contribution pension plans.             This participation rate does vary considerably across

countries, with high levels in Australia, the UK, and Canada, and quite low levels in Slovenia,

Slovakia, and especially Greece.            The main reason for this cross-country variation is that some

countries in the sample rely primarily on DB pensions, which are claims to future income but are

not well measured in the underlying surveys that we rely upon and are not counted as nancial

assets in our analysis.

       Outside retirement accounts, there is considerable variation across countries in the participa-

tion rates for directly held stocks and mutual funds.               Despite the well known costs and risks of

self-directed active equity investment, and evidence surveyed by Ramadorai (2010) that individual

investors tend to underperform institutions, in several countries (Australia, Spain, France, the UK,

and the US) the participation rate is substantially lower in mutual funds than in directly held stocks.

This is a striking fact even though the mutual fund participation rate excludes mutual funds held

in retirement accounts.

       Households' economic exposure to equities can best be summarized by an inclusive equity par-

ticipation rate that takes account of households' indirect holdings of equities in retirement accounts

and mutual funds as well as their direct equity holdings.                  An italicized row of panel A shows

that under this broadest denition, the equity participation rate is just below one half in the US,

about one third in Finland, and no more than one quarter in other continental European countries.
                                                                                                                      8

   5
       We dene the participation rate as the fraction of households who report that they hold an asset, even if they
also say that their holding is zero. This is a choice that makes little dierence in most countries but does have an
impact in Italy, where around 10% of households report having a deposit account with zero balance.
   6
       In Greece, only 74% of households report holding any type of nancial asset.   While this may accurately reect
relatively low participation in nancial markets, it may also reect distrust of ocial surveys in Greece, a country
notorious for tax evasion (Artavanis et al. 2015).   This illustrates the diculties that cultural dierences can cause
for cross-country comparative survey research.
   7
       The World Bank's Global Financial Inclusion project (Demirgüç-Kunt & Klapper 2013) reports even more com-
prehensive results.    Using survey data from 148 countries around the world, they show that 50% of adults worldwide
are banked, that is, have an account at a formal nancial institution, but also that account penetration varies across
countries by level of economic development and across income groups within countries.
   8
       The exclusion of dened-benet pensions from the analysis cannot explain this cross-country variation, since if
DB pension claims were treated as nancial assets they would be bond-like rather than equity-like assets and would



                                                           5
As we discuss in section 4, the participation rate increases with wealth in all these countries but

nonparticipants are found even among households with substantial gross assets and net worth.

    The participation rate in xed-income products outside retirement accounts is overall relatively

low, albeit with substantial variation across countries. Italy and the UK both have relatively high

participation rates in these products, which include both public debt and long-term debt issued

by banks.      Campbell (2016), using the same underlying survey data for a smaller set of eight

countries, reports consolidated participation rates in all risky assetsboth equities and xed-income

securitiesand nds broadly comparable cross-country patterns to those reported here for equities.

    Turning to non-nancial assets, vehicles and valuables are most commonly held.               Perhaps more

importantly, the homeownership rate (measured as the fraction of households owning their main

residence, rather than the more common denition in the real estate literature of the fraction of

housing units that are owner-occupied) is above 50% everywhere except Germany, a country in

which renting is famously more common.

    In almost all countries about 10% of households own private businesses.               These tend to be the

wealthiest households so private businesses are a much more important component of the aggregate

household balance sheet than this fraction would indicate.

    On the liabilities side, panel B of Table 1 shows substantial cross-country heterogeneity. Three

quarters of households are indebted in the US, and this fraction is only slightly lower in Canada,

Australia, the UK, and the Netherlands.             However, this is very dierent from Italy, where only

one in four households has any debt, or even France, Spain, and Germany, where about half of

all households are indebted.        Given that all countries in our sample are developed industrialized

nations with mature market economies and most of them members of the same currency area, this

degree of cross-country variation may seem surprising. Dierent explanations have been proposed

in the literature, referring to the taxation of mortgage payments, the regional history of nancial

regulation, competitiveness of the banking sector, eciency of the legal system, nancial literacy

of households, and cultural dierences in the social acceptance of indebtedness (Guiso et al. 2006,

Bover et al. 2013).

    Countries also dier with respect to the preferred methods of short-term nancing. A substantial

fraction of households hold vehicle, student loans and other debt in all countries, but the participa-

tion rates vary considerably, between one eighth in Greece and Slovakia to over one half in Finland.

In Anglo-Saxon countries credit card debt is widespread, ranging from about one quarter in Canada

and the UK to almost 40% in the US. In Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands, overdraft facilities

and credit lines are relatively more popular.

    Finally, panel B of Table 1 shows wide cross-country variation in the use of mortgage debt.           For

example, only one in ten Italians and one in ve Germans have a mortgage, whereas almost half of

American households do.         This heterogeneity is not explained by the homeownership rate, which

indeed is low in Germany but is close to the US level in Italy.


    The magnitude and composition of assets and liabilities

    Table 1 shows participation rates, but gives no information about the magnitude of assets and

liabilities.   Table 2 summarizes the size of the various components of household balance sheets,

not increase the inclusive equity participation rate in continental European countries.




                                                          6
converted to 2010 US dollars at market exchange rates.

       The rst two rows of panel A report mean and median total household assets in each country.

Large dierences between mean and median assets, notably in the US and Germany, reect an

unequal and right-skewed wealth distribution.            Concentrating on median assets to better reect the

nancial position of an average household, we see the highest values in Australia, Canada, and the

UK, and surprising patterns in Europe where the values are relatively high in southern European

countries such as Spain and Italy, also high in the Netherlands, but strikingly low in Germany.

Even Greece has a higher median household asset value than Germany, despite the large income

discrepancy between these two countries.

       In the lower part of Panel A, we compute the average share of each asset category, relative to

total gross assets.       We do this by equally weighting, rather than wealth-weighting, household-level

portfolio shares, again in order to better reect the portfolio of a typical household.

       The asset shares help us to interpret the cross-country variation in total asset holdings.                  In

Anglo-Saxon countries (Australia, Canada, the UK, and to a lesser degree the US), and in the

Netherlands, retirement assets have a relatively high share.              In these countries, the relatively high

levels of median gross assets are attributable to the importance of DC retirement plans as we

discuss in the next section.          In southern Europe, notably in Greece, Spain, and Italy, housing is

much more important and nancial participation rates are relatively low.                The puzzling observation

that median households in these countries have greater assets than the median German household

is largely attributable to the higher rate of homeownership in southern Europe.

       Other interesting facts emerge from this table. Deposits and transaction accounts are surprisingly

important across the sample, and especially so in Europe.                 In the extreme case of Germany, the

mean asset share in such accounts is 30%.           While it may be optimal for households with a very small

buer-stock of savings to keep their assets liquid, such a high liquidity ratio seems unlikely to be

optimal for the average household.          On the household demand side, it may well be the case that the

high liquidity ratio reects low nancial literacy, extreme risk aversion, or an irrational preference

for liquidity.
                 9    On the supply side, some countries may impose regulatory hurdles on nancial

institutions which limit the provision of more advantageous products. It is also possible that prot-

maximizing nancial institutions consciously direct households towards protable products that pay

low interest.
                10

       Conrming the evidence of Table 1, mutual funds, bonds, and publicly traded stocks account for

only a tiny fraction of household portfolios, despite historical evidence for an equity premium, and

theoretical exhortations for households to invest in risky assets yielding a positive risk premium.

We discuss this well known puzzle in the section on household risky asset holdings.

       Nonnancial assets are relatively important in all countries, but particularly so in southern

Europe as discussed above.           The dominant single asset in all countries is the household's primary

residence.      Vehicles and other consumer durables are especially important in the UK, the US, and

Canada, and generally represent the second-largest non-nancial asset category, except in Greece,

Spain, and Finland, where vacation homes and tourism-related residential properties are widespread.

   9
       Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner (2014) focus on the other end of the spectrum, namely, wealthy hand-to-mouth
households, who own substantial illiquid assets, but little to no liquid assets. They argue that in the US, this is a
sizeable population whose existence has important implications for macro modeling and scal policy.
  10
       Gurun et al.   (2013) discuss directed advertising eorts of banks in the US, and Fecht et al.   (2013) provide
evidence of German banks taking actions which are detrimental to retail investors.




                                                           7
          Nonnancial assets are often nanced with debt, and panel B of Table 2 describes this side of the

balance sheet.          Median liabilitiesamong households with nonzero liabilitiesare greatest in the

Anglo-Saxon countries and particularly the Netherlands, and are generally lower in southern Europe.

Combining this fact with the asset holdings in panel A of Table 2, and the liability participation

rates shown earlier in Table 1, it follows that median southern European households have higher

net wealth than US or northern European households as shown at the bottom of panel B of Table

2.        This fact, initially surprising given lower incomes in southern Europe, is in part a reection of

nancial underdevelopment in southern Europe, which leads households to save for housing rather

than funding it through mortgage borrowing.

          The contrast between northern and southern European balance sheets raises interesting questions

about the relation between private household wealth, shown here, and broader concepts of national

wealth and welfare.           Public housing and other assets used to provide public services enter national

balance sheets but not private balance sheets, and these public assets are likely greater in northern

Europe.           It is also likely that bequest motives are stronger in countries with weak provision of

public services and limited availability of credit to fund educational and housing investments by

young adults.           Finally, it should be kept in mind that a high level of house prices, as in the UK,

raises measured household wealth but corresponds to more expensive housing services rather than

a higher standard of living.

          The patterns in household balance sheets we have documented in this section justify the attention

the literature pays to the topics we review in the remainder of this paper, namely, retirement savings,

other risky investments, unsecured household debt, and mortgages.




3 RETIREMENT SAVINGS
Retirement saving is a dicult but extremely important challenge for households, as actions must

be taken far in advance of outcomes, small changes in actions can have large eects on outcomes

because savings are compounded over long horizons, and retired households have few margins for

adjustment if retirement wealth proves inadequate.                  Researchers are exploiting micro-level data

on individual retirement accounts and variation in retirement savings systems around the world to

study this important topic.            Overall, researchers have found that households are prone to making

errors in both retirement asset accumulation and decumulation, and that both poor active decision

making and inertia contribute to these errors.

          The most basic distinction in retirement systems is that between dened-benet (DB) and

dened-contribution (DC) pensions.               DB systems provide a pre-specied income stream and the

assets that support these promised payments are owned by the pension provider, not by the pension

recipient.
                11   If these assets lose their ability to support the promised payments, in principle the

pension provider is liable and the pension recipient is protected, although in practice DB pensions

can be reduced in extreme circumstances.                  DC systems allow households to accumulate assets,

through their own contributions and those of their employers, which in turn support consumption

in retirement.         These systems demand more of individual households but also allow greater exibil-

ity to accommodate job changes, periods of part-time work, early retirement, and dierences across

     11
          Within DB systems, there is also the distinction between funded systems as in the UK and the Netherlands, and
pay-as-you-go systems as in France and Germany.




                                                             8
households in desired investment strategies.

       Figure 1 illustrates the cross-country variation in retirement systems.
                                                                                       12   The gure shows the

fraction of households with DC plans on the left axis, and the average dollar value of the DC account

on the right axis.      The gure shows that following a shift away from DB plans in the last 25 years,

DC pensions dominate the market in Australia, the UK, and the US, but are far less prevalent in

Europe.

       The incidence of DC plans has risen in reaction to increased workforce mobility, demographic

changes, pension under-funding, and regulatory reform linked with market-based accounting in these

countries, especially in the UK and in the US, where the size of the average DC pot is considerably

higher than in any of the other countries.

       At the opposite end of the spectrum, DC plans have not made signicant inroads into many Eu-

ropean countries, where government- and employer-sponsored DB pensions are far more prevalent.

There is considerable heterogeneity across DB pension plans in Europe, and they are often indistin-

guishable from public social security schemes (Boersch-Supan 2008). Especially in Italy, Spain, and

Eastern Europe, traditional public systems carry the entire burden of retirement nancing, and DC

plans have only very modest participation rates. In Germany, France, and the Netherlands, public

pensions coexist with large DC schemes, which are mostly private and voluntary.                    As household

surveys provide very imprecise measures of public pensions and DB plans, we focus in Figure 1 on

the prevalence of DC plans, leaving DB pensions as a residual.

       We now turn to summarizing the extensive literature on household choices in the areas of retire-

ment asset accumulation and decumulation.


       Retirement asset accumulation

       A large body of research has demonstrated that retirement asset accumulation is a mineeld

in which household choices are particularly subject to error.               Benartzi & Thaler (2007) survey

household decision making in this area and show that households make errors of two types.                  On the

one hand, many households make poor active decisions.              Notably they adopt naive diversication

strategies that depend on the menu, i.e., the choice of retirement savings options. Households seem

to spread assets across available funds on the menu, regardless of these funds' asset allocation,

an approach that often implies a suboptimal allocation between bonds and stocks.                      Households

also engage in trend-following strategies in which their equity allocation moves with recent market

returns, and they overinvest in the stock of companies in which they are employed, especially

following high returns on these stocks (Benartzi 2001).

       On the other hand, households appear sluggish in their decision making, in the sense that they

are generally slow to join advantageous plans, and make infrequent changes to their retirement

savings rates and asset allocations.          As we discuss below, practical nudge approaches built on

academic work in this area have attempted to use this household inertia to cure the tendency to

make poor active choices.

       Work using a variety of international datasets has conrmed these ndings on inertia as well

as poor active decision making. In Sweden, over 90% of DC plan participants choose the default

  12
       Figure 1 excludes Canada where the underlying survey does not make a clean distinction between pure DC plans
and plans with DB features.




                                                          9
plan, and only a tiny percentage of participants make any changes to their portfolio (Cronqvist &

Thaler 2004). In Denmark, only 15% of households are active savers and optimally adjust their

portfolios to respond to retirement-related tax incentives (Chetty et al. 2013). This behavior is not

without consequence: Choi et al. (2011) nd quantitatively important eects of low participation

and contribution rates and suboptimal asset allocation.

   Worryingly, these problems appear to be concentrated among those least able to bear the con-

sequences of suboptimal decisions.    For example, Disney et al. (2001) exploit structural changes

induced by pension reform in the UK to show that household responses diered strongly across social

strata, with greater participation by high-income earners. They estimate that half of UK households

do not make sucient contributions towards pension accounts. They also nd that exactly those

parts of the population that do not have any retirement savings and that hold few nancial assets

are the ones that are more likely to opt out both of the state component of the pension scheme and

of plans provided by employers. Similar conclusions have been reached in Canada, Italy, and Ger-

many. Chetty et al. (2013) nd that, in Denmark, active savers are wealthier and more nancially

sophisticated, while passive individuals are least prepared for retirement.

   The greater incidence of investment mistakes among poorer and lower-income households may be

explained in part by the lower nancial literacy of these households. Hastings et al. (2013) show that

household nancial literacy is correlated with wealth and income, both within and across countries,

although there is considerable residual variation in nancial literacy.    The literature on nancial

literacy has progressed slowly, plagued by measurement and identication problems. Nevertheless,

international evidence documenting a positive impact of nancial literacy has emerged.        Bucher-

Koenen & Lusardi (2011) exploit the shock of German reunication and use regional variation

across German federal states to obtain exogenous variation in the nancial knowledge of peers.

They nd a positive impact of nancial knowledge on retirement planning.          Lusardi & Mitchell

(2011) conclude that the impact of nancial literacy on planning is also positive in the US, but they

recognize that nancial literacy can be hard to improve given that many households are unfamiliar

with the basic economic concepts needed to make adequate saving and investment decisions.

   Recently developed solutions to poor decision making employ household inertia in an innovative

way. Households tend to choose the path of least resistance (Madrian & Shea 2001, Choi et al. 2002),

engaging in passive decision-making and accepting the status quo.         Paradoxically, this provides

the path to a potential solution, since wealth accumulation in DC retirement systems depends on

numerous product-level and institutional design features. Among those that matter are the nancial

incentives households have to participate and contribute (for example matching contributions from

employers); the ease of participation (for example opt-in versus opt-out systems); the presence of

defaults for asset allocation (in the US, for example, defaults used to be riskless money market

funds but since the Pension Protection Act of 2006 have largely become target-date mutual funds

with a mix of equity and xed-income assets); rules concerning early withdrawals (which are often

permitted in the US but much less so in other countries as shown by Beshears et al. 2015); and

requirements for annuitization or withdrawal of assets upon retirement.

   To be more specic, households respond to system design features that are economically neutral,

or almost so, which nonetheless reduce the decision-making burden of taking a certain course of

action.   The household nance literature has increasingly taken the view that such nudges can




                                                 10
be used to promote advantageous retirement savings strategies.       Evidence has emerged showing

that sensible default options, automatic enrollment, automatic contribution rate increases, fund

matching, and dynamic asset allocations are benecial to households (see, for example, Madrian &

Shea 2001, as well as Hedesstrom et al. 2004 for Sweden, and Lippi 2014 for Italy).

      It is tempting to conclude that similar approaches will work elsewhere in household nance, but

it is important to keep in mind that the retirement savings context is special because employees

seem to trust employers to design retirement systems in a benevolent fashion (although Bubb et

al.   2015 question whether this trust is well placed).   In other contexts, households may lack an

institutional counterparty that they regard as benevolent. For example, there is less evidence that

nudges work as well in developing countries.     In Mexico, government nudges were ineective for

households at the lower end of the wealth distribution, and investors did not respond optimally to

the available information, even when signicant eorts were made to make the relevant features

salient, for example by building a synthetic fee index (Duarte & Hastings 2012).


      Retirement asset decumulation

      How well do households utilize their accumulated savings, once they reach retirement age? A

simple life-cycle model would suggest that older people should run down their nancial assets as

they age.    However, economists both in the US and around the world have been puzzled by the

observation that assets are only slowly decumulated and that the acceptance rate of annuity-type

products is very low (Benartzi et al. 2011).

      One plausible explanation for this behavior is a concern about health-care costs, which leads

households to retain assets in case they need to pay for long-term care.      Ameriks et al.   (2011)

survey US Vanguard clients and report that this concern is salient to them. Cross-country evidence

also lends support to this mechanism. Using micro-level data from the U.S. Health and Retirement

Study (HRS), the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA), and the Survey of Health, Ageing

and Retirement in Europe (SHARE), Nakajima & Telyukova (2013) nd that the rate of dissaving

in retirement, especially of nancial assets, is correlated with the public provision of healthcare.

Household exposure to out-of-pocket medical spending risk accounts for much of the cross-country

variation in post-retirement asset decumulation, with households dissaving more rapidly in Scandi-

navian and other countries with high-quality public healthcare.

      The role of housing in retirement is also important.   In southern and central-eastern Europe,

the homeownership rate is high and the rate of dissaving is low. In northern Europe, real estate

wealth is less important and retirees spend down their wealth more rapidly. This raises the question

of why homeowners do not extract home equity as they age.          It is possible that housing is used

for bequests, which older people may particularly wish to leave to their young adult children given

the relatively weak public provision of services and the diculty of borrowing in many southern

European countries; but it may also be that home equity extraction is dicult in southern Europe,

where nancial products such as home equity loans and reverse mortgages are uncommon. Even in

the absence of such nancial instruments, retirees could decumulate housing wealth by downsizing,

but such behavior also seems unusual in southern Europe. Angelini et al. (2014) show using SHARE

data that northern Europeans change residence ve to seven times on average, while southern and

eastern Europeans typically move less than three times.       In the extreme, elderly households in




                                                  11
Greece, Poland, and the Czech Republic experience only one change of residence on average during

adult life, and no further adjustments in their holdings of residential property during retirement.




4 RISKY INVESTMENTS
A large literature on risky household investments has found that household decisions in this area

deviate considerably from the predictions of theory.             There are two main themes here.           The rst is

participation in risky asset markets: theory is very clear on the desirability of participation, showing

that any rational household should hold at least some equities in a market with a positive equity

premium.
             13   The second is ecient portfolio construction: even if households participate in equity

markets, they can easily squander the benets by constructing portfolios with unnecessarily high

risk or low average returns.

       The deviation of observed household behavior from the strong theoretical exhortation to partic-

ipate in risky asset markets is clear. As Tables 1 and 2 show, many households do not participate

in equity markets, and when they do participate, they tend to hold relatively small fractions of

their portfolios in risky form.       This is true even when one takes account of indirect equity holdings

through DC retirement accounts, and Campbell (2016) shows that it is also true when one denes

risky assets more broadly to include long-term xed-income securities.

       An important theme of the literature on risky asset holdings is that households with higher

income, greater nancial wealth, and better education tend to invest more in risky assets and also

invest more eciently, i.e., in a more diversied fashion, and paying lower fees.                     For both these

reasons, such households tend to earn higher average returns.              Piketty (2014) has expressed concern

that this dispersion in returns increases the inequality of the wealth distribution, a particularly

powerful eect in countries with DC retirement systems and a high ratio of household wealth to

income.

       However it would not be accurate to characterize all low-wealth households as non-participants

and high-wealth households as participants.            Participation rates do increase with wealthin unre-

ported results, we nd that the inclusive equity participation rate is between three and eight times

as large for households with greater than median net worth than for households with lower than

median net worthbut the participation rate is quite low even in the upper half of the wealth

distribution, exceeding 50% only in Australia and remaining well below 30% in all other countries

including the US.
                      14   It is certainly true that non-participation by low-wealth households can easily

be rationalized by small xed costs of risky investment, but it is far harder to explain for wealthy

households.

       As mentioned earlier, even among participants, risky shares vary cross-sectionally at given levels

of wealth, and the inecient construction of many household portfolios has been shown to oset

or even negate the benet of stock market participation. For example, many households in Sweden

  13
       The large historical equity premium has led both nancial planners and academic economists to recommend
substantial equity allocations for households accumulating nancial assets (Campbell & Viceira 2002, Campbell
2006).
  14
       Wealth is of course endogenous to investment decisions.    Briggs et al.   (2015) address this issue by studying
Swedish lottery winners.    The authors show that close to 40% of Swedes with lottery winnings of over US$ 300,000 do
not begin participating in equity markets following such a large exogenous wealth shock.    Using a calibrated life-cycle
portfolio model, they suggest that a large fraction of the population must have unduly pessimistic expectations about
the equity premium to rationalize this behavior.




                                                          12
hold portfolios with a high proportion of uncompensated idiosyncratic risk (Calvet et al. 2007), and

in India, Campbell et al. (2014) show evidence that many household portfolios exhibit negatively

compensated style tilts  for example, holding growth stocks in a market with a value premium,

or by adopting a short-term contrarian investment strategy in a market with momentum where

outperforming stocks continue to outperform for a period of time.

   We now discuss what the literature has discovered about the determinants of both non-participation

and inecient portfolio construction.   These determinants fall into several broad categories: wealth,

genetic factors, cognitive ability, nancial literacy, trust, the eects of past experience and reinforce-

ment learning, inertia, and information frictions.


   Determinants of risktaking

   The cross-sectional variation in risktaking suggests that risk aversion varies across households.

An important question in household nance is the extent to which this variation is endogenous to

wealth.   It is quite plausible that risk aversion declines with wealth, for example if the utility of

bequests or luxury goods is less curved than the utility of basic necessities (Carroll 2002, Wachter

and Yogo 2010).     Calvet & Sodini (2014) use high-quality Swedish administrative data and nd

that risk aversion appears to decline in wealth even when one compares identical twins who have

the same genetic determinants of risk aversion.

   Turning to exogenous determinants of risktaking, an intriguing strand of the literature focuses

precisely on these genetic determinants, although research on this subject must be interpreted with

caution on account of the observation that genes may induce predispositions that only develop in

specic environments (Ridley 2003).     By comparing the similarity in nancial behavior across pairs

of identical and fraternal Swedish twins, Barnea et al.      (2010) suggest that genetic factors could

account for about a third of the cross-sectional variation in stock market participation and asset

allocation, although these ndings are disputed by Calvet & Sodini (2014), who attribute this result

to the frequency of communication between twins.          One channel by which genetic factors may

inuence risktaking is through genetic variance in cognitive ability. Grinblatt et al. (2011) use data

from Finland, where IQ scores are available for all Finnish males in a 20-year age range because

they are obtained upon induction into Finland's mandatory military service. They show that scores

on IQ tests predict stock market participation, as well as trading behavior and performance.

   Numerous studies measure nancial literacy and show that it correlates with risktaking.           Van

Rooij et al.   (2011) survey households in the Netherlands and nd that low-literacy households

are less likely to participate in the stock market.     Christiansen et al. (2008) show, using Danish

data, that economists are far more likely to participate in the stock market than other comparable

investors suggesting that specic nancial education may also be an important determinant.              A

diculty in interpreting these studies is that nancial literacy is endogenous; wealthier people, and

people with greater risk tolerance and hence greater interest in risky asset markets, may choose to

become nancially literate.

   Guiso et al. (2008) emphasize that trust in formal nancial institutions and systems is a prereq-

uisite for equity investing, and present evidence that countries and regions with low levels of trust

also tend to have low levels of stock market participation.      Overall, international studies conrm

that less trusting individuals are less likely to buy stocks and, conditional on buying stocks, buy




                                                   13
less.    Trust, which is dicult to measure, may be correlated with other observable attributes.     For

example, religious households consider themselves more trusting, and are more likely to save, and

left-wing voters and politicians are less likely to invest in stocks, controlling for income, wealth, ed-

ucation, and other relevant factors, a nding that may be explained by greater faith in the market

among right-wing voters (see Kaustia & Torstila 2011).

    A growing literature studies the relation between past experiences and risktaking.       One strand

of this literature relates personal economic experiences to long run risk-taking in nancial markets,

nding that investors living through periods of low stock returns, ination, and unemployment

suer declines in stock market participation and allocations to risky assets even decades after the

experience. Malmendier & Nagel (2011) nd, using data from the US, that stock returns experienced

during an investor's lifetime predict participation and risktaking, and suggest that the mechanism

is a tendency for households to overweight events they have experienced directly when they forecast

asset returns.    The international literature has also documented similar links between experiences

early in life and subsequent portfolio decisions, showing that stock market downturns in particular

have signicant and economically substantial eects on households' willingness to take nancial

risks.

    On the other hand, time-series variation in risktaking may also partially result from inertia.     If

a household rarely reviews its portfolio risk, and allows this to drift passively with market returns,

the household's risky share will tend to increase with stock prices.   Calvet et al. (2009) use Swedish

administrative data and nd evidence for partial but not complete inertia.

    Finally, information frictions may be an important part of the story. Hong et al. (2004), for

example, use data from the Health and Retirement Study in the US, and nd that social households,

who interact with their neighbors, or attend church, are more likely to invest in the stock market.

Kaustia & Knüpfer (2012) show that in Finland, recent stock returns that local peers experience

aect an individual's stock market entry decision, although the result is not symmetric in the sense

that negative returns don't seem to aect exit from the market.          They attribute this result to

households not discussing negative experiences with others as often as they do positive outcomes,

although the usual caveats about work on peer eects about unobservable common determinants

apply here (Angrist, 2014).


    Underdiversication, income hedging, and local bias

    Household portfolio returns are inuenced not only by the overall level of risk taken, but also

by the eciency of diversication.      An underdiversied portfolio has higher risk for any average

return, because it takes uncompensated idiosyncratic risk.      Hence its average return per unit risk,

or Sharpe ratio, is lower.   Calvet et al. (2007) study non-retirement portfolios in Sweden, a country

where mutual funds play an important role, and nd that the median Swedish household obtains

a Sharpe ratio about 85% that of a world equity index (invested without currency hedging), but

the corresponding number for a household at the fth percentile of eciency is only 40%.          These

numbers translate into average return losses on risky investments, relative to the ecient benchmark,

of 87 basis points for the median household and over 7% for a household at the fth percentile of

eciency.     The return losses are only about one-third as large on complete household portfolios,

because the share of risky assets is on average only about one-third.




                                                   14
   The results of Calvet et al. are based on unusually comprehensive wealth data, but some of their

ndings appear consistent with data from other countries.         For example, Calvet et al. calculate

the fraction of the total variance of each household's risky portfolio that is due to idiosyncratic

risk, and nd this to be about 55% for the median Swedish household that invests in risky assets.

Comparable ratios are reported within portfolios of directly held stocks studied by Grinblatt &

Keloharju (2000) in Finland, Von Gaudecker (2015) in the Netherlands, and Campbell et al. (2014)

in India.   In India, directly held stocks constitute the principal investment in risky assets for a

majority of households.

   One justication for underdiversication could be to hedge the risks of labor income that house-

holds receive, or other risks such as future health risk.    Since wages and stock returns generally

move together at the industry level, income hedging would require households to invest in industries

other than the one they work for.      In fact, households typically anti-hedge by overinvesting in

their own industry and even their own employer as shown by Benartzi (2001), Massa & Simonov

(2006) and others.

   Alternatively, underdiversication might be justied if households have superior information

about local stocks in the industry they work for or the region where they live.     Such information

could lead households to actively overweight or underweight local stocks, and could create an un-

conditional average tilt towards local stocks if information reduces the risk of holding these stocks

or if households face short-sales constraints.   Theoretically, even a small initial local informational

advantage may be magnied into signicant home bias, as investors rationally choose to expand

their knowledge in the domain in which their information advantage initially lies.         In this vein,

Massa & Simonov (2006) attribute the observed anti-hedging behavior of Swedish households to

superior information they may have about the industries in which they are employed, and Bernile

et al. (2015) suggest that US investors earn greater returns on stocks with greater local economic

exposure. However, Døskeland & Hvide (2011), using Norwegian data, nd no evidence for superior

performance of anti-hedging investments.

   Perceptions of familiarity rather than true informational asymmetry may also play a role here.

For example, Grinblatt & Keloharju (2001) nd that Finnish households are more likely to hold and

trade stocks of rms located nearby, rms where the CEO is from a similar cultural background to

themselves, and rms that communicate in their native tongue. They also nd that these eects

are more pronounced for not-for-prot, government, and household investors than for prot-making

corporations.

   Both the degree of underdiversication and the reasons for it may vary with the household's

level of nancial sophistication.   Von Gaudecker (2015) nds that Dutch households with lower

nancial literacy are less well diversied unless they seek advice from professional advisers or personal

contacts. Guiso & Viviano (2015) also relate diversication to nancial literacy using administrative

data from Italy. Korniotis & Kumar (2013), using data from 11 European countries and the US, show

that households with demographic characteristics suggestive of sophistication tend to outperform

if they hold concentrated portfolios, but the opposite is true for households that are likely to be

unsophisticated.

   Finally, there is some evidence for life-cycle eects on portfolio construction. For example, Beter-

mier et al. (2016) examine the tendency of Swedish investors to hold value stocks (comparatively




                                                   15
cheap stocks with high book-market ratios), relative to growth stocks (comparatively expensive

stocks with low book-market ratios). They nd a tendency for young investors to overweight growth

stocks while older investors overweight value stocks.   This tendency is particularly strong among

investors employed in cyclical industries. They suggest that this life-cycle eect on the value tilt

is consistent with models in which value stocks have the same risk exposures as young investors'

human capital, while growth stocks hedge these risks.


   Trading behavior

   Households can squander some of the benets of stock market participation if their short-term

decision making is sub-optimal.    This behavior was originally highlighted in the work of Barber

& Odean (2000) on the high turnover of US households' portfolios unaccompanied by increases in

expected returns, suggesting that households incur unnecessarily high transactions costs. Moreover,

as Grinblatt & Keloharju (2001) show, households tend to exhibit a strong disposition eect, i.e.,

the tendency to hold one's losing investments while selling winners, a losing strategy in a market

with positive momentum, and a sub-optimal one in countries in which losses can shield capital gains

from taxes.

   The literature has highlighted similar causes for biases in short-term decision making as it has

for longer-term risktaking behavior. For example, Cronqvist & Siegel (2014), using twins data from

Sweden, show that genetic factors have strong explanatory power for behavioral biases in equity

markets, including underdiversication and the disposition eect. Intriguingly, Chen et al. (2006)

show that capuchin monkeys appear to exhibit loss aversion, suggesting that such behavior has deep

evolutionary roots.    IQ also appears to aect short-term equity trading behavior.     Grinblatt et

al. (2012) nd that, in Finland, high-IQ investors are less subject to the disposition eect, more

aggressive about tax-loss trading, and more likely to supply liquidity when stocks experience a one-

month high. High-IQ investors also exhibit superior market timing, stock-picking skill, and trade

execution.

   Learning and feedback also seem to play a role in short-term nancial decision-making. Several

papers, including Korniotis & Kumar (2011) and Campbell et al.        (2014), show that style tilts,

trading intensity, and the disposition eect are related to time in the market, feedback from invest-

ment performance, and investors' demographic characteristics suggesting the role of experience and

sophistication.   Feng & Seasholes (2005), tracking the behavior of Chinese investors through time,

show that sophistication and trading experience eliminate the reluctance to realize losses, but only

moderately reduce the propensity to realize gains.

   The international household nance literature has studied the eects of trading performance

on trading intensity using datasets from dierent countries, converging on the view that good per-

formance predicts trading intensity.   This suggests a model in which investors learn from their

performance about their trading skill, and they cease trading if they conclude that they lack skill

(see, for example, Linnainmaa 2011, who uses data from Finland).      However, others propose that

the eects of performance on trading may stem from more naive reinforcement learning, or from

the fact that investors may have non-classical utility functions such as reference-dependent prefer-

ences with loss aversion. For example, Anagol et al. (2015, 2016) use lotteries in oversubscribed

IPOs in India to show that lottery-winning investors, who receive exogenous gains (from which no




                                                 16
inferences about investor skill can be made) on account of being randomly allotted IPO shares, are

more inclined to hold the shares that they won for long periods of time despite incurring substantial

losses on them, likelier to apply for future IPOs, increase the fraction of their portfolios held in

the same sector as the IPO stock, increase the overall number of stocks that they hold, and churn

their portfolios far more frequently.   Anagol et al. detect these eects on investment behavior even

among investors with substantial portfolio holdings, for whom the exogenous gains are small enough

fractions of the portfolio to rule out explanations based on wealth eects or portfolio rebalancing.


   Delegated investing, fees, and complexity

   Households can control suboptimal investment behaviors in several ways.       One possibility is for

households to hold mutual funds as a way to gain equity exposure without trading stocks directly.

Another possibility is for households to seek professional advice on their investment decisions (Von

Gaudecker 2015).     In both of these cases, however, there may be important trade-os between

households' tendencies to engage in these behaviors, the level of fees charged by advisers and mutual

funds, the incentives of advisers to oer objective advice, and the possibility that mutual fund

managers or advisers may themselves be susceptible to these behaviors.

   Fees are perhaps the most obvious example of costs imposed on households through delegation

to mutual funds.     Khorana et al.     (2009) show that mutual fund fees vary considerably around

the world, and that the quality of a country's governance environment is negatively correlated with

the level of fees charged to customers.   Anagol & Kim (2012) estimate, using a natural experiment

in India in which regulatory actions dierentiated the fees that could be charged by closed- and

open-ended mutual funds, that investors lost and fund rms gained approximately $350 million US

as a result of the shrouded fees that could be charged by closed-end funds. On the demand side,

Grinblatt et al. (2015) show that high-IQ investors in Finland avoid mutual funds with high fees.

   Visible fees are not the only way in which institutional asset managers are able to extract rents

from retail investors.   Structured products, which oer payos that are nonlinear and often complex

functions of asset returns, are a common household investment vehicle in Europe.     Célérier & Vallée

(2014) conduct a textual analysis of the term sheets of 55,000 retail structured products issued in

17 European countries during the 2000s. They nd that the complexity of these products increased

signicantly over the decade, that relatively more complex products have higher markups, and that

the headline rate oered by a product (the return made salient to investors through marketing)

is an increasing function of its complexity.    These results cast serious doubt on the suitability of

structured products for unsophisticated investors.

   Financial advice is another area in which households face signicant challenges. Foerster et al.

(2014), using comprehensive data from Canada, show that nancial advisers oer one-size-ts-all

advice that appears better explained by adviser attributes than household characteristics.        This

advice appears to cost roughly 2.7% per year, signicantly more than the cost of a life-cycle fund.

While nancial advisers may help their clients by giving them the courage to invest in risky assets,

as suggested by Gennaioli et al.     (2015), these results raise the question of whether a lower-cost

solution can be made available.




                                                   17
5    UNSECURED CREDIT
The main forms of unsecured credit in most countries are credit cards, overdrafts, and high-cost

short-term credit commonly known as payday loans.          The literature has analyzed the nature of

borrowers and their repayment behavior, the structure of markets and products, the pricing of

credit in these markets, and the behavior of households following bankruptcy (see Zinman (2015)

for a recent survey).   The literature seeks to understand not only consumer mistakes in using credit,

but also the incentives to supply complex nancial products that exploit these mistakes.    We survey

research on dierent types of unsecured credit, and conclude with a brief summary of work on one

potential outcome of consumer borrowing, personal bankruptcy. The literature on this subject seeks

to understand the principal determinants of personal bankruptcy, and considers the optimal design

of bankruptcy regulation.


    Credit cards and overdraft accounts

    Credit cards and overdraft accounts are convenient and ubiquitous, but often criticized for con-

fusing marketing and misleading back-end fees.

    In the UK, teaser rates on credit cards are omnipresent.     These often take the form of zero

interest rate deals, provided to households as an incentive to switch credit card providers, for a

limited period during which APRs on cards are eliminated. Once the initial teaser period elapses,

households can hit a payment wall which can result in signicant nancial vulnerabilities, as banks

re-adjust rates to more normal APRs.      May et al. (2004), using survey data from the UK, nd that

many households take such deals, and estimate signicant costs to households who do not switch

following the teaser period.   Recently in the UK, the Royal Bank of Scotland unilaterally announced

that it is eliminating such deals from its set of consumer oers, claiming that their internal research

found evidence that the fees paid by consumers on these deals were close to extortionate.

    Gabaix & Laibson (2006) provide a useful theoretical framework which has often been used to

study the consumer credit market.       They suggest that a shrouded equilibrium is one in which

sophisticated consumers benet at the expense of unsophisticated consumers in an environment

in which producers oer complex multi-attribute products.          The sophisticated unbundle the

products, eschewing the expensive options, and the price that they eventually pay is lower since

unsophisticated consumers cross-subsidize them by consuming these unnecessary frills. Producers

do not have an incentive to deviate by oering simpler products, since such oers simply educate

more consumers, causing these new sophisticates to move to the complex product.

    In the US, the CARD Act of 2009 regulated the practices of personal credit card issuers in a way

that appears to have been successful at reducing their ability to earn unusually high fees.   Agarwal

et al. (2015) use small-business credit cards as a control group (since they were not regulated by

the CARD Act) and nd that explicit fees did not go up even though the collection of back-end fees

was regulated.   This suggests that credit card issuers have some market power and took a hit to

their prots following the regulation - which does not match the implications of a simple competitive

version of the shrouded equilibrium model, although it is consistent with a more complex imperfect-

competition framework.

    An active area of research has explored the determinants of households' repayment behavior.     In

the US, Gross & Souleles (2002) pioneered the use of large loan-level datasets to study credit card



                                                   18
payment ows. They estimate duration models of default on credit card balances, and use variation

in default costs (which can be both pecuniary costs such as legal fees, as well as nonpecuniary costs

such as social stigma) to explain changes in borrowers' willingness to default.

   Features of the market can also inuence repayment behavior. Campbell et al. (2012) use data

from a payment solutions company and exploit variation across US counties to study bank account

closures resulting from excessive overdraft activity.   They nd that involuntary closures relate to

the competitiveness of the banking sector, with more closures in counties with more competitive

banking markets and more multi-market banks. As with many other studies in household nance,

they also nd that high involuntary closures are associated with low levels of education and wealth.

   In this area of household nance as in others, reinforcement learning is an important theme.

Agarwal et al. (2013a) nd that households learn how best to reduce fees on their credit card bills,

and estimate that this knowledge depreciates by roughly 10% per month, i.e., they nd evidence that

households learn and subsequently forget.      Similar patterns hold for borrowers who use overdraft

accounts.   Bakker et al.     (2014) use supervisory transaction-level data from the US to study the

life cycle of overdraft usage. They conclude that borrowers become inattentive after the rst year,

ignoring increases of fees.

   Finally, the form of the institution providing consumer credit may be important.          Cheaper

credit normally requires an ongoing relationship with a nancial institution.     Mistrust may be one

force that inhibits the formation of such a relationship.    Mutual and nonprot institutions, such

as mutual insurance companies, credit unions, and traditional UK building societies, may help to

address this problem (Bubb & Kaufman 2013), with the caveat that mutuals can easily be captured

by their management since depositors do not provide eective oversight. Wheelock & Wilson (2011),

using US data, document a rapid increase in the share of credit unions as a share of US depository

institution assets, and present evidence that they exhibit increasing returns to scalesuggesting

that this may be an important growth sector in the future.


   Payday loans, pawn loans, and payroll loans

   Payday loansextremely short-term credit products often bearing high annual percentage rates

(APRs)can be an attractive alternative means of borrowing, particularly for households who lack

access to credit cards and overdrafts. However, this particular form of credit has been controversial.

Critics claim that these loans are potentially exploitative because borrowers may repeatedly renew

their loans and enter a debt trap, whereas defenders point out that consumers without a savings

buer-stock can use these markets to avoid worse outcomes such as eviction for non-payment of

rent, or loss of work when a car breaks down (Agarwal et al. 2009b, Stegman 2007, Campbell et al.

2011).   The literature on payday loans and other small-ticket short-duration credit also has links

with the microcredit literature in developing countries (for a survey, see Banerjee et al. 2015).

   International research has been particularly fertile in this area. For example, Berry & Duncan

(2007) use data from the Canadian Survey of Financial Security to show that having access to

payday loans allows people to meet nancial emergencies more easily, while at the same time payday

borrowers are more likely to become insolvent. Some papers, e.g. Carrell & Zinman (2014), exploit

variation in payday loan regulations across US states to identify the eects of access to payday loans

on nancial outcomes. They draw upon exogenous variation in the assignment of military personnel




                                                   19
to domestic bases, as well as the fact that US states have eective regulatory authority over such

loans. They nd that access to payday loans leads to a signicant decline in job performance and a

higher likelihood of nancial distress.

   More recently, the literature has tried to understand the exact mechanism through which payday

loan indebtedness generates problems for borrowers.       Skiba & Tobacman (2011) explore whether

households who borrow simply view payday loans as a solution to their immediate cashow dif-

culties without adequately accounting for the additional interest burden they impose, and nd

evidence to support this conjecture using administrative loan-level data.    They exploit a regression

discontinuity design using the applicants' credit scores, to show that payday loans causally and

substantially increase overall personal bankruptcy rates.   This echoes the nding of Campbell et al.

(2012), who nd that access to payday lending is associated with involuntary bank account closure.

   Signicant regulation has been imposed on payday lending around the world.           In the UK, the

Financial Conduct Authority has recently exercised its mandate to impose a payday lending rate

cap, explicitly citing rollover lending, punishing repayment schedules, and default fees as factors

resulting in debt traps for low income households.       Such caps also exist in Canada.    In the US,

fteen states have banned payday lending altogether.

   Zinman (2010) suggests that imposing such restrictions on borrowing may not be eective at

averting the negative consequences of payday loans.      He uses cross-state variation in the US, and

shows that borrowing restrictions have     negative   consequences on the overall household nancial

situation. Households appear to simply substitute one product with another, often opting for even

worse terms than those initially oered by payday lenders.

   Evidence from developing countries also serves to challenge the negative view on payday loans.

Karlan & Zinman (2010) use a randomized control trial in South Africa and question the popular

presumption that vulnerable consumers over-borrow in the expensive consumer credit markets. They

document signicant net benets for households, which can mostly be attributed to a relaxation

of binding borrowing constraints.     In emerging markets, payroll loans are a widespread form of

employer-provided payday loans.     In Brazil, they are essentially personal loans with principal and

interest payments directly deducted from the borrower's payroll check. Costa & de Mello (2008)

exploit the fact that a high-level federal Brazilian court upheld a regional ruling that had declared

employer-based payment deduction illegal. Using personal loans without payment deduction as a

control group, they nd that payroll loans help to decrease overall borrowing costs.

   The contrast in these results for developed and developing countries shows the potential of the

international comparative approach. It suggests the hypothesis that in the early stages of economic

development, when access to nancial products is limited, documentation scarce, and monitoring

costly, short-term high-cost credit may temporarily ease the nancial burden on households and

help them to avoid unemployment and long-term health problems. On the other hand, in developed

countries, less nancially sophisticated and uneducated people self-select into more expensive forms

of credit, which can easily push them into nancial and economic distress.    More research is needed

to test this hypothesis more carefully and to evaluate the eects of payday lending regulation.

   The literature nds a clear connection between the life stage (young, single parent), nancial po-

sition (low-income), employment situation (fragile) and the propensity to take short-term consumer

credit (Autio et al.   2009). Interestingly, this also holds for retail sales debt.   Vissing-Jorgensen




                                                  20
(2011) uses transaction-level data from Mexico to show that dierent product categories are as-

sociated with dierent likelihood of default.   She attributes these eects to variation in the type

of individuals who buy certain products, suggesting that the purchase of luxury goods on credit

is a sign of conspicuous consumption or lack of self-control.   Using data from Sweden, Bos et al.

(2012) nd that pawn shop borrowers are more often female, experience instability in both their

job and marital status, more likely to be divorced or separated, less likely to own a home, more

likely to have bad credit scores, and often have exhausted their outstanding lines of credit. Lusardi

& DeBassa-Scheresberg (2013) survey US households to understand the prevalence of a number of

forms of unsecured credit, including payday loans, pawn shops, auto title loans, refund anticipation

loans, and rent-to-own shops.   They nd that roughly one in four Americans had used these types

of credit in the previous ve years, and that most borrowers were young adults with low levels of

nancial literacy.


   Personal bankruptcy

   Households' mistakes and poor management of unanticipated expenditures can lead to declara-

tions of personal bankruptcyitself an important area of investigation. The literature has concen-

trated on understanding the principal determinants of personal bankruptcy, as well as the optimal

design of bankruptcy regulation, an important institution in household nance.

   Health shocks appear to be an important determinant of bankruptcy.         Gross & Notowidigdo

(2011) use cross-state variation in Medicaid expansions to show that an increase in Medicaid eli-

gibility reduces the personal bankruptcy rate. Out-of-pocket medical expenses are shown to cause

about a quarter of personal bankruptcies among low-income households.       Duygan-Bump & Grant

(2009) nd, using cross-country data from Europe, that bankruptcy declaration is typically associ-

ated with an unexpected (often health) shock.

   Several studies have undertaken simple cross-country or cross-state analysis to understand the

features of the regulatory environment that are associated with high bankruptcy rates.        Unsur-

prisingly to an economist, these studies nd that formal bankruptcy is more prevalent when this

procedure is cheap and easy, and when the alternative of informal default is costly and dicult.

(See for example Duygan-Bump & Grant (2009) who use European data and Lefgren & McIntyre

(2009) who use US data.)     There is also research on how debtor protections, both in bankruptcy

and in mortgage foreclosure, aect the willingness of lenders to extend credit.   Gropp et al. (1997)

and Pence (2006) nd that state-level debtor protections reduce the availability of auto loans and

the size of mortgages, respectively.

   More structural models have also been used to understand the eects of debtor protections.

For example, Mitman (2015) calibrates a model to t cross-state variation in mortgage recourse

provisions as well as bankruptcy laws, and to understand the eect of US bankruptcy reform in

2005.   Consistent with the empirical literature discussed above, Mitman nds that reduced access

to bankruptcy after 2005 initially reduced bankruptcy rates; but he also nds that it inadvertently

increased foreclosure rates. Dobbie & Goldsmith-Pinkham (2015) present related empirical work,

focusing on consumer deleveraging in the aftermath of the Great Recession.

   Finally, some recent work has looked at the welfare eects of bankruptcy for households, using

approaches for causal identication.   For example, Dobbie & Song (2015) use administrative tax




                                                  21
data and exploit the random assignment of bankruptcy lings to judges to study post-bankruptcy

outcomes. They nd that after declarations of personal bankruptcy, annual earnings are relatively

higher, mortality decreases, and subsequent foreclosure rates are lower.




6 MORTGAGES
Mortgages epitomize the promise and the challenge of international comparative household nance.

Mortgages are of rst-order importance in every country, as shown in Tables 1 and 2.           This is

the natural result of three facts:   housing is the most important asset of the household sector;

the indivisibility of houses and high costs of moving make it desirable to nance home ownership

through debt; and houses provide good-quality collateral for secured borrowing.      The literature in

this area has focused on household decisions in all phases of the mortgage lifecycle  from the choice

of mortgage contract, to the decision to renance the mortgage, and nally on the determinants of

mortgage default.    These are all complex decisions, and as with other areas of household nance,

the literature has explored the roles of reinforcement learning and inertia in explaining households'

observed choices, which often appear to deviate widely from the prescriptions of nance theory.

   While mortgages are extremely important in all countries, the details of the mortgage system

vary widely across countries, as reviewed in Campbell (2013) and illustrated in Table 3. The table

shows that the US and Germany rely primarily on xed-rate mortgages (FRMs), while Australia,

Ireland, the UK, and southern European countries have almost exclusively adjustable-rate mortgages

(ARMs).    Some other countries, such as Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Sweden, show

considerable variation in the ARM share over time.         FRMs in Germany cannot be renanced

without compensating the lender for any change in interest rates since mortgage issuance, while

the US system allows renancing provided the borrower has suciently positive home equity and

good credit standing, and the Danish system provides an absolute right to non-cash-out renancing

(Andersen et al.    2015).   Some US states have non-recourse mortgages in which lenders have no

claim on borrowers beyond foreclosure, eectively giving homeowners a put option on their houses

with strike price equal to the mortgage principal; and even in other states with recourse mortgages,

personal bankruptcy allows consumers to escape residual mortgage debt relatively easily. This is not

the case in most European countries which have strong recourse provisions.     Finally, mortgages are

funded primarily through government-supported securitization in the US, through covered bonds

in many European countries including those where FRMs are available, and through depository

nancial institutions elsewhere.


   Mortgage choice: ARMs vs. FRMs

   From an individual household's point of view, the choice of an ARM versus a FRM trades o

risks and costs.   An ARM, like a oating-rate note, is an instrument with stable capital value but

volatile interest payments.   Monthly payments on an ARM increase with the nominal interest rate.

To the extent that the nominal interest rate moves with ination, the increased payments merely

compensate for inationary erosion of real principal value and can be oset by further borrowing

provided that the homeowner has unused borrowing capacity.           If the homeowner is borrowing-

constrained, however, or if the nominal interest rate increase is also an increase in the real interest




                                                  22
rate, then increased monthly ARM payments have a negative eect on the borrower's budget.                          A

FRM, by contrast, has volatile capital value and stable nominal interest payments.                      The risk to

the borrower is that ination declines, increasing the real burden of the xed nominal payments.

The option to renance a FRM is intended to limit this risk, but within the US system renancing

depends on the borrower's home equity and credit score, and on the functioning of mortgage-backed

security markets (Campbell & Cocco 2003, 2015).

       The relative costs of ARMs and FRMs vary over time with market conditions.                 There is a debate

in the literature about how to measure these costs.               Koijen et al. (2009) argue that homeowners

estimate the average ARM rate over the likely tenure of a mortgage, using a backward-looking rule of

thumb to do so, and compare the result with the prevailing FRM rate.                Their model describes recent

time-variation in the US ARM share quite well.                  However Campbell & Cocco (2003) argue that

borrowing-constrained homeowners compare the current ARM rate to the FRM rate because they

value budget relief today, and because they may be allowed to take out a bigger ARM than FRM if

banks impose a limit on the current ratio of mortgage interest to income.                 Badarinza et al. (2015)

use international panel data on mortgage rates and ARM shares, and nd evidence that homeowners

look no further forward than one year when deciding upon an ARM versus a FRM.                        These authors

also present evidence for inertia in the ARM share, which may reect gradual adjustment of banks'

marketing strategies or households learning gradually from each others' choices.

       The variation in the ARM share across countries seems to be inuenced by several deeper factors

including a country's historical ination volatility (Campbell 2013), regulatory system (notably

in the US where government housing policy implicitly subsidizes FRMs), and mortgage funding

arrangements.        Foà et al. (2015) study variation in the ARM share across Italian banks, showing

that banks with greater oating-rate funding have greater ARM shares even after controlling for the

rates they quote.       Foà et al. interpret this as showing that banks can manipulate the choices of their

customers through advertising or by steering their clients into mortgages they prefer to originate.
                                                                                                                   15

       As with other areas of household nance, reinforcement learning and experience eects may play

a role in mortgage choice as well.         Botsch & Malmendier (2014) show that variation across cohorts

in experienced ination levels across their lifetimes appears to help to explain their choices of ARMs

versus FRMs, with lower experienced ination rates associated with a greater choice of ARMs.

       Mortgage choice is important in part because of its macroeconomic consequences.                   Reductions

in interest rates to combat a recession are likely to be more eective in an ARM system where lower

rates feed through immediately into mortgage payments without requiring renancing.                      Di Maggio

et al. (2015) and Keys et al. (2014) use geographical variation in the ARM share across the US

(which results largely from dierences in housing costs interacting with the upper limit on the size

of FRMs eligible for implicit subsidy through GSE securitization) to argue that regions with high

ARM shares recovered more quickly from the Great Recession.


       Mortgage renancing

       Another longstanding theme of the household nance literature is that households often fail

  15
       There is also support in the US for the idea that funding arrangements aect mortgage choice through variations
in the supply of particular types of contracts.   Fuster and Vickery (2014) nd that the FRM share is lower at times
when mortgages are dicult to securitize  when it is arguably harder to fund long-term FRMs, as bank deposits
then become the proximate source of (maturity mismatched) funding.




                                                           23
to renance their mortgages even when it is advantageous for them to do so.                    Such households

have been given the derogatory name of woodheads in mortgage industry slang.                     The optimal

renancing decision is hard to calculate because the combination of xed renancing costs and

random variation in interest rates makes renancing a real option problem.               In fact, an empirically

realistic solution has only recently been oered in the academic literature by Agarwal et al. (2013b).

However some households seem to pay rates that are far above any reasonable renancing threshold

(Campbell 2006).
                      16

       In the US context, it is challenging to measure the incidence of renancing mistakes because

borrower characteristics are only measured at mortgage origination, so researchers cannot easily

tell whether non-renancing borrowers have poor credit standing or negative home equity that

constrain them from renancing.           Andersen et al.    (2015) circumvent this problem by exploiting

the dierent rules of the Danish mortgage system, which grants an absolute right to renance to

lower the interest rate.     Using high-quality Danish data on household characteristics, they nd that

renancing mistakes are made more often by households with lower income and education and by

older households.      Financial and housing wealth have opposite eects, with renancing more likely

for households with high housing wealth relative to nancial wealth, that is, households for whom

the mortgage is a particularly important balance sheet item.

       Andersen et al. model the failure to renance as a failure to pay attention to incentives.            An

alternative perspective is oered by Johnson et al. (2015) who argue that mistrust of banks is an

important deterrent to renancing.

       Sluggish renancing provides prots to mortgage originators that, in a competitive mortgage

market, are passed on to mortgage borrowers in the form of lower interest rates.              This implies that

sophisticated borrowers, who know how to renance optimally, are subsidized by unsophisticated

borrowers, another instance of a shrouded equilibrium.             It also inhibits the introduction of easier-

to-use products such as automatically renancing mortgages, because the sophisticated households

who might naturally be early adopters of such products will lose the subsidy if they switch away

from conventional mortgages.

       Do banks take advantage of or even manipulate these behavioral patterns? Mounting interna-

tional evidence seems to point in this direction. Gurun et al. (2013) document a positive relationship

between local advertising and mortgage pricing in the US. They show that advertising is associated

with higher costs only for lenders who rely heavily on minorities and low-education areas. Almen-

berg & Karapetyan (2013) use data from the Swedish association of real estate agents and show

signicant consumer confusion and loan take-up mistakes in co-op loans, whose terms are less salient,

in the sense that they are less visible and easier for the consumer to ignore. Worryingly, Van Ooijen

& van Rooij (2014) also nd that Dutch households with a limited understanding of loan contracts,

who may need the advice the most, do not more often seek professional nancial advice than more

sophisticated homeowners.         Allen et al. (2014) use data from Canadian bank mergers to show that

such consolidation weakens consumer bargaining power in mortgage markets.


       Mortgage default

       The literature has also explored the determinants of mortgage default rates. In the US, authors

  16
       Sluggish renancing is not conned to FRM-based systems.   It also occurs in the UK, where ARMs have been
oered with teaser rates and no renancing penalties (Miles 2004).



                                                        24
have emphasized the role of supply (the expansion of credit to subprime borrowers) and demand

(unreasonable house price expectations) factors as driving the increases in delinquencies seen dur-

ing the recent mortgage crisis (Mian & Su 2009 and Adelino et al.           2015).   Authors have also

investigated whether mortgage default by households is strategic, or simply triggered by economic

circumstances aecting borrowers' ability to pay, with recent ndings suggesting a limited scope for

strategic default (Gerardi et al., 2015).

    There has been increasing attention to the eects of regulation on mortgage default.         Several

authors in the US have highlighted the role of subsidies to low income borrowers through the

Community Reinvestment Act (see, for example, Dahl et al.            2000, Kroszner 2008, and Agarwal

et al.    2012).    Using regulatory treatment discontinuities in India, Campbell et al.     (2015) also

nd evidence that subsidies matter for mortgage default, and that when regulators force lenders to

recognize delinquencies early in the life cycle of a loan, this has signicant impacts on longer-run

default rates.     Corbae & Quintin (2015) highlight the role of regulation in changing possible contract

types, and the attendant eects on default and foreclosure.       Their model shows that relaxations in

payment to income requirements are well able to explain increases in US default rates during the

crisis.

    Others have studied the eects of lender market structure on foreclosure.     For example, Favara &

Giannetti (2015) conjecture that lenders with a large share of outstanding mortgages on their balance

sheets internalize the negative spillovers associated with the liquidation of defaulting mortgages and

are thus less inclined to foreclose.     They nd evidence using zip-code level data in the US that

those areas with a higher fraction of outstanding mortgages experience fewer foreclosures, and more

renegotiations of delinquent mortgages.




7 CONCLUSION
Research in household nance has shown conclusively that some households make better nancial

decisions than others, and that poor decisions can have rst-order consequences for households'

lifetime welfare.    The international comparative household nance literature conrms these ndings

using high-quality administrative data and strong identication that exploits unique features of

household nancial systems in dierent countries and their changes over time.

    This paper has explored some possible determinants and consequences of these international

dierences.    As the literature moves forward, there will be an active debate about the relative merits

of dierent systems, and the possibility of transferring successful design features across national

boundaries.      Household nance economists both in academia and in consumer nancial regulators

such as the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau

in the USwill be leading contributors to this discussion.




                                                     25
References
Adelino M, Schoar A, Severino F. 2015. Loan originations and defaults in the mortgage crisis: The

  role of the middle class. Unpublished paper.


Agarwal S, Benmelech E, Bergman N, Seru A. 2012. Did the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA)

  lead to risky lending? Unpublished paper.


Agarwal S, Chomsisengphet S, Mahoney N, Stroebel J. 2015. Regulating consumer nancial prod-

  ucts: Evidence from credit cards.   Quarterly Journal of Economics     130:111164


Agarwal S, Driscoll JC, Gabaix X, Laibson D. 2009a. The age of reason: Financial decisions over

  the life cycle and implications for regulation.   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity   2009:51117


Agarwal S, Driscoll JC, Gabaix X, Laibson DI. 2013a. Learning in the credit card market. Unpub-

  lished paper.


Agarwal S, Driscoll JC, Laibson DI. 2013b. Optimal mortgage renancing: A closed-form solution.

  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking      45:591622


Agarwal S, Qian W. 2014. Consumption and debt response to unanticipated income shocks: Evidence

  from a natural experiment in Singapore.     American Economic Review      104:42054230


Agarwal S, Skiba PM, Tobacman J. 2009b. Payday loans and credit cards: New liquidity and credit

  scoring puzzles?   American Economic Review        99:412417


Allen J, Clark R, Houde JF. 2014. The eect of mergers in search markets:          Evidence from the

  Canadian mortgage industry.     American Economic Review        104:33653396


Almenberg J, Karapetyan A. 2013. Hidden costs of hidden debt.         Review of Finance   18:22472281


Ameriks J, Caplin A, Laufer S, Van Nieuwerburgh S. 2011. The joy of giving or assisted living?

  Using strategic surveys to separate public care aversion from bequest motives.   Journal of Finance
  66:519561


Anagol S, Balasubramaniam V, Ramadorai T. 2015. The eects of experience on investor behavior:

  Evidence from India's IPO lotteries. Unpublished paper.


Anagol S, Balasubramaniam V, Ramadorai T. 2016. Endowment eects in the eld: Evidence from

  india's ipo lotteries. Unpublished paper.


Anagol S, Kim HH. 2012. The impact of shrouded fees: Evidence from a natural experiment in the

  Indian mutual funds market.    American Economic Review         102:576593


Andersen S, Campbell JY, Nielsen KM, Ramadorai T. 2015. Inattention and inertia in household

  nance: Evidence from the Danish mortgage market. Unpublished paper.


Angelini V, Brugiavini A, Weber G. 2014. The dynamics of homeownership among the 50+ in

  Europe.   Journal of Population Economics    27:797823


Angrist JD. 2014. The perils of peer eects.   Labour Economics     30:98108



                                                     26
Artavanis NT, Morse A, Tsoutsoura M. 2015. Tax evasion across industries: Soft credit evidence

  from Greece. Unpublished paper.


Autio M, Wilska TA, Kaartinen R, Lähteenmaa J. 2009. The use of small instant loans among

  young adults  a gateway to a consumer insolvency?      International Journal of Consumer Studies
  33:407415


Badarinza C, Campbell JY, Ramadorai T. 2015. What calls to ARMs? International evidence on

  interest rates and the choice of adjustable-rate mortgages. Unpublished paper.


Badarinza C, Ramadorai T. 2016. Home away from home?             Foreign demand and London house

  prices. Unpublished paper.


Bajo E, Barbi M, Bartoli F. 2014. Financial illiteracy and mortgage renancing decisions. Unpub-

  lished paper.


Bakker T, Nagypal E, Watson C. 2014. The dynamics of overdraft fees and incidence. Unpublished

  paper.


Banerjee A, Karlan D, Zinman J. 2015. Six randomized evaluations of microcredit: Introduction

  and further steps.   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics        7:121


Barber BM, Odean T. 2000. Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock investment

  performance of individual investors.   Journal of Finance   55:773806


Barnea A, Cronqvist H, Siegel S. 2010. Nature or nurture: What determines investor behavior?

  Journal of Financial Economics     98:583604


Bekaert G, Hoyem K, Hu WY, Ravina E. 2015. Who is internationally diversied? Evidence from

  296 401 (k). Unpublished paper.


Benartzi S. 2001. Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to company stock.

  Journal of Finance     56:17471764


Benartzi S, Previtero A, Thaler RH. 2011. Annuitization puzzles.    Journal of Economic Perspectives
  25:143164


Benartzi S, Thaler RH. 2007. Heuristics and biases in retirement savings behavior.   Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives     21:81104


Bernile G, Kumar A, Sulaeman J. 2015. Home away from home: Geography of information and

  local investors.   Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming

Berry RE, Duncan KA. 2007. The importance of payday loans in Canadian consumer insolvency.

  Unpublished paper.


Beshears J, Choi JJ, Hurwitz J, Laibson D, Madrian BC. 2015. Liquidity in retirement savings

  systems:   An international comparison.     American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings
  105:420425




                                                  27
Betermier S, Calvet LE, Sodini P. 2016. Who are the value and growth investors?            Journal of
  Finance, forthcoming

Boersch-Supan A. 2008. First results from the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe

  (2004-2007): Starting the longitudinal dimension. University of Mannheim


Bos M, Carter S, Skiba PM. 2012. The pawn industry and its customers: The United States and

  Europe.    Vanderbilt Law and Economics Research Paper

Botsch M, Malmendier U. 2015. The welfare consequences of experienced ination on residential

  mortgage choice. Unpublished paper.


Bover O, Casado JM, Villanueva E, Costa S, Du Caju P, et al. 2013. The distribution of debt across

  euro area countries:    The role of individual characteristics, institutions and credit conditions.

  Unpublished paper.


Bricker J, Henriques A, Krimmel J, Sabelhaus J. 2015. Measuring income and wealth at the top

  using administrative and survey data. Unpublished paper.


Briggs J, Cesarini D, Lindqvist E, Ostling R. 2015. Wealth and stock market participation: Esti-

  mating the causal eect from Swedish lotteries. Unpublished paper.


Bubb R, Corrigan P, Warren PL. 2015. A behavioral contract theory perspective on retirement

  savings.   Connecticut Law Review, forthcoming

Bubb R, Kaufman A. 2013. Consumer biases and mutual ownership.            Journal of Public Economics
  105:3957


Bucher-Koenen T, Lusardi A. 2011. Financial literacy and retirement planning in Germany.      Journal
  of Pension Economics and Finance       10:565584


Bucks B, Pence K. 2015. Wealth, pensions, debt, and savings: Considerations for a panel survey.

  Journal of Economic and Social Measurement        40:125149


Calvet LE, Campbell JY, Sodini P. 2007. Down or out: Assessing the welfare costs of household

  investment mistakes.    Journal of Political Economy   115:707747


Calvet LE, Campbell JY, Sodini P. 2009. Fight or ight? Portfolio rebalancing by individual in-

  vestors.   Quarterly Journal of Economics   124:301348


Calvet LE, Sodini P. 2014. Twin picks: Disentangling the determinants of risk-taking in household

  portfolios.   Journal of Finance   69:867906


Campbell D, Asís Martínez-Jerez F, Tufano P. 2012. Bouncing out of the banking system:             An

  empirical analysis of involuntary bank account closures.   Journal of Banking and Finance   36:1224

  1235


Campbell JY. 2006. Household nance.       Journal of Finance   61:15531604


Campbell JY. 2013. Mortgage market design.        Review of Finance   17:133



                                                   28
Campbell JY. 2016. Restoring rational choice: The challenge of consumer nancial regulation.        Amer-
  ican Economic Association Annual Meeting          Richard T. Ely Lecture


Campbell JY, Cocco JF. 2003. Household risk management and optimal mortgage choice.              Quarterly
  Journal of Economics      118:14491494


Campbell JY, Cocco JF. 2015. A model of mortgage default.          Journal of Finance    70:14951554


Campbell JY, Jackson HE, Madrian BC, Tufano P. 2011. Consumer nancial protection.             Journal of
  Economic Perspectives     25:91114


Campbell JY, Ramadorai T, Ranish B. 2014. Getting better or feeling better? How equity investors

  respond to investment experience. Unpublished paper.


Campbell JY, Ramadorai T, Ranish B. 2015. The impact of regulation on mortgage risk: Evidence

  from India.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming

Campbell JY, Viceira LM. 2002. Strategic asset allocation: portfolio choice for long-term investors.

  Oxford University Press


Carrell S, Zinman J. 2014. In harm's way? Payday loan access and military personnel performance.

  Review of Financial Studies    27:28052840


Carroll C. 2002. Portfolios of the rich. In   Household portfolios, eds. L Guiso, M Haliassos, T Jappelli,
  chap. 10. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA


Célérier C, Vallée B. 2014. What drives nancial complexity?           A look into the retail market for

  structured products. Unpublished paper.


Chen MK, Lakshminarayanan V, Santos LR. 2006. How basic are behavioral biases? Evidence from

  Capuchin monkey trading behavior.       Journal of Political Economy     114:517537


Chetty R, Friedman JN, Leth-Peterson S, Nielsen TH, Olsen T. 2013. Active vs. passive decisions

  and crowd-Out in retirement savings accounts: Evidence from Denmark.              Quarterly Journal of
  Economics     129:11411219


Choi J, Laibson D, Madrian B, Metrick A. 2002. Dened contribution pensions: Plan rules, partic-

  ipant choices, and the path of least resistance.     Tax Policy and the Economy    16:67114


Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC. 2011. $100 Bills on the sidewalk: Suboptimal investment in 401(k)

  Plans.   Review of Economics and Statistics      93:748763


Christiansen C, Joensen JS, Rangvid J. 2008. Are economists more likely to hold stocks?          Review of
  Finance   12:465496


Cooper I, Sercu P, Vanpee R. 2013. The equity home bias puzzle: A survey.        Foundations and Trends
  in Finance    7:289416


Corbae D, Quintin E. 2015. Leverage and the foreclosure crisis.      Journal of Political Economy   123:1

  65



                                                      29
Costa ACA, De Mello JMP. 2008. Judicial risk and credit market performance: Micro evidence from

  Brazilian payroll loans. In   Financial Markets Volatility and Performance in Emerging Markets.
  University of Chicago Press, 155184


Cronqvist H, Siegel S. 2014. The genetics of investment biases.    Journal of Financial Economics
  113:215234


Cronqvist H, Thaler RH. 2004. Design choices in privatized social-security systems: Learning from

  the Swedish experience.    American Economic Review     94:424428


Cynamon BZ, Fazzari SM. 2015. Household income, demand, and saving: Deriving macro data with

  micro data concepts.   Review of Income and Wealth, forthcoming

Dahl D, Evano DD, Spivey MF. 2000. Does the Community Reinvestment Act inuence lending?

  An analysis of changes in bank low-income mortgage activity. Unpublished paper.


Demirgüç-Kunt A, Klapper L. 2013. Measuring nancial inclusion: Explaining variation in use of

  nancial services across and within countries.   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity   2013:279

  340


Di Maggio M, Kermani A, Ramcharan R. 2015. Monetary policy pass-through: Household consump-

  tion and voluntary deleveraging. Unpublished paper.


Disney R, Emmerson C, Wakeeld M. 2001. Pension reform and saving in Britain.       Oxford Review
  of Economic Policy   17:7094


Dobbie W, Goldsmith-Pinkham P. 2015. Debtor protections and the Great Recession. Unpublished

  paper.


Dobbie W, Song J. 2015. Debt relief and debtor outcomes:         Measuring the eects of consumer

  bankruptcy protection.     American Economic Review    105:12721311


Døskeland TM, Hvide HK. 2011. Do individual investors have asymmetric information based on

  work experience?   Journal of Finance   66:10111041


Duarte F, Hastings JS. 2012. Fettered consumers and sophisticated rms: Evidence from Mexico's

  privatized social security market. Unpublished paper.


Duygan-Bump B, Grant C. 2009. Household debt repayment behaviour: What role do institutions

  play?    Economic Policy   24:107140


Favara G, Giannetti M. 2015. Forced asset sales and the concentration of outstanding debt: Evidence

  from the mortgage market. Unpublished paper.


Fecht F, Hackethal A, Karabulut Y. 2013. Is proprietary trading detrimental to retail investors?

  Unpublished paper.


Feng L, Seasholes MS. 2005. Do investor sophistication and trading experience eliminate behavioral

  biases in nancial markets?    Review of Finance   9:305351




                                                   30
Foà G, Gambacorta L, Guiso L, Mistrulli PE. 2015. The supply side of housing nance. Unpublished

  paper.


Foerster S, Linnainmaa JT, Melzer BT, Previtero A. 2014. Retail nancial advice: Does one size t

  all? Unpublished paper.


Fuster A, Vickery J. 2015. Securitization and the xed-rate mortgage.      Review of Financial Studies
  28:176211


Gabaix X, Laibson D. 2006. Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information suppression in

  competitive markets.      Quarterly Journal of Economics   121:505540


Gennaioli N, Shleifer A, Vishny R. 2015. Money doctors.      The Journal of Finance   70:91114


Gerardi K, Herkenho KF, Ohanian LE, Willen PS. 2015. Can't pay or won't pay? unemployment,

  negative equity, and strategic default. Unpublished paper., National Bureau of Economic Research


Giglio S, Maggiori M, Stroebel J. 2015. Very long-run discount rates.   Quarterly Journal of Economics
  130:153


Grinblatt M, Ikaheimo S, Keloharju M, Knüpfer S. 2015. IQ and mutual fund choice.         Management
  Science, forthcoming

Grinblatt M, Keloharju M. 2000. The investment behavior and performance of various investor

  types: a study of Finland's unique data set.   Journal of Financial Economics    55:4367


Grinblatt M, Keloharju M. 2001. What makes investors trade?        Journal of Finance   56 (2):549578


Grinblatt M, Keloharju M, Linnainmaa J. 2011. IQ and stock market participation.            Journal of
  Finance    66:21212164


Grinblatt M, Keloharju M, Linnainmaa JT. 2012. IQ, trading behavior, and performance.          Journal
  of Financial Economics      104:339362


Gropp R, Scholz JK, White MJ. 1997. Personal bankruptcy and credit supply and demand.         Quarterly
  Journal of Economics      112:217251


Gross DB, Souleles NS. 2002. An empirical analysis of personal bankruptcy and delinquency.      Review
  of Financial Studies   15:319347


Gross T, Notowidigdo MJ. 2011. Health insurance and the consumer bankruptcy decision: Evidence

  from expansions of Medicaid.     Journal of Public Economics   95:767778


Guiso L, Haliassos M, Jappelli T. 2002. Household portfolios. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA


Guiso L, Sapienza P, Zingales L. 2006. Does culture aect economic outcomes?      Journal of Economic
  Perspectives   20:2348


Guiso L, Sapienza P, Zingales L. 2008. Trusting the stock market.    Journal of Finance   63:25572600


Guiso L, Viviano E. 2015. How much can nancial literacy help?       Review of Finance    19:13471382



                                                  31
Gurun UG, Matvos G, Seru A. 2013. Advertising expensive mortgages. Unpublished paper.


Haliassos M, Jansson T, Karabulut Y. 2015. Incompatible European partners? Cultural predispo-

  sitions and household nancial behavior. Unpublished paper.


Hastings JS, Madrian BC, Skimmyhorn WL. 2013. Financial literacy, nancial education and eco-

  nomic outcomes.    Annual Review of Economics     5:347373


Hedesstrom TM, Svedsater H, Garling T. 2004. Identifying heuristic choice rules in the Swedish

  premium pension scheme.    Journal of Behavioral Finance      5:3242


Henrich J, Heine SJ, Norenzayan A. 2010. Most people are not WEIRD.           Nature   466:29


Hong H, Kubik JD, Stein JC. 2004. Social interaction and stock-market participation.            Journal of
  Finance    59:137163


Johnson E, Meier S, Toubia O. 2015. Money left on the kitchen table: Exploring sluggish mortgage

  renancing using administrative data, surveys, and eld experiments. Unpublished paper.


Kaplan G, Violante G, Weidner J. 2014. The wealthy hand-to-mouth.         Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity   Spring:77138


Karlan D, Zinman J. 2010. Expanding credit access: Using randomized supply decisions to estimate

  the impacts.   Review of Financial Studies   23:433464


Kaustia M, Knüpfer S. 2012. Peer performance and stock market entry.          Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics     104:321338


Kaustia M, Torstila S. 2011. Stock market aversion? Political preferences and stock market partic-

  ipation.   Journal of Financial Economics    100:98112


Kennickell AB. 2008. The role of over-sampling of the wealthy in the Survey of Consumer Finances.

  Irving Fisher Committee Bulletin   28:403408


Keys BJ, Piskorski T, Seru A, Yao V. 2014. Mortgage rates, household balance sheets, and the real

  economy. Unpublished paper.


Khorana A, Servaes H, Tufano P. 2009. Mutual fund fees around the world.           Review of Financial
  Studies    22:12791310


Koijen RSJ, Hemert OV, Nieuwerburgh SV. 2009. Mortgage timing.        Journal of Financial Economics
  93:292324


Koijen RSJ, Van Nieuwerburgh S, Vestman R. 2014. Judging the quality of survey data by compar-

  ison with "truth" as measured by administrative records: Evidence from Sweden. In             Improving
  the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures. University of Chicago Press

Korniotis GM, Kumar A. 2011. Do older investors make better investment decisions?               Review of
  Economics and Statistics   93:244265




                                                   32
Korniotis GM, Kumar A. 2013. Do portfolio distortions reect superior information or psychological

  biases?   Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis     48:145


Kroszner RS. 2008. The Community Reinvestment Act and the recent mortgage crisis. In               Con-
  fronting Concentrated Poverty Policy Forum. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
  Washington, D.C.


Lefgren L, McIntyre F. 2009. Explaining the puzzle of cross-state dierences in bankruptcy rates.

  Journal of Law and Economics      52:367393


Linnainmaa JT. 2011. Why do (some) households trade so much?             Review of Financial Studies
  24:16301661


Lippi A. 2014. Does menu design inuence retirement investment choices? Evidence from Italian

  occupational pension funds.    Judgment and Decision Making      9:7782


Lusardi A, DeBassa-Scheresberg C. 2013. Financial literacy and high-cost borrowing in the United

  States. Unpublished paper.


Lusardi A, Mitchell OS. 2011. Financial literacy and retirement planning in the United States.

  Journal of Pension Economics and Finance        10:509525


Madrian BC, Shea DF. 2001. The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) participation and savings

  behavior.   Quarterly Journal of Economics     116:11491187


Malmendier U, Nagel S. 2011. Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences aect risk taking?

  Quarterly Journal of Economics     126:373416


Massa M, Simonov A. 2006. Hedging, familiarity and portfolio choice.         Review of Financial Studies
  19:633685


May O, Tudela M, Young G. 2004. British household indebtedness and nancial stress: A household-

  level picture. Unpublished paper.


Meyer BD, Mok WKC, Sullivan JX. 2015. Household surveys in crisis.            Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, forthcoming

Mian A, Su A. 2009. The consequences of mortgage credit expansion:              Evidence from the US

  mortgage default crisis.   Quarterly Journal of Economics    124:14491496


Miles D. 2004. The UK mortgage market: Taking a longer-term view. HM Treasury, London, UK


Mitman K. 2015. Macroeconomic eects of bankruptcy and foreclosure policies. Unpublished paper.


Nakajima M, Telyukova I. 2013. Housing in retirement across countries. Unpublished paper.


Pence KM. 2006. Foreclosing on opportunity: State laws and mortgage credit.        Review of Economics
  and Statistics   88:177182


Piketty T. 2014. Capital in the 21st century. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.




                                                   33
Ramadorai T. 2010. Institutional investors. In     Behavioral Finance: Investors, Corporations, and
  Markets, eds. HK Baker, J Nofsinger. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Ridley M. 2003. Nature via nurture: Genes, experience, and what makes us human. HarperCollins

  Publishers


Saiz A, Wachter S. 2011. Immigration and the neighborhood.        American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy   3:169188


Schuh S, Stavins J. 2010. Why are (some) consumers (nally) writing fewer checks?         The role of

  payment characteristics.    Journal of Banking and Finance    34:17451758


Skiba PM, Tobacman J. 2011. Do payday loans cause bankruptcy? Unpublished paper.


Stegman MA. 2007. Payday lending.      Journal of Economic Perspectives    21:169190


Van Ooijen R, Van Rooij M. 2014. Mortgage risks, debt literacy and nancial advice. Unpublished

  paper.


Van Rooij M, Lusardi A, Alessie R. 2011. Financial literacy and stock market participation.   Journal
  of Financial Economics     101:449472


Vissing-Jorgensen A. 2011. Consumer credit: Learning your customer's default risk from what (s)he

  buys. Unpublished paper.


Von Gaudecker HM. 2015. How does household portfolio diversication vary with nancial literacy

  and nancial advice?     Journal of Finance   70:489507


Wachter JA, Yogo M. 2010. Why do household portfolio shares rise in wealth?       Review of Financial
  Studies   23:39293965


Wheelock DC, Wilson PW. 2011. Are credit unions too small?        Review of Economics and Statistics
  93:13431359


Zinman J. 2010. Restricting consumer credit access: Household survey evidence on eects around

  the Oregon rate cap.     Journal of Banking and Finance    34:546556


Zinman J. 2015. Household debt: Facts, puzzles, theories, and policies.   Annual Review of Economics
  7:251276




                                                   34
                                                                 Table 1: International comparison of participation rates

     In this table, we compare the fractions of households which participate in assets and debt markets across countries. Panel A refers to nancial and non-nancial assets and Panel B to
     mortgage- and non-mortgage debt. We include accounts with positive balances, as well as ones which households report as active, but which hold amounts equal to zero during the time of
     the interview. The data sources are the Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS), the US Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF, 2010 wave), the Canadian Survey
     of Financial Security (SFS, 2012 wave), the Australian Household, Income and Labour Dynamics Survey (HILDA, 2010 wave), and the UK Wealth and Assets Survey (WAS, 2012 wave).
     Deposits include current accounts, checking, money market, savings and transaction accounts. Bonds include both sovereign and corporate xed-income products, both denominated in
     domestic and foreign currency. Directly held stocks include publicly traded shares, employee shares and options, excluding amounts held through mutual funds or as part of registered
     retirement pension plans. Other nancial assets include trust accounts, money owed to households, certicates, leases, proceeds from lawsuits (HFCS, SCF), other non-pension assets (SFS),
     children's bank accounts (HILDA), children trust funds, National Savings Products and other investments (WAS). Retirement assets include all types of dened contribution plans (public,
     occupational, or private) which have an account balance. The category labeled other debt includes unsecured loans, payday and informal loans (HFCS, WAS), unpaid hospital bills, loans
     against life insurance (SCF) and bill payment arrears (WAS). The symbol "n.a." denotes asset or debt categories for which holdings are not separately classied, or for which data has not
     been collected.
                                                                                                  Panel A
                                                                              The assets side of the household balance sheet




                                                                                       y




                                                              ia
                                                                                                                                             l.




                                                                          a
                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                       ia
                                                                                                                                                                  ia




                                                                                                e




                                                             al
                                                                                     an
                                                                                                                                                       k




                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                                                  n




                                                                                                                                          er




                                                             r
                                                                                                                     ce
                                                                                                                                                                            n




                                                                        ad
                                                                                    m
                                                                                                ec
                                                                                                                                         h




                                                                                                                                y




                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                                     n




                                                          st
                                                                                                                                                    va
                                                                                                                                                               ve
                                                                                                                                                                                             A




                                                                                                                                                                         ai




                                                                                 er
                                                                                             re




                                                         u
                                                                                                                               al
                                                                                                                                      et
                                                                                                                                                                                  K
                                                                                                                                                                                             S




                                                                     an
                                                                                                      in
                                                                                                                    ra
                                                                                                                                                  lo
                                                                                                                                                             lo
                                                                                                                                                                        p




                                                        A
                                                                    C
                                                                                G
                                                                                            G
                                                                                                      F
                                                                                                                   F
                                                                                                                            It
                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                                                                                            U




35
       Financial assets                                     99.5%    96.7%          99.3%   74.5%     100.0%       99.6%    92.0%     97.8%       91.7%      93.9%      98.3%   99.0%       94.0%


       Deposits                                             97.4%    93.6%          99.0%   73.4%     100.0%       99.6%    91.8%     94.2%       91.2%      93.6%      98.1%   97.4%       92.6%

       Retirement assets and life insurance                 82.6%    70.5%          46.5%    3.8%      23.7%       37.5%    18.0%     49.8%       15.0%      18.3%      23.6%   76.1%       57.6%

       Directly held stocks                                 34.5%    10.0%          10.6%    2.7%      22.2%       14.7%       4.6%   10.4%           0.8%   10.0%      10.4%   17.5%       15.1%

       Mutual funds                                          3.3%    11.6%          16.9%    1.2%      27.4%       10.7%       6.3%   17.7%           2.7%   12.0%      5.6%     5.4%       8.7%

       Total direct and indirect holdings of stocks          n.a.       n.a.        23.7%    4.7%      33.9%       23.0%    11.5%     19.3%           6.8%   20.4%      25.1%        n.a.   49.8%

       Bonds                                                 1.7%       7.4%        5.2%     0.5%         0.8%      1.7%    14.6%         6.0%        1.0%       0.7%   1.4%    28.2%       13.2%

       Other assets                                         16.3%    20.1%          22.0%    3.9%           n.a.   10.2%       4.2%   10.7%       10.2%          6.5%   6.8%    31.9%       13.4%


       Non-nancial assets                                  94.6%   100.0%          80.2%   92.2%      84.3%       100.0%   97.7%     89.8%       96.0%      96.2%      95.3%   100.0%      91.3%


       Vehicles, valuables and other assets                 91.3%   100.0%          73.2%   73.5%      67.9%       100.0%   95.1%     82.6%       68.5%      80.4%      79.9%   100.0%      87.5%

       Main residence                                       67.4%    62.5%          44.2%   72.4%      67.8%       55.3%    68.7%     57.1%       89.9%      81.8%      82.7%   68.0%       67.2%

       Other real estate                                    20.5%    18.4%          17.8%   37.9%      29.8%       24.7%    24.9%         6.1%    15.3%      23.2%      36.2%   10.9%       14.4%

       Private businesses                                   12.2%    17.1%          9.4%     9.8%      13.8%       10.7%    18.4%         4.8%    10.8%      11.6%      15.0%        n.a.   12.1%
                                              Table 1: International comparison of participation rates (continued)

                                                                                           Panel B
                                                                   The liabilities side of the household balance sheet




                                                    a
                                                                             y




                                                   li
                                                                                                                                  l.




                                                               a
                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                            ia
                                                                                                                                                       ia




                                                                                      e




                                                                           an
                                                                                                                                            k




                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                               er




                                                  ra
                                                                                                            ce
                                                                                                                                                                 n




                                                              ad
                                                                          m
                                                                                      ec
                                                                                                                              h




                                                                                                                    y




                                                                                                  la
                                                                                                           n




                                               st
                                                                                                                                         va
                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                                              A




                                                                                                                                                              ai




                                                                       er
                                                                                   re




                                              u
                                                                                                                    al
                                                                                                                           et
                                                                                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                                                                                              S




                                                          an
                                                                                              in
                                                                                                           ra
                                                                                                                                       lo
                                                                                                                                                  lo
                                                                                                                                                             p




                                              A
                                                          C
                                                                      G
                                                                                  G
                                                                                              F
                                                                                                          F
                                                                                                                   It
                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                     U
                                                                                                                                                                             U




36
     Household liabilities                        69.1%   71.1%           47.4%   36.6%       59.8%       46.9%    25.2%   65.7%       26.8%      44.5%      50.0%   63.2%   74.9%


     Vehicle-, student loans and other debt       38.8%   42.7%           21.7%   12.6%       51.2%       28.7%    15.3%   24.6%       12.6%      27.1%      27.2%   44.0%   48.5%

     Credit cards                                 27.9%   24.8%           3.4%    13.7%            n.a.     n.a.   1.4%        4.6%        5.1%       3.0%   7.3%    24.8%   39.4%

     Overdrafts and credit lines                   n.a.   39.9%           19.8%    5.7%            n.a.    7.0%    3.6%    20.8%           8.0%   24.0%      0.6%     n.a.   2.1%

     Mortgage debt for primary residence          36.7%   33.8%           18.0%   13.9%       32.8%       16.9%    9.6%    43.9%           9.3%   12.5%      26.8%   36.2%   47.0%

     Other mortgage debt                          10.0%       6.4%        6.0%     3.9%            n.a.   10.1%    1.6%        2.5%        0.6%       1.6%   7.3%    4.8%    5.4%
                                                    Table 2: International comparison of the allocation of household wealth

     In this table, we compare the average allocations of household assets and liabilities across countries. Panel A refers to nancial and non-nancial assets and Panel B to mortgage- and
     non-mortgage debt. The data sources are the Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS), the US Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF, 2010 wave), the Canadian
     Survey of Financial Security (SFS, 2012 wave), the Australian Household, Income and Labour Dynamics Survey (HILDA, 2010 wave), and the UK Wealth and Assets Survey (WAS, 2012
     wave). Deposits include current accounts, checking, money market, savings and transaction accounts. Bonds include both sovereign and corporate xed-income products, both denominated
     in domestic and foreign currency. Directly held stocks include publicly traded shares, employee shares and options, excluding amounts held through mutual funds or as part of registered
     retirement pension plans. Other nancial assets include trust accounts, money owed to households, certicates, leases, proceeds from lawsuits (HFCS, SCF), other non-pension assets (SFS),
     children's bank accounts (HILDA), children trust funds, National Savings Products and other investments (WAS). Retirement assets include all types of dened contribution plans (public,
     occupational, or private) which have an account balance. The category labeled other debt includes unsecured loans, payday and informal loans (HFCS, WAS), unpaid hospital bills, loans
     against life insurance (SCF) and bill payment arrears (WAS). We express absolute holdings of assets and debt in 2010 US Dollars. We compute averages across households using population
     weights, as indicated in each survey. The symbol "n.a." denotes asset or debt categories for which holdings are not separately classied, or for which data has not been collected.
                                                                                              Panel A
                                                                            The assets side of the household balance sheet




                                                                 a
                                                                                        y




                                                               li
                                                                                                                                             l.




                                                                            a
                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                                                       ia
                                                                                                                                                                   ia




                                                                                                 e




                                                                                      an
                                                                                                                                                       k




                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                                                         er




                                                              ra
                                                                                                                    ce
                                                                                                                                                                              n




                                                                          ad
                                                                                     m
                                                                                                 ec
                                                                                                                                         h




                                                                                                                              y




                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                                   n




                                                            st
                                                                                                                                                    va
                                                                                                                                                                ve
                                                                                                                                                                                           A




                                                                                                                                                                           ai




                                                                                  er
                                                                                             re




                                                           u
                                                                                                                             al
                                                                                                                                     et
                                                                                                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                                                                                                           S




                                                                       an
                                                                                                      in
                                                                                                                   ra
                                                                                                                                                  lo
                                                                                                                                                              lo
                                                                                                                                                                          p




                                                          A
                                                                      C
                                                                                 G
                                                                                             G
                                                                                                      F
                                                                                                                  F
                                                                                                                           It
                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                                                          U




        Mean household assets ('000 US Dollars)               742.8    623.9         307.7   220.6      273.4      357.7     397.4       348.2        114.9       213.3   486.0   651.8   635.0




37
        Median household assets                               477.8    358.4          94.0   152.1      183.3      208.2     260.3       300.7         89.3       146.9   315.5   408.3   189.9


        Financial assets                                      36.5%   37.7%          47.9%   12.5%     29.7%      30.8%    16.1%     41.7%        12.4%       10.0%       13.6%   33.9%   30.2%


        Deposits                                               9.7%       9.9%       30.0%   11.5%     24.2%      22.0%    11.9%     21.3%        10.4%           7.0%    10.5%   5.9%    11.6%

        Retirement assets and life insurance                  23.2%   24.1%          10.5%    0.4%        1.5%     6.1%      1.5%    16.8%            1.2%        1.1%    1.4%    25.1%   13.3%

        Directly held stocks                                   2.8%       1.0%       0.9%     0.2%        1.9%     1.0%      0.2%        0.6%         0.0%        0.4%    0.5%    0.6%    1.3%

        Mutual funds                                           0.4%       1.3%       2.4%     0.1%        1.9%     0.7%      0.6%        1.6%         0.2%        0.6%    0.4%    0.3%    1.3%

        Bonds                                                  0.2%       0.2%       0.6%     0.1%        0.0%     0.1%      1.6%        0.6%         0.0%        0.1%    0.1%    1.1%    0.5%

        Other assets                                           0.2%       1.2%       3.5%     0.3%         n.a.    1.0%      0.3%        0.8%         0.6%        0.9%    0.7%    0.8%    2.1%


        Non-nancial assets                                   63.5%   62.3%          52.1%   87.5%     70.3%      69.2%    83.9%     58.3%        87.6%       90.0%       86.4%   66.1%   69.8%


        Vehicles, valuables and other assets                  10.5%   22.6%          13.4%   13.5%     11.2%      18.5%    19.1%     11.1%            8.4%    11.6%       8.6%    28.7%   22.5%

        Main residence                                        42.5%   31.9%          29.9%   54.7%     46.5%      38.9%    53.2%     43.3%        73.6%       67.7%       61.2%   34.6%   40.6%

        Other real estate                                      7.9%       5.2%       6.7%    16.0%     11.6%       9.1%      8.2%        2.2%         3.8%        7.8%    13.3%   2.8%    3.2%

        Private businesses                                     2.5%       2.6%       2.0%     3.1%        1.0%     2.7%      3.4%        1.7%         1.7%        2.8%    3.2%     n.a.   3.5%
                                           Table 2: International comparison of the allocation of household wealth (continued)

                                                                                         Panel B
                                                                  The liabilities side of the household balance sheet




                                                             a
                                                                                    y




                                                           li
                                                                                                                                         l.




                                                                       a
                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                   ia
                                                                                                                                                               ia




                                                                                              e




                                                                                  an
                                                                                                                                                   k




                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                               n




                                                                                                                                     er




                                                          ra
                                                                                                                  ce
                                                                                                                                                                          n




                                                                      ad
                                                                                m
                                                                                             ec
                                                                                                                                     h




                                                                                                                          y




                                                                                                        la
                                                                                                                 n




                                                        st
                                                                                                                                                va
                                                                                                                                                            ve
                                                                                                                                                                                          A




                                                                                                                                                                       ai




                                                                             er
                                                                                         re




                                                       u
                                                                                                                          al
                                                                                                                                 et
                                                                                                                                                                                  K
                                                                                                                                                                                          S




                                                                  an
                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                 ra
                                                                                                                                              lo
                                                                                                                                                          lo
                                                                                                                                                                      p




                                                      A
                                                                  C
                                                                             G
                                                                                         G
                                                                                                    F
                                                                                                                F
                                                                                                                         It
                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                                                                                         U




     Mean household liabilities ('000 US Dollars)         135.0       88.6        37.4       16.5       50.2      34.5    16.3       113.1          4.6         7.3       48.9    70.0   104.6




38
     Median of positive household liabilities              92.7       58.8        17.7       20.3       40.7      25.5    20.8       124.3          4.4         5.5       54.0    55.3    75.7

     Vehicle-, student loans and other debt               29.9%   28.2%          32.7%   25.2%      53.9%       44.5%    50.8%   22.5%        40.3%       51.4%       35.5%      34.2%   31.2%

     Credit cards                                         12.3%   12.4%          2.3%    19.7%           n.a.     n.a.   3.0%        1.1%         9.9%        1.8%    3.4%       9.8%    12.1%

     Overdrafts and credit lines                           n.a.   15.9%          21.7%   10.9%           n.a.    8.3%    6.2%    13.4%        15.3%       22.3%       0.5%        n.a.   0.7%

     Mortgage debt for primary residence                  47.4%   38.1%          33.8%   34.4%      46.1%       31.5%    35.5%   60.6%        33.0%       21.9%       48.3%      51.1%   52.7%

     Other debt secured with real estate                  10.4%       5.4%       9.5%     9.7%           n.a.   15.7%    4.7%        2.4%         1.5%        2.5%    12.2%      4.8%    3.3%


     Mean household net worth                             607.8   535.3          270.2   204.1      223.2        323.2   381.1       235.2        110.3       206.0   437.0      581.7   530.4

     Median household net worth                           355.8   237.8           71.3   140.9      118.5        160.4   240.2       143.3         84.7       139.1   274.1      326.6    82.5
                            Table 3: International comparison of mortgage markets


In this table, we rst report the time-series average and standard deviation of the share of adjustable-rate mortgages in the
total amount of new mortgage issuance (ARM share). The sample starts in 1991 (Australia), 1992 (USA), 1996 (Sweden),
2003 (Eurozone countries), 2004 (UK), 2005 (Finland) and ends in 2013. We then indicate the degree to which prepayment
penalties are a feature of respective mortgage markets. We use the term "Varying" to denote the situation in which dierent
amounts of prepayment penalties apply to dierent mortgage contracts or nancial institutions. Finally, we report the allocation
of outstanding mortgage volumes across sources of funding. The data corresponds to the year 2013 and is obtained from the
European Mortgage Federation and the Federal Reserve Board. The category Mortgage-backed securities contains both agency-
and non-agency securities.

                              Average      Std. dev. of   Prepayment                Sources of funding
                             ARM share     ARM share       penalties     Deposits    Covered Mortgage-backed
                                                                                      bonds         securities
              Australia         88.3%         5.1%          Varying        n.a.       n.a.           n.a.
              Belgium           23.2%         17.0%           Yes         62.3%       4.3%          33.4%
              Denmark           44.6%         13.2%           No           n.a.       n.a.           n.a.
              Finland           96.1%          2.5%           Yes         66.3%      33.7%           0.0%
              Germany           15.9%          2.2%           Yes         82.2%      16.5%           1.3%
              Greece            63.1%         23.3%         Varying       70.7%      23.3%           6.0%
              Ireland           81.6%          9.1%           Yes         38.4%      22.0%          39.7%
              Italy             70.7%         16.8%           Yes         42.5%      33.8%          23.7%
              Netherlands       24.3%          7.4%           Yes         50.9%       9.7%          39.5%
              Portugal          97.2%          3.0%          n.a.         43.3%      32.1%          24.6%
              Spain             85.3%          7.8%           Yes         26.1%      54.6%          19.3%
              Sweden            53.6%         17.7%           Yes         36.0%      64.0%           0.0%
              UK                46.9%         15.3%           Yes         75.0%       8.5%          16.5%
              USA               8.5%           7.1%           No          40.0%       0.0%          60.0%




                                                              39
                                                          Figure 1: Private pension coverage at household level.


In this gure, we compare the fractions of households with dened-contribution pension plans across countries. On the right
axis, we show the corresponding average value of accounts, conditional on contributing. Canada is not part of this sample
because the types of pension holdings are not separately classied in the Survey of Financial Security. We compute averages
across households using population weights, as indicated in each survey. All quantities are reported in 2010 US Dollars.

                                         1                                                                                                                          250



                                        0.8                                                                                                                         200
               Fraction of households




                                                                                                                                                                          ’000 US Dollars
                                        0.6                                                                                                                         150



                                        0.4                                                                                                                         100



                                        0.2                                                                                                                         50



                                         0                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                             France


                                                                                                           Slovakia


                                                                                                                      Slovenia
                                              Australia


                                                            UK


                                                                  USA




                                                                                                                                 Spain




                                                                                                                                                 Finland


                                                                                                                                                           Greece
                                                                                                                                         Italy
                                                                        Germany


                                                                                  Netherl.




                                                                           Fraction of households with DC plans (left axis)
                                                                           Average account value of DC plans (right axis)




                                                                                                      40
