NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOME THEORETICAL CONNECTIONS AMONG WEALTH, INCOME, SUSTAINABILITY,
AND ACCOUNTING
Martin L. Weitzman
Working Paper 22060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22060

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Martin L. Weitzman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Some Theoretical Connections Among Wealth, Income, Sustainability, and Accounting
Martin L. Weitzman
NBER Working Paper No. 22060
March 2016
JEL No. Q01,Q2,Q5
ABSTRACT
In theory, and under some quite strong assumptions, there exists an important rigorous
quantitative relationship among the following four fundamental economic concepts: (1) "wealth";
(2) "income"; (3) "sustainability"; (4) "accounting". These four basic concepts are placed in
quotation marks here because a necessary first step will be to carefully and rigorously define what
exactly is meant by each concept. In this paper, I review what is known about this important fourfold quantitative relationship in an ultra-simplified setting. I identify some basic applications of
this simplified economic theory of wealth and income (and sustainability and accounting). While
the contents of this paper are expressed at a very high level of abstraction and require some
restrictive assumptions, I believe that the fundamental four-fold relationship it sharply highlights
is useful for understanding, at least in principle, what is "wealth" and what is its theoretical
relationship to "income," "sustainability," and "accounting."

Martin L. Weitzman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 313
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mweitzman@harvard.edu

Some Theoretical Connections Among Wealth,
Income, Sustainability, and Accounting
Martin L. Weitzman
February 26, 2016
for chapter of Wealth: Economics and Policy
preliminary and con…dential
comments appreciated

Abstract
In theory, and under some quite strong assumptions, there exists an important rigorous quantitative relationship among the following four fundamental economic concepts:
(1) “wealth”; (2) “income”; (3)“sustainability”; (4) “accounting”.

These four basic

concepts are placed in quotation marks here because a necessary …rst step will be to
carefully and rigorously de…ne what exactly is meant by each concept. In this paper,
I review what is known about this important four-fold quantitative relationship in an
ultra-simpli…ed setting. I identify some basic applications of this simpli…ed economic
theory of wealth and income (and sustainability and accounting). While the contents
of this paper are expressed at a very high level of abstraction and require some restrictive assumptions, I believe that the fundamental four-fold relationship it sharply
highlights is useful for understanding, at least in principle, what is “wealth”and what
is its theoretical relationship to “income,” “sustainability,” and “accounting.”

1

Introduction: Some Heroic Assumptions

Our task here is very ambitious, being nothing less than rigorously elucidating a strong
quantitative theoretical relationship among the four fundamental economic concepts of: (1)
Department of Economics, Harvard University (mweitzman@harvard.edu). As will become clear, this
paper is in the nature of an essay that attempts to enlarge upon, clarify, and unify my own approach to
what might be called “the pure theory of perfectly complete national income accounting.” I do not attempt
to do a proper survey or evaluation of the many other views on this vast subject.

1

“wealth”; (2) “income”; (3) “sustainability”; (4) “accounting”. In the course of dealing
with these four fundamental economic concepts, we will be forced to deal also with such
background concepts as “consumption”, “investment”, “investment prices”, “capital”, “the
rate of return”(on investment, in units of consumption), and so forth. We will not get very
far in the analysis without making several heroic assumptions that greatly simplify the problem under consideration via a particular “toy model.” I believe that the heroic simplifying
assumptions behind this toy model may be acceptable at a high level of abstraction because
they will allow us to obtain sharp neat results, which can then serve as a conceptual point
of departure for further analysis and applications.1
First of all, for utmost simplicity, I assume in this toy model that there is just one
consumption good. (More generally the single consumption good could be interpreted as
the “gain”or “payo¤”of the system.) The assumption of a single consumption good allows
for an unambiguous measure of “the”rate of return along a consumption-e¢ cient trajectory,
which, when this rate of return is additionally assumed to be constant over time, will play an
important role in what follows. The rate of return in any period (along an e¢ cient trajectory)
is the extra consumption that could be obtained next period from curtailing consumption
in this period by one unit, but otherwise leaving the rest of the e¢ cient trajectory as is.2
The strong assumption of a single composite consumption good is stark, but it might be
approximately appropriate for an ideal index number of aggregate consumption. In any
event, I need this assumption, along with the further assumption of a constant rate of
return, to get very sharp results. E¤ectively I am assuming the situation is “as if”the utility
function is linear in consumption and the welfare criterion is “as if”it is present discounted
consumption at the given constant rate of return. The more complicated general case of
multiple consumption goods and a nonlinear utility function is treated in Weitzman (2003,
Chapter 6, “The Pure Theory of Perfectly Complete National Income Accounting”), which
the interested reader might consult.3 Here I am aiming at expositional simplicity. Let
1

By now there exists a large literature on the four basic concepts of this paper and related subjects.
(See, for example, as just a small subset, the extensive bibliography cited in Hamilton and Hartwick (2014).)
Compared to this large literature, my own tendency (beginning with Weitzman (1970)) has been to sacri…ce
some generality in favor of a tight fully-rigorous quantitative formulation. There is a trade-o¤ here between
generality and elegance. Even the most frugal formulations in this …eld make very demanding assumptions
on the economic framework and the completeness of prices and quantities. My attitude here is: “Why not
go a little further with the basic assumptions to achieve full elegance?”. In this paper I do not have space to
do a proper literature survey of the numerous other approaches. Instead, I attempt to enlarge upon, clarify,
and unify my own approach. The antecedents of this paper having roots in my own previous work (in
addition to Weitzman (1970)) include Weitzman (1976) and Weitzman (2003). I consider the presentation
here to be more sharply focused and more elegantly expressed than these previous expositions.
2
For background on de…ning the rate of return for a single consumption good, see Solow (1963), who
takes a similar approach to this paper.
3
The general result in Weitzman (2003) has the spirit or ‡avor of the result in this paper, but is more

2

consumption at time t be denoted C(t).4 (In this paper the basic economic unit is the
nation, but the same theory goes through for other settings, in which case C(t) typically
represents gain or payo¤ at time t.)
Unlike consumption, capital is intended from the beginning to be multi-dimensional,
micro-speci…c, and all-encompassing. Indeed, the major purpose of this approach is to
present the simplest case where there is a powerful connection among wealth, income, accounting, and sustainability for multiple investments in multiple capital goods. Consumption
is already aggregated into one composite good, which serves as the numeraire, but capital is
disaggregated into its many speci…c forms or types.
The notion of “capital”used here is quite a bit more general than the traditional produced
means of production, like equipment and structures. Subsoil minerals are forms of capital.
Fish stocks are forms of capital. More generally, natural resources of all types (renewable
and non-renewable) are here considered to be forms of capital. Forms of human capital,
such as education, skills, capabilities, and know-how should in principle be included, and
also the knowledge capital accumulated from R&D-like activities. In principle, social and
institutional and intellectual-property capital should be accounted for (if only we knew how
to quantify and price such concepts). Generally speaking, every possible type of capital
ought to be included –to the extent that we know how to measure and evaluate at e¢ ciency
prices the associated ‡ow of net investments. In principle, environmental assets should
be treated as forms of capital. From this perspective, environmental quality might be
viewed as a stock of capital that is depreciated by pollution and invested in by abatement.
The underlying ideal is to have the list of capital goods be as comprehensive as possible,
subject to the practical limitation that meaningful competitive-market-like e¢ ciency prices
are available for evaluating the corresponding net investments.
Suppose that altogether there are n capital goods, including stocks of natural resources
and other unorthodox forms. The stock of capital of type j (1
j
n) in existence at
time t is denoted Kj (t) and its corresponding net investment ‡ow is Ij (t) = K_ j (t), where
K_ j (t) dKj (t)=dt. The n-vector K = fKj g denotes all capital stocks, while I = fIj g stands
_
for the corresponding n-vector of net investments. In vector notation, I(t) = K(t),
where
_
K(t)
dK(t)=dt. Note that the net investment ‡ow of a natural capital asset like a school
of …sh, a timber reserve, an oil …eld, or a pool of water would be negative whenever the
complicated, involving willingness-to-pay consumer-surplus-like measurements that e¤ectively reconstruct
the curved utility function. It is precisely to simplify this extra complexity that I treat here the special case
of a single consumption good with a linear utility function, so that the relevant welfare criterion is present
discounted consumption discounted at the given rate of return.
4
“Consumption” here should be broadly construed to include, e.g., public goods, externalities, the enjoyment of environmental amenities, and so forth, as well as conventional private consumption of goods and
services.

3

underlying asset is being depleted or run down more rapidly than it is being replaced or
built up.
In a spirit of focusing sharply for the sake of developing the core theory, we assume that
the “attainable possibilities” of the underlying production system are time autonomous.
This means that the (n + 1)-dimensional vector (C(t); I(t)) is producible at time t if and
only if
(C(t); I(t)) " A(K(t));
(1)
where A(K) is the time-free (n + 1)-dimensional attainable possibilities set as a function of
capital stock K. It is assumed that the attainable possibilities set A(K) is convex, which will
guarantee that necessary and su¢ cient conditions coincide in the optimal growth problem
to be presented.5

2

The Basic Optimal Control Problem

As was already mentioned, the rate of return in any period along a consumption-e¢ cient
trajectory is the extra consumption that could be obtained next period from curtailing consumption in this period by one unit, but otherwise leaving the rest of the e¢ cient trajectory
as is. We now make yet-another heroic assumption that the economy is moving along an
e¢ cient trajectory where at all times the own rate of interest (or rate of return) on the single
consumption good is the constant r. This might be considered a tolerable approximation for
a great many practical purposes because it accords with a well-known “stylized fact”that the
real rate of return has been essentially trendless over time, at least throughout the measurable past.6 One could try to argue that the economic entity corresponding most closely to
this concept is the annual after-tax real return to capital (because it approximately de…nes
the relevant intertemporal consumption trade-o¤ faced by the average citizen in deciding
how much to save). As a very rough approximation, a trendless round …gure of r 4-5% per
year might then be used for this real interest rate in the postwar period or even, perhaps,
over longer historical periods.7
Some re‡ection reveals that such an economy moving along an e¢ cient trajectory with
5

This is not quite true. Technically speaking, I need more convexity in the sense that (C(t); I(t); K(t))"B,
where B is a time-independent (2n + 1)-dimensional convex set of feasible alternatives. See Weitzman (2003)
for further details. I implicitly assume that this stronger convexity condition is being met.
6
Nordhaus (1994) in his section entitled “Empirical Evidence on the Return on Capital” summarizes a
large number of studies that are consistent with a trendless interpretation. Indeed, this is one of Kaldor’s
famous “stylized facts” about the growth of advanced industrial economies. (For a discussion, see Solow
(1970), p. 3.)
7
Nordhaus (1995), Jorgenson (1994), or Feldstein (1997) could each be cited to justify trendless ‡uctuations in the rate of return averaging around 4-5% per year.

4

own rate of interest on consumption equal to the constant r must be a solution of the
optimal control problem that maximizes the present discounted value of consumption at
constant discount rate r. More formally, such a trajectory will
maximize
Z 1
e rt C(t) dt
(2)
0

subject to the feasibility constraints (1) and the capital accumulation equation
_
K(t)
= I(t);

(3)

K(0) = ;

(4)

and with the given initial condition

where stands for the initially given vector of capital stocks.
Because the maximand (2) is a weighted linear average of fC(t)g with time weights
fe rt g, the rate of transformation along the optimal trajectory between consumption at
time and consumption at time 0 is guaranteed to be exp( r( 0
)). Thus, the solution
of maximizing (2) (subject to constraints (1), (3), (4)) has the property of being an e¢ cient
consumption trajectory all along which the rate of return is the constant r. Conversely, an
e¢ cient consumption trajectory all along which the rate of return is r must maximize (2)
subject to constraints (1), (3), (4).
I note in passing that maximizing (2) (subject to constraints (1), (3), (4)) can be interpreted as an as-if optimal control problem. The underlying problem might be maximizing
some complicated form of dynamic utility, but the solution is as if there is an e¢ cient consumption trajectory all along which the rate of return is the constant r. This way of looking
at things seems to me to be a more intuitive characterization than in terms of dynamic
utility maximization. There might be some form of complicated dynamic utility maximization in the background, but the reduced form of a solution is as if it results in an e¢ cient
consumption trajectory along which the rate of return is the constant r. This as if form
accords with the well-known “stylized fact”that the real rate of interest has been essentially
trendless over time, at least throughout the measurable past.8 I am e¤ectively assuming
that we are in a special case where instantaneous “utility” is as-if identi…ed with the single
measurable consumption good whose rate of return is r.
An application of the famous maximum principle of optimal control theory to the “as if”
problem here takes the following form. Introduce the n-dimensional investment-price row
8

See the last two footnotes for a further exposition of this point.

5

vector P = fPj g. Henceforth we adhere to the convention that all prices are row vectors and
all quantities are column vectors. The current-value Hamiltonian expression C + PI is in
the form of net domestic product (NDP) with consumption as numeraire. A function of K
and P that will play a critical role in the maximum principle is the current-value maximized
Hamiltonian expression
e
H(K;
P)
max fC + PIg:
(5)
(C;I)"A(K)

A feasible trajectory satis…es (1), (3), (4). With underlying convexity, the necessary
and su¢ cient condition for a feasible trajectory fC (t); I (t); K (t)g to be optimal is the
existence of an investment-price trajectory fP (t)g satisfying for all t the condition9
e
H(K
(t); P (t)) = C (t) + P (t) I (t)

(6)

and simultaneously satisfying everywhere along the optimal trajectory the vector di¤erential
equation
"
#
e
@
H
_ (t) =
+ rP (t);
(7)
P
@K
t

_ (t) dP (t)=dt and the subscript t denotes evaluation along an optimal trajectory
where P
at time t.
The maximum principle corresponding to the optimal control problem of this section represents an important dual-side interpretable as a dynamic competitive equilibrium. This dual
interpretation allows us to gain insight into the nature of fully-accounted-for comprehensive
NDP and its relation to income, wealth, and sustainability.

3

Economic Interpretation of the Maximum Principle

What is the economic interpretation of conditions (6) and (7)? Brie‡y, (6) and (7) are
describing an economy-wide dynamic competitive equilibrium with a perfect capital market
whose rate of return is r. There is a deep connection between maximization of (2) over
time and competitive market equilibrium over time in an economy whose rate of return is r.
Essentially, the basic invisible-hand theorem here says that an economic situation maximizing
present discounted consumption (at discount rate r) is being optimally controlled over time if
and only if the situation can simultaneously be interpreted as describing a dynamic perfectforesight competitive equilibrium with a perfect capital market paying rate of return r. If (2)
9

See Weitzman (2003), as applied to the formulation of this paper. For convenience, here I am omitting
the transversality condition at in…nity. Again, see Weitzman (2003) for a full treatment of this aspect.

6

is being maximized subject to constraints (1), (3), (4), then optimal investment levels must
be accompanied by investment or capital prices (relative to a consumption numeraire price
of 1) in such a way that any observers would swear they are witnessing the evolution of an
economy with a perfect capital market in a dynamic perfect-foresight competitive equilibrium
having rate of return r. Conversely, if price and quantity trajectories are behaving as if the
model were describing a dynamic perfect-foresight competitive equilibrium with a perfect
capital market having rate of return r, then it must constitute a solution to the problem of
maximizing (2) subject to constraints (1), (3), (4).
A convenient thought experiment for conceptualizing a nation having a perfect capital
market paying a real interest rate of r is to postulate an imaginary national bank where
any amount of consumption may be borrowed or deposited at real interest rate r, under the
condition that all loans must eventually be paid o¤. The unit of account in this nation is
the consumption good C, whose numeraire price is 1. In e¤ect, the national bank is a place
where extra consumption can be deposited or borrowed at real interest rate r.
The perfectly competitive price of investment (or capital) good j at time t is Pj (t). This
means that at time t any representative agent can buy or sell any amount of capital Kj (t)
(or net investment Ij (t)) at the given competitive price Pj (t).
The …rst condition of the maximum principle (6) signi…es that at all times representative
agents are acting to maximize NDP, taking prices as given. Envisioning the optimal control
problem here as a movie unfolding over time, condition (6) represents a “still frame” photographed at instant t. It is a static description, indicating that at time t the economy is
on its attainable possibilities frontier at a point where the marginal rates of transformation
among current consumption and current investments, or among various forms of current
investment, is exactly the current competitive prices of investments P (t).
Behind the scenes, the representative agents of the economy might be manipulating
thousands, or even millions of intermediate control variables to attain by the “invisible
hand” the maximized reduced-form value of NDP expression (6). The reduced form of
even the most complicated static competitive equilibrium is that all intermediate control
variables have been set (by internal competition in intermediate goods) so that the economy
is placed on its attainable possibilities frontier at the precise point where marginal rates of
transformation among …nal outputs (the one consumption good and the n investment goods)
are equal to their price ratios, which is exactly the reduced-form condition (6).
Condition (6) means that no matter how complicated are the internal workings of the
competitive economy, any observers of these microeconomic inner workings will come away
thinking that they are witnessing a static competitive equilibrium. As long as we maximize
the Hamiltonian expression (6) over all control variables, including intermediate goods and
7

services, it does not matter whether I is directly controlled, as in the compact formulation
here, or whether it is indirectly controlled by an arbitrarily large collection of intermediate
control variables. In the most abstract formulation, any number of control variables, subject
to any number of intermediate-materials-balancing constraints in the background may be
simultaneously determining consumption C and net investment I. The intermediate control
variables are like dummy variables here –we are no more interested in them per se than we are
interested in the details of intermediate goods like metallic ores or chemical feedstocks. We
are ultimately interested only in the netted-out reduced-form attainable possibilities set A(K)
setting out feasible combinations among C and I as a function of K. None of the background
detail about control variables representing intermediate goods or about intermediate control
sets really matters. The only thing that matters is that NDP is being maximized over
the reduced-form attainable possibilities set A(K) (as if at …xed investment prices) for each
instant of time.
The second condition of the maximum principle is the di¤erential equation (7), which
holds everywhere along an optimal trajectory. Unlike (6), which is a description of a perfectly
competitive static economy, condition (7) is a uniquely dynamic description of a capitalstock market in competitive equilibrium. This kind of dynamic competitive equilibrium is
sometimes called an “equilibrium in price expectations”or a “perfect foresight equilibrium.”
To understand this dynamic competitive equilibrium interpretation, we need to begin with
the concept of “arbitrage.” Arbitrage is the simultaneous purchase and sale of equivalent
securities in order to make pure positive pro…ts from price discrepancies. Condition (7) is
essentially saying that in a perfectly competitive capital market no pure pro…ts can be made
from arbitrage. Condition (7) is a dynamic version of the basic static principle that prices
in competitive equilibrium are determined where supply equals demand –because otherwise
someone could make pure pro…ts from arbitrage.
Let represent a very small period of time. Suppose that a representative agent buys
one dollar’s worth of capital Kj at time t at price Pj (t). Thus, 1=Pj (t) units of capital
Kj are purchased by the representative agent at time t, who then uses this extra capital
e
to produce extra income at the ‡ow rate (per unit of Kj ) of @ H=@K
j during the interval
between time t and time t + , after which the agent sells the capital at time t + for a price
of Pj (t + ) dollars. At time t + , the representative agent will then have made a net gain
in dollars of
"
#
!
e
@H
1
+ Pj (t + ) Pj (t) :
(8)
Pj (t)
@Kj
t

If the representative agent instead placed the dollar as a deposit in the national bank at

8

time t, then the net amount gained from this bank investment at time t + would be
(9)

r :

In a perfectly competitive capital market where no pure pro…ts can be made from arbitrage, (8) must equal (9), which can be rewritten as the condition
Pj (t + )

Pj (t)

"

=

e
@H
@Kj

#

+ rPj (t):

(10)

t

Taking the limit as ! 0, and then passing over to vector notation, equation (10) becomes
exactly condition (7). If (7) did not hold, then the economy would be in disequilibrium and
pure pro…ts could be made from arbitrage by moving money from private investment in Kj
to the national bank (if (9) exceeds (8)) or from the national bank to private investment in
Kj (if (8) exceeds (9)). By transferring funds from one investment vehicle to the other, this
arbitrage activity would put pressure on capital-stock prices to move in a direction closer to
satisfying (7), and such price movements would not cease until no more pure pro…ts could
be made from arbitrage, meaning (7) holds fully in dynamic competitive equilibrium.10
To sum up this section, any group of economists observing a nation over time on a
trajectory simultaneously satisfying (6) and (7) would swear under oath that they were
witnessing a dynamic competitive equilibrium with a perfect capital market at real interest
rate r. So if we can imagine for some economy what a dynamic competitive equilibrium
with a perfect capital market at interest rate r would look like, then we can simultaneously
imagine the solution to the corresponding optimal control problem.

4

Complete Accounting and Comprehensive Income

Let the expression Y (t) stand for what will be called in this paper comprehensive income
(or comprehensive NDP)11 at time t The formal de…nition of comprehensive income Y (t)
at time t is
e
Y (t) = H(K
(t); P (t)):
(11)
10

Special cases of (7) include the Hotelling Rule for non-renewable resources and the marginal product of
produced capital being equal to the (real) interest rate.
11
At the level of abstraction of the toy model here, there is no distinction between net domestic product
and net domestic income.

9

From (6) we could just as well write (11) along an optimal trajectory as
Y (t) = C (t) + P (t) I (t):

(12)

In the setup here, comprehensive national income is NDP as measured with the price of
consumption normalized to unity and relative prices of net investment goods evaluated at
the e¢ ciency prices that correspond to a dynamic competitive equilibrium for the model.
We have already mentioned that any group of economists observing a nation over time on
a trajectory simultaneously satisfying (6) and (7) would swear under oath that they were
witnessing a dynamic competitive equilibrium with a perfect capital market at real interest
rate r. In this same spirit, national income statisticians at time t would swear that NDP
(with consumption as numeraire) is correctly measured by comprehensive national income
e
Y (t) = C (t) + P (t) I (t)) = H(K
(t); P (t)).
“Complete accounting” here refers to condition (1) along with conditions (5) and (6).
The signi…cance of “complete accounting” in this toy economy is the following. As has
already been explained, comprehensive national income Y (t) = C (t) + P (t) I (t)) =
e
H(K
(t); P (t)) along an optimal trajectory represents “perfectly complete” net domestic
product (or “perfectly complete” net domestic income) with the consumption good as numeraire having a price of one. For theoretical purposes, we are thus imagining an idealized
world where the coverage of capital goods is so comprehensive, and the national accounting
system is so complete, that there remain no unacounted-for residual “atmospheric” growth
factors. National income accounting is assumed to be “perfectly complete” because all
sources of future growth have been attributed to proper investments, in the form of (1), which
are fully “accounted for”by being valued at their proper competitive or e¢ ciency prices and
e
included in comprehensive national income as Y (t) = C (t)+P (t) I (t)) = H(K
(t); P (t)).
Condition (1) signi…es that time t enters the attainable possibilities set A( K(t)) only via the
capital stocks at that time K(t). In this sense a “perfectly complete”production system is
time autonomous.
Unfortunately, we do not now live in a world where national income accounting is complete, even though our theoretical models often assume this feature.12 Completeness is perhaps best envisioned as a limiting case, which some real-world accounting systems approach
in coverage but few attain. In our actual world we cannot measure accurately all investments, many externalities are not corrected or internalized, non-convexities and distortionary
taxes abound, it is often di¢ cult to impute market-like shadow prices for nonmarket goods,
imperfect competition and other non-optimal conditions exist, there are various atmospheric
12

Every paper written in this area has to struggle mightily with the fact that, in practice, accounting is
incomplete, and sometimes very incomplete.

10

sources of positive or negative growth (like exogenous technological progress), which we
cannot or do not include in net domestic income, and so on. (The omitted atmospheric
contributions are identi…ed primarily as a residual, which is obtained by subtracting o¤ from
actual growth the e¤ects of all known, properly attributed, sources of growth.)
Note that, technically speaking, it is always possible to convert any time-dependent
system into a time-autonomous system merely by relabeling “time”as the (n + 1)st capital
good, whose corresponding net investment ‡ow (or rate of change) is the positive constant
+1. And this approach would be …ne for national income applications, provided we knew the
e¢ ciency price of time. Then, complete accounting for such a time-dependent system would
include as the price of the (n + 1)st “investment”the value to the welfare-producing system
of the passage of calendar time itself. The di¢ culty with this approach is not theoretical,
but rather empirical. We are not sure where to look in a real-world economy for a decent
market-based measure of the value of changes dependent on calendar time, such as the value
of exogenous atmospheric technological progress or other elements of the “residual.”
The primary justi…cation usually given for studying the pure theory of complete accounting in a real world of incomplete accounting is that the pure theory can serve as a
guiding beacon lighting the way toward greater completeness –by suggesting what activities
to include, and how best to include them, to “green up” net domestic product or income
into a more comprehensive aggregate re‡ecting more accurately what the future portends
relative to the present. Also, the pure theory of complete accounting may be important because it will indicate how to use current income-like data to make rigorous dynamic welfare
comparisons –at least in principle.
All misgivings notwithstanding, it is perhaps not unreasonable to begin an inquiry into
the welfare signi…cance of comprehensive income by postulating the perfectly complete accounting that goes along with a time-autonomous attainable possibilities set and “as if
perfectly competitive”investment prices.

5

What is Wealth (or Welfare)?

Let W (t) represent the wealth (or welfare) of the toy economy at time t. Wealth is a stock
of welfare that capitalizes the future ‡ow of well-being. In the model of this setup it is
natural to de…ne wealth (or welfare) as the capitalized present discounted value of all future

11

consumption.13 Thus, along an optimal trajectory,
W (t)

Z

1

e

r(x t)

C (x) dx:

(13)

t

Taking the time derivative of (13) by di¤erentiating the right-hand-side integral with respect to t, and simplifying the resulting expression, yields here the basic di¤erential equation
_ (t) = rW (t)
W

C (t):

(14)

Consider the optimal control problem we have been dealing with thus far. Let V ( )
represent the state evaluation function, which is the maximized value of (2) (subject to
constraints (1), (3), (4)) as a function of the initially given capital stocks . In words, V ( )
is the maximum present discounted consumption that the system can deliver, starting from
the initial condition K(0) = . Then, by de…nition, all along an optimal trajectory it must
hold that
W (t) = V (K (t)):
(15)
Furthermore, it can be shown14 that, all along an optimal trajectory, the relationship
V 0 (K (t)) = P (t)

(16)

must hold, where V 0 (K) = f@V =@Kj g. Condition (16) means that at all times t along the
optimal trajectory the e¢ ciency price Pj (t) of the investment good j, which appears in the
maximized Hamiltonian (6), is the partial derivative of the state evaluation function with
respect to capital Kj evaluated at K=K (t).
Now take the time derivative of both sides of equation (15), yielding by the chain rule of
di¤erentiation
_ (t) = V 0 (K (t)) K
_ (t) = P (t) I (t);
W
(17)
where the last equality is from (16) and (3).
Next, combine (14) with (17), which yields, after rearrangement, the fundamental relationship between wealth and income:
rW (t) = C (t) + P (t) I (t) = Y (t):
13

(18)

The literature often misidenti…es inclusive wealth (at time t) as the value of contemporaneous capital
stock P (t) K (t). This is a mistake because P (t) K (t) does not have welfare signi…cance, even in the
simplest cases.
14
See Weitzman (2003). I am assuming here for simplicity that the function V ( ) is di¤erentiable. A
more general case is treated in Weitzman (2003).

12

6

“Sustainability”as “Sustainable-Equivalent Consumption”

Recent times have witnessed a greatly heightened awareness of the interactions between
economic, social, and environmental issues. People throughout the world have become much
more sensitive to the important possible links between their own human societies and the
natural environmental surroundings within which these societies may thrive or fail. Terms
like “green accounting”and “sustainability”have found their way into the popular lexicon.
What do we mean by these terms?
The …rst term is relatively easy to explain. “Green accounting” in the formulation of
this paper is more or less synonymous with what we have called “complete accounting”
because all sources of future growth (including, as negative investments, resource depletion,
degradation of natural capital, and so forth) have been attributed as proper net investments,
which are fully “accounted for”by being valued at their proper e¢ ciency prices and included
in national income.
But what is to be understood by the fuzzier concept of “sustainability”? The Bruntland
Commission on Environment and Development (1987) famously described “sustainable development”as being “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.”15 Unfortunately, this de…nition
is still much too vague to be operationally useful. The purpose of this section is not to demolish the concept of “sustainability,”which has, I believe, a legitimate core essence in the
form of “sustainability equivalence,”but rather to eliminate the fuzziness by formalizing and
making more operational the basic economic ideas underlying this concept of “sustainability
equivalence.” At the end of the day it will turn out that there is a fundamental connection
between “comprehensive income” (with complete accounting) and “sustainable-equivalent
consumption.”
The word “sustainability”is often used but rarely de…ned carefully. It can have a great
many meanings, and even nuances, which may vary greatly depending on the user and the
context of the usage.16 This leaves a lot of room for an author to pick, choose, and use
his/her favorite de…nition, within reason.
At the broadest level, sustainability refers in some way to the ability to “sustain”in the
sense of keeping constant something across time. That is, the word sustainability connotes
a constancy-like property of “something.”
The various notions of sustainability then seem to di¤er primarily in the “something”
15
16

World Comm. Environ. Dev. (1987), page 43.
See Pezzey (1992) for a survey of some of the many various meanings of “sustainability.”

13

that is supposed to be sustained – usually in the degree of speci…city of the “something”
to be sustained. For example, “sustainability” in the narrow sense might refer to maintaining at constant levels something quite particular – forests, or wetlands, or landscapes,
or mineral reserves, or …sheries –so that future generations might enjoy the same usage of
these speci…c forms of natural-resource capital as we do now. Although “sustainability”
in this narrow sense might sometimes be a practical shorthand way of expressing certain
desirable conservation goals, it seems too arbitrary to serve as a general principle for guiding
economic development. As a practical matter, we simply cannot have economic growth,
with its attendant goal of raising people out of poverty, while preserving everything that has
any conceivable natural or aesthetic value. Taken to an extreme, the injunction to pursue
“sustainable development” in the narrowly speci…c sense of leaving intact particular forms
of natural capital would paralyze development, since no growth is possible without causing
levels of something to decline somewhere.
Sector-speci…c or use-speci…c or micro-speci…c de…nitions of “sustainability” are highly
problematic in several ways. It is left up in the air what is the particular set of speci…c
resources to be sustained, and who selects the list. In technical terms, the principle of
sustainable development at this level of speci…city is not invariant to aggregation and is
highly sensitive to which sector’s output is chosen to be sustained. For example, what is
sustainable for one species of plant or animal may be unsustainable for other species of plant
or animal.
Does all of this mean that the concept of sustainability is useless? I don’t think so.
In its appropriate form, the idea of sustainability is so extremely appealing as an intuitive
conceptual device for thinking seriously about the environmental big-picture side of economic
development that it is di¢ cult to imagine how we might do without it. The approach taken
here is to adopt what I think is a particularly fruitful de…nition (out of the many possible
de…nitions) as follows. What we will understand here by the word “sustainability” – as
applied to a particular development program – is the sustainable-equivalent consumption
that the program generates. In other words, the sustainability of a development program
is to be identi…ed with the hypothetical constant level of consumption that would yield the
same wealth or welfare as the actual dynamic trajectory.
More formally, we de…ne sustainable-equivalent consumption (at time t) to be the hypothetical quasi-…xed forward-looking consumption level C S (t) that satis…es the equation
Z

t

1

e

r(x t)

C S (t) dx =

Z

1

e

r(x t)

C (x) dx:

(19)

t

“Sustainable-equivalent consumption” C S (t) signals to us (at time t) what future con14

sumption portends (on average) relative to current consumption C (t). If C S (t) > C (t)
then future consumption looks “better” (on average) than present consumption, or, loosely
speaking, the welfare level expressed by present consumption can be (more than) “sustained”
into the future . Conversely, if C S (t) < C (t) then future consumption looks “worse”(on average) than present consumption because the welfare level expressed by present consumption
cannot be “sustained”into the future.
Later it will be shown that
C S (t)

C (t) = P (t) I (t):

(20)

Equation (20) indicates that the di¤erence between sustainable-equivalent consumption C S (t) and current consumption C (t) is exactly captured quantitatively by current net
investment P (t) I (t). If C S (t) = C (t), then P (t) I (t) = 0, meaning that positive accumulation investments in produced means of production just exactly o¤set negative depletion
investments; in this razor’s-edge case, future consumption looks the same (on average) as
current consumption.17

7

What is Income?

Speaking generally, the proper de…nition of “income” is one of the most elusive subjects
in economics. It is also one of the most important, as witnessed by the great interest in
income accounting at all levels throughout the economy, including national income accounting. Whatever di¢ culties there may be in measuring income, such measures are attempted
very frequently in practice. Three great economists are associated with three di¤erent basic
approaches to de…ning income. In what follows, income at time t will be symbolized by the
notation Y (t).
For Irving Fisher, wealth was the primary concept and income was then de…ned as an
interest-like return on wealth.18 In the notation of this paper, Fisherian income YF (t) is
de…ned as
YF (t) rW (t):
(21)
Erik Lindahl (1934) argued that the income of a period should be identi…ed with the
sum of consumption plus the net increase of wealth over the period. In the notation of this
17

A variant of this situation is sometimes called “Hartwick’s rule,”after Hartwick (1977). On this subject,
see also Asheim, Bucholz, and Withagen (2003).
18
This is my paraphrasing of Fisher’s basic position. See for example Fisher (1906).

15

paper, “Lindahlian income”(at time t) YL (t) is de…ned as
YL (t)

_ (t):
C (t) + W

(22)

I think that it is fair to say that contemporary national income accounting is centered
conceptually on what is frequently identi…ed as the “Hicksian”concept of income. In John
Hicks’s own words, income is “the maximum amount which can be spent during a period if
there is to be an expectation of maintaining intact the capital value of prospective returns.”19
Hicks was well aware that all concepts of income are at best a “rough approximation”with
“far too much equivocation in their meaning” –as opposed to constituting a “strict logical
category.” He characterized examples of his own approach as “an approximation to the
central meaning of the income concept,” to be contrasted with “an analysis which aims at
logical precision.”
All of this notwithstanding, Hicks was …rm in his own mind about his “central meaning”
when he wrote “the calculation of income consists in …nding some sort of standard stream
of values whose present capitalized value equals the present value of the stream of receipts
which is actually in prospect. It is a standard stream in that it maintains some sort of
constancy, as against the actual expected stream of receipts, which may ‡uctuate in any
manner whatsoever ... We ask, not how much a person actually does receive in the current
week, but how much he would be receiving if he were getting a standard stream of the same
present value as his actual expected receipts. That amount is his income.”20
In a perceptive essay entitled “The Concept of Income in Economic Theory,” Nicholas
Kaldor has characterized Hicks’s approach to de…ning income as follows. “The novelty of
this [Hicks] approach to the income concept is that it eschews any connection between the
notion of income and the notion of capital. Fisher, Lindahl, and the other writers on the
subject invariably looked upon income as the yield derived from some given source: in the
case of Fisher, it is the net yield of capital goods after elimination of all ‘double counting’;
for the others, it is the net yield after deducting (or adding as the case may be) whatever
is necessary to maintain the ‘source’or the ‘corpus’intact. In Hicks’s approach the source
or corpus from which the income is derived disappears altogether as a separate entity –
capital appears only as the capitalized value of a certain future prospect and income as the
‘standard stream equivalent’ of that prospect. Capital and income are thus two di¤erent
ways of expressing the same thing, not two di¤erent things.”21
In the notation of this paper, Hicksian standard-stream-equivalent income (at time t)
19

All quotations attributed here to Hicks are taken from Hicks (1946), chapter 14.
Hicks (1946), page 184, emphasis (italics) in the original.
21
Kaldor (1955) chap. 5, sec. 4 (income as “standard stream”), italics (emphasis) in original.
20

16

YH (t) is de…ned as the forward-looking solution of the equation
Z

t

1

e

r(x t)

YH (t) dx =

Z

1

e

r(x t)

C (x) dx:

(23)

t

There is obviously a close connection between Hicksian standard-stream income YH de…ned by (23) and sustainable-equivalent consumption C S de…ned by (19). In fact, the two
are equal because they both satisfy the same equation.

8

Connecting the Concepts

In the model of this paper, a number of very strong assumptions have been made. But
then a very strong equivalence connection can be established among the various concepts
of the paper. Under perfectly-complete accounting, comprehensive income Y (t) equals
sustainable-equivalent consumption C S (t) equals Fisherian income YF (t) equals Lindahlian
income YL (t) equals Hicksian income YH (t). In symbols,
Y (t) = C S (t) = YF (t) = YL (t) = YH (t):

(24)

The proof of proposition (24) comes from the following set of equivalences.
Sustainable-equivalent consumption equals Hicksian income equals Fisherian income because (from comparing (19), (23) and making use of (13), (21))
R 1 r(x t)
Z 1
e
C (x) dx
t R
C S (t) = YH (t) =
e
=r
1
e r(x t) dx
t
t

r(x t)

C (x) dx = r W (t) = YF (t): (25)

Lindahlian income equals Fisherian income equals comprehensive income because (from
combining together (22), (14), (21), (18), and (12))
_ (t) = rW (t) = YF (t) = C (t) + P (t) I (t) = Y (t):
YL (t) = C (t) + W

(26)

The central result (24) indicates a strong sense of how future welfare may be compressed
into present income, however present income is de…ned (within reason).

9

Concluding Remarks on Wealth and Income

The toy model of this paper is starkly oversimpli…ed. It is being presented at an extremely
high level of abstraction. Many strong assumptions have been made to obtain the strong

17

equivalences of (24). Readers can make up their own minds, but I think that this toy model
is useful as a conceptual framework for thinking rigorously about wealth and income (and
sustainability and accounting). The concepts explored here are deceptively tricky and it is
hard for me to see how else they might be crisply exposited and rigorously analyzed.
The overarching theme of this paper is the tight relationship between comprehensive
wealth and comprehensive income. To paraphrase Kaldor,22 in the toy model being presented here properly-accounted wealth and properly-accounted income are (at least in principle and at a high level of abstraction) two di¤erent ways of expressing the same thing, not
two di¤erent things. Several consequences emerge from the basic duality between wealth (or
welfare) and income. In this conclusion I mention only what I consider to be perhaps the
single most important prototype application.
Question: how can money income be used to make welfare comparisons of the same
economy over time (or di¤erent economies across space)? Answer (at the high level of
simpli…cation and abstraction of this paper, with both economies having the same constant
rate of return on consumption): one situation gives higher present discounted consumption
than the other if and only if current comprehensive income (with the single consumption good
as the common real numeraire) is higher in the one situation than in the other.
The above answer to the most basic question about the relation between current money
income and future welfare is so simple that its power can easily be overlooked. Imagine
any two dynamic economies. The two economies might be arbitrarily di¤erent. They
may have completely di¤erent endowments or completely di¤erent production opportunities.
For example, one economy may have mineral reserves, but cannot use machines to grow.
Another economy may be able to use accumulated machines to grow but lacks mineral
resources. And so forth. The only thing in common between the two economies is that
they are both behaving as if they are maximizing present discounted consumption at the
same discount rate. The two economies may be grinding out completely di¤erent growth
trajectories.
Suppose we want to compare dynamic welfare between the two economies. We want to
know what is the di¤erence between the two in present discounted consumption. Suppose
further that the only thing we can observe about the two economies is their current real
comprehensive income with the single consumption good as numeraire. (This is equivalent
here to observing money income in both economies and being able to convert the money
income of one economy into the monetary units of the other by using as a price de‡ator socalled “purchasing power parity,” which here is just the ratio of the two consumption-good
money prices.) The observing economist knows nothing else about these two economies
22

Kaldor (1955) chap. 5, sec. 4 (income as “standard stream”).

18

except their real national income.
Then the striking result is that the numerical di¤erence in present discounted consumption between the above two economies is exactly the numerical di¤erence in real comprehensive income divided by the consumption discount rate. With complete accounting in this
situation, all relevant information for making dynamic future welfare comparisons is contained in current comprehensive income. Such a result is remarkable because it means that
changes in forward-looking welfare can (at least in principle and under strong assumptions)
be picked up exactly by changes in the ‡ow of comprehensive current income.
Frankly,
what I think is remarkable here is not so much that strong abstractions are required to obtain
the strong equivalences of (24), but that such strong equivalences as (24) exist at all under
recognizable abstractions. In this highly-idealized situation, current comprehensive income
is a su¢ cient statistic for any dynamic welfare comparisons. To state this proposition rigorously, and to explore its numerous rami…cations, is, I think, the main contribution of the
present paper.

References
[1] Asheim, Geir, Wolfgang Bucholz, and Cees Withagen (2003). “The Hartwick Rule:
Myths and Facts.”Environmental and Resource Economics, 25, 129-150.
[2] Feldstein, Martin (1997). “The Costs and Bene…ts of Going from low in‡ation to Price
Stability.” In C.D. Romer and D.H. Romer, eds, Reducing In‡ation: Motivation and
Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[3] Fisher, Irving (1906). The Nature of Capital and Income. New York: Macmillan.
[4] Hamilton, Kirk, and John Hartwick (2014). “Wealth and Sustainability.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 30 (1), 170-187.
[5] Hicks, John R. (1946). Value and Capital. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[6] Hartwick, John M. (1977). “Intergenerational Equity and the Investment of Rents from
Exhaustible Resources.”American Economic Review, 65, 972-4.
[7] Jorgenson, Dale W. (1994). “Investment and Economic Growth.” The Simon Kuznets
Lectures, Yale University.
[8] Kaldor, Nicholas (1955). An Expenditure Tax. London: Allen and Unwin.

19

[9] Lindahl, Erik (1934). “The Concept of Income.” In G. Bagge, ed., Economic Essays in
Honor of Gustaf Cassel. London: George Allen & Unwin.
[10] Nordhaus, William D. (1994). Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of
Climate Change. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
[11] Pezzey, John (1992). “Sustainable Development Concepts: An Economic Analysis.”
World Bank Environment Paper no. 2. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
[12] Solow, Robert M. (1963). Capital Theory and the Rate of Return. Amsterdam: NorthHolland Publishing Company.
[13] Solow, Robert M. (1970). Growth Theory: An Exposition. New York: Oxford University
Press.
[14] Weitzman, Martin L. (1970). “Aggregation and Disaggregation in the Pure Theory of
Capital and Growth: A New Parable.” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper no. 292,
Yale University. Accessible at cowles.yale.edu/cfdp.
[15] Weitzman, Martin L. (1976). “On the Welfare Signi…cance of National Product in a
Dynamic Economy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 90: 156–162.
[16] Weitzman, Martin L. (2003). Income, Wealth, and the Maximum Principle. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press.
[17] World Commission on Environment and Development (1987). Our Common Future
(“The Bruntland Report”). New York: Oxford University Press.

20

