NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC RENTS DERIVED FROM
HOSPITAL PRIVILEGES IN THE
MARKET FOR PODIATRIC SERVICES

Richard C. Frank
Jonathan P. Weiner
Donald M. Steinwachs
David S. Salkever

Working Paper No. 2207

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1987

We are grateful to Jean Mitchell, Steven Kiepper, Michael Morrissey, Joseph
Newhouse and an anonymous referee for useful comments on earlier drafts;
and to Beth Helgeson for expert research assistance. This research was
partially supported by the American Podiatric Medical Association. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Health
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2207
April 1987

Economic Rents Derived from Hospital Privileges
in the Market for Podiatric Services

ABSTRACT

This, study examines the relative impacts of human capital and market

conditions on the economic rents associated with hospital privileges in the
market for footcare. An empirical model of hospital privileges for podiatrists
is formulated based on the Pauly-Redisch model of hospital behavior. The
privilege model is then incorporated into a model of podiatrists' earnings via a

selection adjustment as proposed by Heckman and Lee. The results indicate the
persistance of economic rents even after controlling for unobserved "quality"
factors.

Richard G. Frank
Jonathan P. Weiner
Donald M. Steinwachs
David S. Salkever
Health Services Research and
Development Center
Johns Hopkins University
624 North Broadway

Baltimore, MD 21205

Introduction

Hospitals are centrally concerned with the competence of the practitioners

who have access to their facility. One of the main mechanisms for controlling
the quality of medical practice within a hospital is policy related to the

granting of hospital privileges to practitioners. This is particularly true
since the 1966 Darling v. Charleston Community Hospital Case1 which extended the
scope of malpractice liability beyond the individual practitioner to the hospi-.

tal. Hospitals were found, in the Darling case as well as others, to bear legal
responsibility for the quality of care delivered by their medical staffs. This
created an incentive for hospitals to be very selective in the granting of staff
privileges.
The medical profession is a key influence in developing national guidelines

for the granting of hospital staff priveleges. Moreover, since hospital staffs
are comprised largely of physicians, that profession exerts substantial
influence on policy towards staff privileges, especially at the level of the

individual hospital. While on one hand physicians are in an excellent position
to judge professional competence, they are also in a position to use their
influence to advance their economic interests by excluding competitors.

Obtaining hospital staff privileges may be critical to an individual prac-

titioner's economic viability. Hospital privileges determine whether providers
have any access to a hospitalts surgical facilities, thereby defining the scope
of procedures that they may perform and whether they are permitted to admit

patients. For non—physician health professionals, the importance of privileges
depends on the inpatient potential of their practices. The absence of access to
a hospital may also have concommitant effects on the outpatient portion of a

provider's practice. If a non-physician provider without privileges competes with
a physician with privileges the non—physician provider may be viewed as less

—2desirable because he/she does not offer a "full product line." This is particularly important in health care where there is uncertainty on the part of a
patient as to:

1) the nature of their medical problem, and 2) the most

appropriate treatment for their condition.
In the research reported here we analyze the economic consequences of

obtaining various levels of hospital staff privileges for podiatrists. We specifically address the determinants of staff privileges focusing on the relative

influence of quality and competitive factors. We then trace the impact of those
privileges on the earnings of podiatrists. We provide estimates of the "rents"
arising from full access to hospital facilities controlling for quality dif-

ferences between providers. The paper is organized as follows: In the next
section we provide background information on the market. The third section
describes the empirical model of podiatric earnings. The fourth section
describes the econometric technique used to assess the effect of privileges on

earnings. The fifth and final sections report results and conclusions.

Background

In 1982 there were roughly 9500 actively practicing Doctors of Podiatric
Medicine (DPMs) in the United States. Approximately 70 percent of podiatrists have
some access to hospital facilities. Fifty-four percent have staff privileges
that are equivalent to those granted to physicians. Podiatrists are concentrated in metropolitan areas on the east and west coasts. The average annual
earnings of podiatrists are about $57,000. In contrast general practitioners
earn roughly $68,000 and general surgeons $145,000. Podiatrists are in a rather
unique position with respect to their scope of practice. While they have not
enjoyed the unrestricted scope of practice of physicians, they have progressed

considerably further than other non—physician health care professionals. For
example, unlike psychologists, podiatrist services are paid for by third party
payors in the same fashion as their medical counterparts.

—3—

Podiatrists are overwhelmingly located in urban areas, 95% are located in
cornniunities with populations over 10,000. They provide an average of roughly 79

visits per week to 69 patients. Most podiatrists spend the majority of their
time in private office based practice. Eighty nine percent spend over fifty
percent of their time in such practice. Only about 14 percent devote at
least 10 percent of their time to hospital inpatient practice. The vase
majority of podiatrists report that the majority of their time is spent in the
general practice of podiatry as opposed to surgery, foot orthopedics, or sports

medicine. Podiatrists spend an average of 15 percent of their time performing
surgery2•

It has been estimated that approximately 20 percent of an orthopedist's patient

visits involve treatment of foot and ankle problems3• Orthopedists provide the
majority of foot surgery undertaken by physicians. Overall orthopedic surgeons are
estimated to perform roughly 13 percent of all elective foot surgery as opposed
to 64 percent provided by podiatrists4•

The 1979, Joint Commission on Accrediation of Hospitals (JCAH) standards stated
that medical staff membership is limited to "individuals who are currently fully

licensed to practice medicine and, in addition to licensed dentists"5• However,
podiatrists may also become members of the "medical staff" under the JCAH rules. To
include podiatrists, the hospitals must make bylaws with specific references to

podiatric services. The scope and extent of surgical privileges granted must be
defined for each podiatrist as is done for all medical staff surgical privileges. A
second level of a hospital's staff membership, is the "professional" or "clinical"

privilege. In the case of podiatrists, such membership may offer a range of limited
privileges such as the ability to consult on patients who are hospitalized for
non podiatric problems, or the ability to perform podiatric surgery in hospital

-4-

operating rooms as long as a physician admits the patient. Also, a consultation with a physician is generally required prior to surgery.
The level and intensity of training obtained by podiatrists has changed

dramatically since as late as 1962 (when the last major revisions in DPM educa-

tion were made). Podiatric training occurs in one of 7 podiatric colleges.
Ninety percent of the students admitted to podiatry schools have at least a bac-

calureate degree. Once admitted to podiatry school the course of training
requires four years. The first two years involve classroom and laboratory study
in the basic sciences such as biology, physiology, pathology, etc. The last two
years are oriented largely towards clinical subjects and supervised patient

care. The clinical subjects include areas such as dermatology, neurology, and
general surgery among others. After successful completion of the four year
program students are awarded the Doctor of Podiatric Medicine degree.

In

recent years it has become increasingly popular to follow receipt of the DPM
degree with additional training in the form of a hospital residency (usually

lasting one year). As the rigor of the podiatric training has increased, so has
the perceived competence and acceptance of podiatrists.
Today, 37 of the states have laws that specifically allow or mandate full

medical privileges for podiatrists5

Organized medicine has been identified with

activities designed to restrict podiatrists' access to hospitals.6 Anecdotal
evidence on efforts to exclude podiatrists range from actions by associations of
orthopedic surgeons to less formal efforts of such physicians on the staffs of

individual hospitals.7 Thus, interprofessional rivalry may play some part in
making access to hospital privileges vary substantially across the nation.

—5—

However, since the level of training has changed rapidly in the podiatry profession, there is also likely to be considerable variation in the technical

skills of licensed podiatrists. For these reasons we are interested in empirically assessing the importance of factors related to both technical proficiency
and market conditions in explaining access to hospital staff privileges among
podiatrists.

An_Empirical Model of E am ig1_Differentials

In

this section we describe our empirical model of podiatrists' earnings.

We view analysis of wage differentials among podiatrists as being potentially

clouded by selectivity issues. Observed outcomes in earnings are based on prior
decisions concerning the granting of hospital staff privileges.

That is, earn-

ings of podiatrists are only observed after they have either been granted or

denied some type of hospital privilege. The earnings that occur under other
scenarios (types of privileges) are not observed for an individual podiatrist.
In addition, the granting of privileges is likely to depend on observed factors,
such as educational attainment and certification, as well as unobserved factors
such as specific clinical and interpersonal skills.

For these reasons we adopt

the approach of Heckman and Lee to the analysis of earnings under conditions of

selectivity.8 Following that approach we propose a two stage approach to estimation of earnings differences associated with varying types of staff privi-

leges. In the first stage we estimate a model of the determinants of staff
privileges, while in the second stage we estimate a model of earnings
controlling for selectivity effects.

We begin our analysis of the determinants of type of privileges with the
assumption that all podiatrists would prefer to have access to full medical

staff privileges at a hospital. Thus, variation in the possession of privileges
depends on decisions made by individual hospitals' medical staffs. As described
above there are three levels of staff privileges: 1) no privileges;

-6-

2) professional or clinical; and 3) medical staff. We posit the existence of
two principal reasons for a hospital not to grant medical staff privileges to a

podiatrist: a) concern about quality of care; and b) interprofessional competition.

Our model of the economics of interprofessional relations in hospitals draws on

the work of Pauly and Redisch9. We assume that decisions regarding the granting of
privileges and the size of the medical staff are dominated by the medical staff of

each individual hospital (this has become less true since 1984). Factors outside the
direct control of the medical staff, such as hospital beds, the stock of podiatrists and
the stock of physicians in the market are assumed to be taken as fixed by the medical

staff in its decisions to grant privileges to individual providers. The medical
staff of the hospital is assumed to make decisions on the basis of majority rule

thereby reflecting the preferences of the median voter. Following Pauly and Redisch
we view the interests of the medical staff to be the maximization of the average

income of staff members. We posit that the medical staff chooses the income maximizing levels of each type of provider (eg. pediatricians, cardiologists and foot

specialists). The equilibrium level of the medical staff in this model was shown by
Pauly and Redisch to occur where the marginal revenue product (MRPo) and average

revenue product (ARP0) of medical staff members are equal. This is shown in Figure
1. Given the equilibrium foot specialist staff size of M*, medical staffs are
hypothesized to try to select M* qualified orthopedists and then fill in any

shortfall with podiatrists. Thus, in contrast to the Pauly-Redisch model we assume
that in the short run the size of the medical staff is variable but the bed size of the
hospital -is not. These assumptions allow us to present the following hypotheses:

1) The greater the supply of orthopedists in a market area the lower the probability that a podiatrist will obtain staff privileges. This occurs because orthope—
dists, being licensed physicians, are more complementary inputs to the rest of the

—7-

medical staff than are podiatrists whose scope of activities are limited by

training and medical practice acts. This means that orthopedists have higher
marginal products than podiatrists. For these reasons medical staffs will try
to reach M* with physician providers of foot care. The more plentiful the supply,
the more likely they can reach M*.
2) Markets with greater numbers of beds, ceterus paribus, will be more

likely to grant privileges to podiatrists. This hypothesis derives from tracing
the change in the equilibrium medical staff, in our shortrun model, resulting

from an increase in the number of hospital beds. While the Pauly-Redisch
formulation does not lead to unambiguous comparative statics results, our
hypothesis can be obtained by imposing several plausible restrictions on the
production and demand constraints in the model. They are that the second partial
derivative of quantity demanded with respect to price be non—negative, and that
the production function for hospital services display positive cross partial

derivatives of output with respect to medical staff and beds (this result

appears in the appendix). The result of these restrictions can be seen on
Figure 1. An increase in the number of beds would shift both the MRP and ARP
curves to the right. This results in a larger equilibrium size of the medical
staff (M**), which increases a podiatrist's chances of being offered staff
privileges.
Given this theoretical frame work we specify our empirical model of
podiatrist privileges (L) in the following manner:

(1) L = L(D, HC, Market, Regulation)

-8-

Demographic characteristics of podiatrists (D) are included as control

variables. These are age, sex, and race.1' Because the nature of podiatric
training has changed dramatically over time as have the prerequisites for
admission to podiatry school, age is included in the model. The relationship is specified as quadratic because we expect that younger podiatrists
are not yet established in the community while old podiatrists are less
well trained.
In order to measure the level of technical preparation of a podiatrist

(HC) we measure two types of credentials. First, is whether the podiatrist
has completed a formal residency program, usually comprised of post-

graduate hospital based surgical training. The second credential measured
is whether a podiatrist has qualified for board certification. Both of
these variables indicate advanced training in surgical techniques, often
key issues in a hospital's appraisal of the quality of an applicant for

privileges. (It should be noted that residency training is not a necessary
prerequisite for obtaining board certification.)

—9-

The theoretical model described above characterizes the medical staff as
viewing the stock of podiatrists and physicians and the number of beds as fixed.

Our specification of market conditions therefore consists of four variables. They
are the orthopedist to population ratio, the podiatrist to population ratio, the bed

to population ratio and the ratio of other physicians to the population in the
market. The stock of other physicians is included because a number of them provide
some footcare.

Finally, we include several indicators of the overall environment for the

practice of podiatry. The presence of a podiatry school or residency training
program is included as an indicator of the costs to medical staffs of obtaining

information about podiatrists. The presence of a school or training program is
hypothesized to lower such costs because staff physicians interact with faculty and

students in the training program. This variable also serves as a proxy for the
existance of a podiatry service in hospitals (a condition for podiatrists to receive

privileges in JCAH standards). A variable which indicates whether podiatrists are
restricted by state law to performing procedures on the foot only is also entered

into the model (Regulation). A number of states define the scope of podiatric practice
to include the foot and ankle or all areas below the knee. More restrictive regulations on the scope of practice are likely to be associated with a reluctance to grant
full medical privileges to podiatrists.'2

This variable captures the regulatory cli-

mate in a state. We also include regional durrny variables to control for a variety
of unmeasured factors that have been shown to vary across geographic areas.

-10-

The second stage of our analysis involves estimation of an earnings model.
At the core of our model is the human capital formulation of earnings.'3

That

is, the earnings of a podiatrist are hypothesized to depend on investments in
education, on-the-job training and the development of other attributes which

enhance productivity. Besides attributes that result from individual choices,
a variety of structural features in the market for foot care that may affect the

earnings of podiatrists are also taken into account. For example, because the
quality of a provider is difficult to judge and because information is costly

there may be returns to obtaining a "quality related" certification. Thus, in
addition to describing education, residency training and years of experience we
include a variable which indicates whether a podiatrist has been board certi-

fied. We also describe market conditions in the market for footcare. The
intensity of both inter and intraprofessional competition is measured by the
podiatrist to population ratio and the orthopedist to population ratio.

Since the scope of practice may be limited by state law, we include the
variable indicating if podiatrists are limited to performing procedures on the

foot only. We also control for several demand characteristics of the market
place. These include: the population over the age of 65 years, and the per
capita income of the population in the market area. The presence of foot
problems is particularly prevalent among the elderly.'4

It is therefore impor-

tant to control for this population attribute.

Finally, podiatrists' earnings are hypothesized to depend on access to

hospital facilities. Our view of this mechanism is rather straight forward. A
key element in the economics of podiatric practice is the development and main-

tenance of a professional relationship with a patient. The podiatrist who cannot offer a full line of service because he or she does not have access to a

—11—

hospital loses income due to restrictions on his or her ability to offer inpatient

care. A podiatrist with access to the hospital but not full medical privileges
must in part surrender professional control of patients who need to be hospitalized for their foot care. The loss of patients may extend beyond the hospital
if providers offering inpatient services are viewed as more attractive to

patients in need of outpatient services. We would therefore expect that,
other factors equal, podiatrists with full medical privileges will have the highest
earnings, followed by those with some staff privileges and lastly those with no
privil eges 15

Thtta_Tec h n i q ue
The econometric problem is to compare the earnings of individual podiatrists
with a particular set of attributes when they have various levels of hospital

privileges. The main difficulty in making this comparison is that individual
podiatrists with differing levels of hospital privileges may differ along lines

we do not observe. For example, there are a variety of attributes concerning a
podiatrist's reputation, interpersonal skills, and technical skill level that we

cannot measure. In addition, we observe the conduct of competition in the market
in rather crude ways. Thus, it is likely that a standard earnings equation such
as that of Griliches'3 would leave certain characteristics of individuals and the

markets within which they operate uncontrolled. This raises the possibility of
omitted variables bias. It is to address this problem that the techniques of

Heckman'6 and Lee17 were developed. Our description of the estimation approach
draws on the expositions of Lee18, Dornenrich and McFadden'9 and Maddala.2°

We can describe the analysis of podiatrist earnings (W) within the context
of an ordered polychotomous choice situation where there are three categories for

—12—

selection (full medical privileges, staff privileges

and no privileges)

(2) Wj X1 Bc +
(3)

'ci

= Z1 d +

ci

where Xci is a vector of exogenous factors which determine earnings and Zci IS a

vector of exogenous influences on the type of privileges granted the (ith)

podiatrist as described in (1) above. E(uc Xc ,

Z)

=

0;

Wc is observed only

if the c th category is selected. I is a polychotomous response variable which
in our study may take the value of 0, 1 and 2.21 In our case since we consider

a hiearchical choice, it may be particularly reasonable to assume that a single
distribution underlies the choice response IC. This enables us to use an ordered
polychotomouS logit model to obtain estimates for the distribution function

underlying Il9. Using these first stage estimates we apply the two stage
approach of Heckman and Lee. The first stage estimates are used to calculate the
inverse of the Mills ratio (x).22

In

the second stage we add

to the three earnings equations implied by

equation (2) as regressors.23 The second stage can be expressed as follows:

(4a) WNPI =
(4b)

(4c)

=

X1

BNP + bNp ANPi + VNpj

Xj Bp +

bp

WMpj = X1 8MP + bMP

XSPi +
XMPi + VMPI

where MP, SP and NP are medical privileges, staff privileges and no privileges

respectively. Use of ordinary least squares results in consistent estimates of
the B's. The variance estimates are biased in an unknown direction as pointed
out by Greene24 and Maddala25. Two sets of problems have been associated with

the use of two stage estimators. They are 1)

collinearity between the X's and

if the variables in Z are the same as in X; and 2) non-robust estimates of

B's.24 The first problem is avoided since our two models contain different

variables. The dummy for presence of podiatry schools or residency programs
was excluded on a priori grounds because

it was viewed as to related to the

—13—

costs of assessing quality of podiatrists rather than determinants of earnings

(see note 12). The Beds variable was excluded on empirical grounds. We experimented
with beds in the earnings equations arid found the coefficients to be close to zero

and not significant (see note 15). To examine the second problem we made a number of
specification changes in the privilege selection equation and examined the resulting

estimates. Few visible differences were noted and no statistically significant differences were found.

The key comparison for the purposes of this paper is to compare WNP, W5p,
and WMP holding constant both observed and unobserved characteristics of the

podiatrist and the market within which he or she operates. We use the traditional single log specification of the earnings model given by equations (4a)

through (4c). This means that predictions of Wc must be transformed into
natural units. Assuming normality of the error term, the predicted earnings
for individual i with privilege class c is
(5) Wci =

exptX'

+

(S2)3

where Sc is the standard error of the estimate andA indicates an estimator.
The arithmetic mean is therefore a function of the geometric mean texp(XiBc)]

and its variance. The coefficient estimators are consistent. This is riot
necessarily the case for estimates of the arithmetic mean. The estimator will
be inconsistent if the Vcj distribution is not normal. Assuming departures from
normality, however, would be inconsistent with the assumptions underlying the

Heckman—Lee approach. We therefore rely on the transformation given in equation
(5) 26

Data

The data used for analysis of the earnings of podiatrists were drawn from a

survey conducted between November of 1983 and September of 1984. The survey was

-14-

conducted by researchers at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI) under
contract to the American Podiatric Medical Association (APMA).

A questionnaire

aimed at collecting a variety of information on the practices of podiatrists,
their attitudes towards work and their backgrounds was distributed to 9,746

podiatrists with mailing addresses. Four thousand eight hundred seventy three
questionnaires were returned for a response rate of 50.3 percent. The response rate
varied somewhat by region of the country.
In order to trace consequences of the variation in response rate by state we

probed the existing data for evidence of systematic bias. We weighted the VP! data
to reflect the national distribution of podiatrists and compared the demographic

characteristics of the weighted to the unweighted sample. The only difference
observed was in the portion of podiatrists in the 35 to 44 and 45 to 65 year old age

groups. These differences were small and not statistically significant. The lack of
other information precluded further analysis of non-response influences.
For the purposes of analyzing the economics of podiatric practice we

augmented the VPI data with data from two other principal sources: the area
resouce file (ARF) and a compilation of state regulations that govern the prac-

tice of podiatry. The ARF contains information on the availability of various
health care resources at the county and metropolitan statistical area (MSA)

level. Included among these health care resources are the number of physicians
by specialty, the number of hospital beds, various demographic characteristics

of the population in a geographical region. The data on regulations were compiled by the APMA. The regulations included specific statutes that restrict the
scope of podiatric practice and limit the types of technologies that can be used

by podiatrists.27 Table 1 reports definitions, means, standard deviations and
sources for key variables included in the analysis.

-15—

It should be noted that the analysis file was constructed so that market areas

were associated with individual podiatrists. The market areas were defined as MSAs.
This resulted in the exclusion of 801 podiatrists practicing outside of MSAs. The
analysis data set was thereby reduced to 4,072 podiatrists. The VPI survey asked
podiatrists their net income from podiatric practice. This response was
coded in $20,000 categories. The earnings variable was constructed by taking
the mean of each category and dividing that number by the number of weekly hours
spent in podiatric practice times forty—eight (the average number of weeks worked per

year).28 Clearly there is measurement error in this variable, however since it is
used only as a left hand side variable the consequence is to add "noise0 to the data.

The remainder of the variables described in Table 1 are measured in a rather

straight forward fashion as described in the table. (Copies of the questionnaire are
available from the authors).
Results

Table 2 presents the first stage polychotoinous logit estimates for the type

of hospital privileges held by a podiatrist. These results are interesting in
their own right. Our measures of training are the most important variables for
explaining type of hospital privilege held by a podiatrist. Both the Residency
and Board certification variables have estimated coefficients which are positive
and significantly different from zero at conventional levels.

The possession

of board certification appears to dominate residency training. This indicates
the importance of obtaining a "brand name" in order to signal quality to consumers with poor information.

The indicators of market conditions were, by and large, estimated to have

impacts consistent with our hypotheses.29 The orthopedist to population ratio was
estimated to have a negative and significant effect on the likelihood of a podiatrist

-16-

obtaining privileges. This is consistent with our view of the decision
making model of medical staffs. The beds variable was positive and significant
which is also in keeping with the Pauly-Redisch model presented above. The coefficient estimate for the DPM variable is positive and significant. This finding is
difficult to interpret.30 In order to test the sensitivity of the model to this
variable

we omitted it and reestimated the model. The coefficient estimates

were not significantly altered by the change (results are available from the

authors).31 The results for the podiatry school and training program coefficient
suggest that podiatrists in areas with training programs have a higher probabi-

lity of obtaining privileges than do those in other areas. This result is consistent with the notion that the costs of assessing quality are lower where
training programs exist.

Finally, our variable which indicates regulatory restrictions on scope of
podiatric practice (limiting providers to procedures on the foot only) had
essentially no impact on the likelihood of a podiatrist holding hospital

privileges. This suggests that hospitals in states with policies that restrict
the practice of podiatry do not exert significant influence on individual hospital
decisions to grant privileges.
Table 3 presents results of the two stage earnings model estimates by type

of hospital privileges. The coefficient estimates generally display similar

patterns across equations. The R2 statistics range from 0.13 to 0.22.
Several specific results are worth noting prior to assessing the earnings

differentials associated with hospital privileges. The impact of board certification is large and significant. For podiatrists with no hospital privileges obtaining board certification increases earnings approximately 28 percent.32
Similar results occur for those podiatrists with partial privileges, while the effect

-17—

is considerably smaller for podiatrists with full medical privileges (17 per cent).
Completion of a residency seems to have little effect on earnings for podiatrists

with less than full medical privileges. The negative and significant estimate for
the Residency variable in the full privileges equation is anomalous. One possible
explanation for this finding is that a number of board certified podiatrists were
"grand fathered" into board certification and earn more without having been residency

trained. We probed this possibility by creating interaction terms with age,
residency status and board certification. The results did not change
significantly with the inclusion of interaction terms. The regulation of scope
of practice variable, which is equal to one when podiatric practice is limited
to the foot only, had a negative and significant impact on earnings for cases on

no privileges or full privileges. The coefficients suggest a 9 to 14 percent
decrease in earnings attributable to these statutes. The scope of practice
regulation coefficient for the partial privileges equation was negative but not
significant at conventional levels.
In assessing the 't' tests reported on Tables 2 and 3 it is important
to recognize that if there are "permanent market effects" in the observed
geographic areas the regression disturbance terms for individual podiatrists

from the same geographic areas will be correlated. This autocorrelation results
in downwardly biased estimates of standard errors. The variables describing the
market areas (e.g. orthopedists per capita) are especially likely to be affected

by autocorrelation. In order to take this possibility into account we estimated
aggregate privilege and wage equation models for the 287 geographic areas in
the sample.

The results for the privileges model indicates that two coefficients had

considerable bias in their estimated t statistics. They were the orthopedist to

-18-

population ratio and the presence of a podiatry school or training program.

Their t statistics fell from 4.85 to 2.02 and 5.15 to 2.48 respectively. In
both cases while there was considerable bias we could still reject the null
hypothesis at the 0.05 level.
For the wage equations there were no significant changes in the estimate t

statistics. For example in the estimates of full privileges the t for the orthopedist to population ratio is 2.07 on Table 3 and was 2.27 for the aggregate wage

equation. Similarly the standard errors for per capita income and the podiatrist to
population ratio were unaffected.
Table 4 reports comparisons between simple mean hourly earnings, predicted
hourly earnings based on OLS estimates and predictions using the Heckman-Lee
estimates. Predicted earnings were calculated for the entire sample (all 4,072

podiatrists). Thus the two sets of predicted earnings are expected to differ from
the simple means for the three privilege types because we use the full sample to pre-

dict earnings for each type of privilege status. The characteristics of podiatrists
in the full sample differ significantly from those of podiatrists in the subsets that

have been selected into each privilege class. The results suggest that when selection effects are taken into account the earnings differentials attributable to
hospital privileges increase for full privileges and are the same for professional
privileges.

The rents from obtaining full medical hospital staff privileges
amount to approximately $10.34 per hour over not having any access to the hospital

using the Heckman-Lee model. The predictions based on the OLS model indicate
a $5.16 per hour difference in earnings due to the possession of full medical

privileges over no privileges. The impact of unobserved factors correlated with

-19-.

selection is therefore considerable. For the Heckman-Lee model the difference
between full and no privileges earnings was significant at the 0.05 level (using

a two tailed test). The difference for the OLS predictions was not significant.
The difference between medical and professional privileges was not significantly

different from zero at conventional levels in either model. The results suggest
that controlling for both observed and unobserved market and provider attributes
there is a substantial economic rent to be collected from the possession of full

medical staff privileges. If only observed attributes are taken into account the

rents associated with privileges are quite small. Moreover, as the first stage
estimates indicate, factors related to the training and skill of a podiatrist as
well as the market forces are important in assignment of hospital privileges.

-20-

Conclusions

This study was undertaken to address several issues. First, was a
determination of the extent to which after controlling for both characteristics
of the individual podiatrist and the market within which he or she operates rents are

collected from acquiring hospital privileges. A second objective was to assess the
relative contribution of market conditions versus the training and credentials of a podiatrist to variation in podiatrist earnings.

Our results indicate that there are significant differences in the earnings

of podiatrists according to the hospital privileges they hold. These differences
occur only when one controls for observed and unobserved characteristics of the

podiatrist and his or her market environment. When we controlled for only
observed factors, estimated earnings differences between those podiatrists having no
privileges and those with full privileges were small ($5.16 per hour). There are
however, substantial rents ($10.34 per hour) associated with hospital privileges
when one uses the selection bias model to measure them.

This result appears to be counter intuitive. That is, one might expect earnings
differentials to close when "unmeasured quality" is controlled. We interpret the
result as suggesting that the unmeasured quality attributes are most useful in hospi-

tal based practice. Examples of such attributes might include skill in specialized
surgical procedures and use of specialized technologies (e.g.; lasers) for performing

foot surgery. Thus, podiatrists with these specialized skills and interests need
full privileges to realize their earnings potential.

Market conditions play a substantial role in indirectly determining
earnings by their role in explaining which podiatrists are most likely to obtain

hospital privileges. They also directly influence the demand for podiatrist
services and thereby put downward pressure on earnings. Indicators of training

—21-.

and technical proficiency also exert important influence on earnings differen-

tials for podiatrists. In both the privileges and earnings equations the individual human capital attributes of podiatrists had substantial explanatory power.

The importance of competitive factor appears to decrease as access to the hospital
becomes more complete.
Finally, our results lend support to the Pauly-Redisch characterization of

hospital staffing decisions. Further probing of staffing behavior using other models
would constitute a worthwhile next step.

Footnotes

1.

Darlingys._Charleston COmmyiiL±!.05PitJ. 331

Ill. 2nd 326, 211 N.E. 2 d

253, Certification denied 383 u.s. 946 1966.

2. American Podiatric Medical Association, Profile of Podiatric Medicine
1984, Washington, D.C.: American Podiatric Medical Association 1984.
3. U.S.DHHS, Office Visits to Orthopedic Surgeons, National Ambulatory
Medical Care Survey: 1980-81, NCHS Advance Data No. 117 DHHS Pub
#(PHS86-1250).

4. Weiner J.P., Steinwachs D.M., Frank R.6. and Schwartz K. "Effective
Podiatric Foot Surgery: The Relative Roles of Doctors of Podiatric
Medicine and Orthopedic Surgeons", American J. Public Health (in press).

5. Parrot 0., Profile of Hospital Podiatry,
71:646-656, 1981.

6. Lazarus W., Levine, E.S. and Levin, L.S. Competition_Amona Health
Practitioners: The Influence of the Medicil_Póession on the Health Man-

aL_; The Federal Trade Commission, Washington, D.C. February IT.
7.

op cit IV 44-45.

8. Heckman, J.J. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error"
Econornetrica 47 (January 1979) 153-161; and Lee, L.F. "Unionism and Wage
Rates: A Simultaneous Equations Model with Qualitative and Limited Dependent Variables" International Economic Review 19 (June 1978) 415—433.
9. Pauly M.V. and Redisch M. "The Not-For-Profit Hospital as a Physicians
63(1) 1973, 87-99.
Cooperative", American EconornicR
10. From
who
the
are

discussions with several hospital administrators and Michael Morrissey,
recently completed a survey of hospital medical staff decision making,
median voter approach appears appropriate for larger urban hospitals which
likely to be those most relevent to podiatrists in this study in 1982.

11. We experimented with a % female variable since women tend to have more
foot problems. However, it was zero in all models and other coefficient
estimates were not effected by the removal of the variable

Footnotes (continued)

12. 37 States have passed laws in support of privileges for podiatrists. Very
few podiatrists practice in state without such laws because they are smaller
rural states (Mississippi , North Dakota). Thus as well as having a direct
measure of regulatory restrictiveness (limitations to the foot only) we
view the poridatry school variable as an exogenous in this shortrun model.
Moreover it serves as an identifying variable with use of the two stop
estimator.

13. See Griliches, Z. "Wages of Very Young Men" Journal
of_PoliticaL Econom.
—
——____
84(4) Part II 1976 69-86.

14.

We also experimented with this variable in the privilege equation where
it had a t statistic of 0.25. Thus we excluded it from that model.

15. Beds could be considered for inclusion in the earning model. The rationale
for this seems weak because for those DPMs with no privileges beds are
dearly irrelevant. For those with full privileges they may matter. In
order to test this proposition we entered the beds variable into the
earning equations. The t statistics ranged from 0.21 to 0.50. We therefore exclude this questionable variable from the final specifications.

16. Heckman op cit ref. 8.

17. Lee op cit ref 8.
18. Lee, L.F. "Approaches to the Correction of Selectivity Bias" Review of
Economic Studies 49:357—82.
19. Domencich, T. and McFadden, D., Urban Travel Demand: A Behavioral Ana].yis
Amsterdam, North Holland 1975.
20. Maddala, G.S., Limited-Dependent and Qualita
Cambridge U.K. Cambridge University Press 1983.

riables in Econometrics

21. Domencich and McFadden address the estimation issues underlying the
Multichotomous logit model.
22. Our econometric procedure follows that outlined in maddala (note 19) pages
275—278. In particular we use the second method described of pages 275 and
276.
23.

A is calculated as given by Welch, W.P., Frank, R.G. and Diehr, P. "Health
Care Costs in HMOs: Correcting for Self Section" in Scheffler and Rossiter
(ed) Advances in_Health Economics and Health Services Research Vol. 5
Greenwich: JAL Press 1984.

Footnotes (continued)

24. Green, W.H.; "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error: ConTnent"
Econometrica 49 (May 1981) 795-798.

25. See Maddala (note 19) and Heckman (note 8).
26. A smearing estimator for the non—normal case is proposed in Duan, N., Manning,
W.G., Morris, C.N. and Newhouse, J.P.; A Comparison of Alternative Estimators
for the Demand for Medical Care, Rand Corporation Report R-2754 HHS Santa
Monica 1982. They propose use of the simple average of the exponentiated
residuals:
S,j = Sum

exp (Ucj)/Nc

We experimented with the smearing estimator and non-normality; the results
were essentially the same.

27. We did not include important regulations that have been adopted by all or
nearly all states.
28. This approach makes use of information contained in the hours of work variable
rather than relying solely on 7 categories of income. The categories used
were as follows: <$30,000; $30-50,000; $50,-70,000; $70-90,000;
$90-110,000; $110,000-130,000; $130,000+. The open ended category mean
was estimated in three ways that yielded similar results. First was to obtain
the maximum podiatrist income from APMA and use the midpoint of the constrained category. The second was to use a Pareto distribution to obtain
an estimate of the category. The third used a log normal distribution to
obtain an estimate of the open ended category's mean.
29. We tested an alternative model of privileges, it is somewhat more general.
I = A ORTHO aOTHERUMD8 BEDS
P0PULATI0N

eiXi

The results were as follows:
=

-0.63
(3.31)

B =

-0.06
(0.25)

v =

0.65
(3.09)

=

-0.22
(0.91)

(t statistics in parenthesis)

30. Since the sample observations are on individual podiatrists and the DPM
variable is an SMA level measure, it is our view that simultaneity is not
likely to be a major difficulty.
31. When the privileges model without DPM/PopulatiOfl was used to re-estimate
the earnings models reported below, there was no difference in ordering
under the new specification and only small differences in the absolute
predicted values.

32. To obtain expressions for the percentage change (
estimated coefficients (b) in the following manner

) we

= eransform
-1.

the

TABLE 1

Means and Standard Deviations

SD

SOURCE

Age

43.18

12.49

VP!

Net Income1

56,903

38,533

VPI

Practice Hours/Week

37.51

11.01

VP!

Earnings (Net Income)

34.52

35.03

VPI

0.35

(0.48)

VPI

Medical Staff Priv. (1)

0.52

0.50

VPI

Other Staff Priv. (1)

0.21

0.43

VP!

Sex (1 if female)

0.036

0.02

VP!

White (1 if white)

0.96

0.98

VPI

DPM/100,000

6.28

3.22

ARF

Orthopedists/100,000

6.10

2.18

ARF

472.05

91.85

ARF

Board Certified!
Board Eligible

0.60

0.46

VPI

Per Capita Income 1980

9550

1749

ARE

180

70

ARE

0.21

0.41

APMA

(Hours C4T)
Resident (1 =

yes)

Beds/100,000

OTHER MDs/100,000

Podiatry Schools
and Residency Programs
present = 1

1laken as mean of $20,000 groupings and then averaged.

TABLE 2

MultichotomoUS Logit Results

Variable

Coefficient
-2.848

1.85

-3.831

2.48

Age

0.052

1.63

Sex

-0.624

3.44

Race

-0.268

1.23

Board Certified

0.848

10.60

Residency trained

0.497

6.21

-0.689

4.85

LOG Podiatrists

0.246

2.66

LOG BEDS

0.623

2.87

LOG Other Mds

0.019

0.54

Practice Limited
to foot only

0.087

0.88

-0.001

4.50

0.521

5.15

a 1
2

LOG Orthopedists

(Age)2

Podiatry School
or training program

861.86

8 regional dumies included
*

t

asymptotic

t

TABLE 3

Heckman-Lee Regression Results*
Variable

Age

No Priv
0.102

Part Priv

Full Priv

(7.84)

0.143
(7.28)

0.159
(14.43)

Sex

-0.338
(3.47)

-0.134
(0.97)

-0.124
(1.37)

Race

-0.140
(1.29)

-0.207
(1.25)

-0.219

-0.070
(1.25)

0.047

-0.081

(0.77)

(1.97)

0.246
(3.26)

0.163
(2.95)

(1.55)

-0.023
(1.75)

-0.005
(0.57)

0.001

0.001

(1.81)

(1.66)

(2.07)

Practice Limited to Foot Only -0.090
(1.70)

-0.042
(0.67)

-0.127
(3.45)

-0.001
(6.88)

0.001
(6.05)

-0.001
(12.04)

Residency Trained

Board Certified

0.254
(3.87)

Log Orthopedists

Per Capita Income

(Age)2

Population

-0.018

o.oooi

(2.56)

0.002

0.0001
(0.43)

(1.49)

-0.015
(1.00)

-0.007

—0.015

(0.48)

(1.63)

-0.338
(0.98)

-0.041
(0.25)

(0.99)

0.811

-0.118

(2.19)

(0.22)

-0.211
(0.56)

R2

0.13

0.22

0.22

F

7.80

9.63

29.67

N

1042

714

2112

(0.20)

Log Podiatrists

A

Constant

*

Us

in parentheses

8 regional dumies included

0.0001

0.060

TABLE 4

Predicted Hourly Earnings
by Type of Privileges
Using Varying Estimators

Simple
Mean

OLS
Model

Model

No Privilege

32.78

25.90

24.95

Professional

31.61

26.81

25.04

Full (Medical)

36.18

31.06

35.29

4024

4024

N

Full—No Privileges

3.40

5.16

Heckman-Lee

10.34

Appendix

(Al)

Qd = Qd(PT)

<0

Demand Function

Quantity demand
Total Price

0d =
P1 =
(A2)

3Q/

Q = F (B,L,M,) FL,M > 0

FLL, FMM <0

= Fixed Beds
L = Non-medical staff labor
M = Medical staff
(A3)

V =

(P1Q

c,w =

-

input

c

-

wL)/M

prices

Maximization of (3) subject to (1) and (2) leads to the equilibrium

(A4)

T

Q/

T/3Q Q/M Q - PT(F

,L,M))F(,L,M) /M

=0
(4) can be rewritten as

(A4') Ym = g(M,B)
which be totally differentiation obtain the following expression

dM

qBB

=

(A5)

-gT

If gBB<0 than the sign of DM/DK depends on gm which is

gBm =

(T

jf

T

2Q/3MaB +

3Q/ 3B + 31'T/ 38

2Q/MB >

dM

and2 >0

a2pT/ Q2/

3MB 3Q

+ 3Q/ 3B 3T/ 3Q 3Q/ 3M

3Q/ 38 Q)

0 and 2P1/ 3Q2 > 0 then

>

0

-

4

/?

—

_J Pi

t
I

(

--- a.-'

