                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   NATIONAL POLICY FOR REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
                HISTORICAL EVIDENCE FROM APPALACHIAN HIGHWAYS

                                            Taylor Jaworski
                                            Carl T. Kitchens

                                         Working Paper 22073
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22073


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2016




We thank Jeremy Atack, Nate Baum-Snow, Bill Collins, Price Fishback, Walker Hanlon, Josh Hausman,
Rick Hornbeck, Shawn Kantor, Ian Keay, Frank Lewis, Gary Libecap, John Wallis, Alex Whalley
and conference/seminar participants at Arizona, Chapman, Colgate, Lakehead, Marquette, McGill,
Michigan, University of California (Santa Barbara), University of Colorado (Boulder), Yale, York,
the 2015 Canadian Network for Economic History meetings, the 2016 NBER/DAE Summer Institute,
the 2016 Public Choice Society, the 2016 Southern Economic Society, and the 2017 AEA/ASSA annual
meetings for comments that improved the paper. Steve Landgraf provided excellent research assistance.
All remaining errors are our own.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Taylor Jaworski and Carl T. Kitchens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
National Policy for Regional Development: Historical Evidence from Appalachian Highways
Taylor Jaworski and Carl T. Kitchens
NBER Working Paper No. 22073
March 2016, Revised November 2019
JEL No. N12,O18,O2,R13

                                             ABSTRACT

How effective are policies aimed at integrating isolated regions? We answer this question in the context
of a highway system in one of the poorest regions in the United States. With construction starting in
1965, the Appalachian Development Highway System ultimately consisted of over 2,500 high-grade
road miles. We use a simple model of interregional trade to motivate our empirical analysis, which
quantifies the relationship between market access and income. We then calibrate the model to evaluate
the aggregate impact of the ADHS and compare this with alternative counterfactual proposals. We
find that removing the ADHS would have reduced total income by $53.7 billion in the United States
with $22 billion of the losses in Appalachian counties. Our findings highlight the potential aggregate
benefits of transportation infrastructure policies, but also suggest that leakage outside of the targeted
area may be substantial.


Taylor Jaworski
Department of Economics, UCB 256
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309
and NBER
tjaworski@gmail.com

Carl T. Kitchens
Department of Economics
Florida State University
239 Bellamy Building
Tallahassee, FL 32306
and NBER
ckitchens@fsu.edu
1   Introduction

    There are large differences in economic performance and individual outcomes across space

within the United States and elsewhere. Policies that aim to integrate the national economy

may facilitate growth through increased trading opportunities or increased productivity due

to competition and the transfer of frontier technology to underdeveloped regions. At the

same time, policymakers must balance concerns at the national level with policies that

disproportionately benefit (or harm) particular regions. In the context of the United States,

the counties in and around the Appalachian Mountains are among the poorest in the country

with income per capita more than 20 percent below the national average.

    In the early 1960s, the stark contrast between Appalachia and the rest of the country

led the region’s governors to lobby the federal government for relief. In 1965, President

Johnson signed the Appalachian Regional Development Act, creating the Appalachian Re-

gional Commission (ARC)–a federal-state partnership aimed at integrating the region–and

fulfilling promises made by the Kennedy Administration. To date, over $34 billion (in 2015

dollars) of federal expenditures have gone to the region, with the bulk of funding going to the

construction of the nearly 2,500 miles of the Appalachian Development Highway System.1

The construction of the Appalachian Development Highway System provides an opportunity
    1
        The federal portion of expenditures under the Appalachian Regional Commission is
similar in size to the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), a large-scale development project
initiated as part of Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal. Total spending on the TVA was ap-
proximately approximately $27.5 billion between 1930 and 2000. There was also a state and
local matching component of the ARC that was up to an additional 30 percent of federal
expenditures depending on the year over the program’s history.

                                              1
to study the long-run impact of a policy aimed at integrating isolated regions.

   In this paper, we examine the impact of the Appalachian Development Highway System

(ADHS) on regional development. Following Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), we use a model

of interregional trade with perfectly mobile labor together with newly digitized network data

of the Appalachian, Interstate, US, and state highway systems in 1960, 1985, and 2010.2

The model makes assumptions that are standard in the literatures on international trade

and economic geography, and is useful for providing a tractable way to capture the direct

and indirect effects of changes in trade costs. With this approach we are able to examine

how changes at a particular point in the highway network influence any or all counties. This

is important in our application, which examines regional transportation infrastructure in

Appalachia, since the aggregate impact we calculate should reflect the role of trade costs

in counties directly targeted by the infrastructure as well as counties that are indirectly

affected.

   We also use the model to motivative our empirical analysis and the interpretation of

our main variable of interest, “market access,” which measures each county’s proximity to

other counties based on the trade costs between county pairs using the highway network and

market size. We start by computing the travel time between all county pairs in the contiguous

United States: for 3,080 counties this gives over four million pairwise travel times. Following
   2
       Some degree of labor mobility is appropriate for modeling the United States since the
second half of the twentieth century. Importantly, this may lead to different implications for
income or welfare following a change in trade costs than the case where labor is assumed to
be immobile (Redding, 2016).




                                              2
Combes and Lafourcade (2005), we convert travel time into trade costs using information

on the cost of inputs for a typical freight shipment and construct “market access” as the

proximity of a county to all other counties; specifically, market access for an origin county

is the sum of the total income in each destination county weighted by trade costs. We then

estimate the elasticity of total income with respect to market access. This elasticity together

with counterfactual changes in the market access based on changes to the highway network

allow us to quantify the aggregate impact of transportation infrastructure improvements.

   Importantly, changes in the measure of market access used in the empirical analysis

reflect changes in transportation costs due to improvements in the highway network as well

as changes in a county’s underlying productivity. In the empirical analysis we use county

fixed effects to address concerns about highway placement with respect to time-invariant local

productivity and state-year fixed effects to control for changes in state policy over time. In

additional specifications we also control for local transportation infrastructure (i.e., highways,

railroads, and proximity to ports), historical access to coal reserves and employment by

sector, and a county’s urban status. Finally, we use an instrumental variables strategy to

isolate variation in changes in market access based on physical distance and the change

in average speed between county pairs due to improvements throughout the transportation

network.3 This allows us to focus on changes in market access due to reduction in travel time

over a fixed distance that are plausibly exogenous to the level or growth in local productivity
   3
       Physical distance is the straight-line distance between county-centroid pairs and average
speed is the the total travel time divided the distance travel along each route using the
complete highway network.



                                                3
that may have been targeted with highway improvements. Using the estimated elasticity,

and holding the spatial distribution of population fixed, we estimate income losses from

removing the ADHS between $58 and $88 billion using ordinary least squares and $36 billion

using instrumental variables.

   As an alternative, we use our data to calibrate a simple structural model that allows for an

endogenous reallocation of economic activity across space in response to counterfactual trade

costs and find that removing the ADHS would have led to income losses of $53.7 billion, which

is equal to 0.4 percent of national income compared with 3.2 percent of gross national product

due to the loss of agricultural land value from removing the US railroads in 1890 Donaldson

and Hornbeck (2016) and 2.5 percent of real gross domestic product from removing India’s

Golden Quadrilateral Alder (2017). We also find roughly half of the benefits of the ADHS

accrue to counties not included in the Appalachian Regional Commission, which suggests

substantial leakage outside of the targeted area. Our findings suggest that the ADHS offset

11 percent of the decline in the national income share in Appalachia over the last five decades.

To the put these results in context, we contrast the aggregate impact of removing the ADHS

and replacing it with alternative highways. We consider an earlier proposal as part of the

President’s Appalachian Regional Commission, a proposal that focused on highway-building

in the Lower Mississippi River Valley during the 2000s, and three extensions to the Interstate

Highway System. In each case, we find that implementing any one of these proposals instead

of the ADHS would have mitigated at most two-thirds of the loss from removing the ADHS.

   Our paper contributes to a recent literature that combines trade theory and detailed

measurement of trade costs to quantify the effect of transportation infrastructure (Donaldson,


                                               4
2018; Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016; Alder, 2017; Baum-Snow, Brandt, Henderson, Turner,

and Zhang, 2017).4 Our results also contribute to a large literature that applies reduced-

form approaches to estimate the effect of highways in the United States (Baum-Snow, 2007;

Chandra and Thompson, 2000; Duranton and Turner, 2012; Duranton, Morrow, and Turner,

2014; Isserman and Rephann, 1994; Michaels, 2008) and in developing countries (Banerjee,

Duflo, and Qian, 2012; Faber, 2014; Ghani, Goswami, and Kerr, 2016; Jedwab, Kerby, and

Moradi, 2016; Jedwab and Moradi, 2017; Jedwab and Storeygard, 2017; Storeygard, 2016).

To this literature, we add estimates of the aggregate and regional implications of highway

building in the United States in the second half of the twentieth century that take into

account general equilibrium responses to changing trade costs.5

   Finally, our results contribute to research focused on economic development in Ap-

palachia and the effects of the Appalachian Regional Commission (Bradshaw, 1992; Black

and Sanders, 2004, 2007; Haaga, 2004; Widener, 1990; Ziliak, 2012) as well as placed-based

policies more generally (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008, 2009; Kline and Moretti, 2014). We

focus exclusively on the impact of the new highway infrastructure due to the ARC, which

requires special attention given the high share of appropriated funds going to the ADHS rel-

ative to other programs and the region’s limited integration internally and with the rest of
   4
       This is different from recent contributions by Allen and Arkolakis (2014, 2016) that
use theory as well as information on trade flows and transport mode choice to construct
endogenous trade costs for the more recent period in the United States. For the period we
study going back to 1960, detailed trade flow and mode choice data does not exist.
   5
     We also contribute newly digitized maps of the US highway network, which we use to
measure county-to-county trade costs in 1960, 1985, and 2010.



                                              5
the country. Importantly, the Appalachian Development Highway System still exists today

and similar proposals elsewhere are under consideration.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of the

region’s history and background for the creation of the Appalachian Regional Commission.

Section 3 describes the highway network and county-level data used in the empirical analysis

and quantitative exercises. Section 4 discusses a model of interregional trade that motivates

our empirical specification. Section 5 presents the results from our empirical analysis, coun-

terfactual exercises that remove Appalachian highways as well as alternative transportation

intervensions, and robustness. Section 6 concludes.

2   Historical Background

    In Night Comes to the Cumberlands, Harry Caudill painted a grim picture of economic

conditions in Eastern Kentucky and, more broadly, Appalachia circa 1960.6 Caudill high-

lighted the poverty, isolation, exploitation, and destruction of natural resources as well as

political backwardness within the region. In the early 1960s average household income in

Appalachia was $5,706 compared to $7,349 nationwide. In addition, one-third of families

in the region lived on less than $3,000 per year compared to one-fifth in the rest of the

country and unemployment in the region was pervasive (President’s Appalachian Regional
    6
        Caudill’s Night Comes to the Cumberlands echoes the greater cultural attention paid to
poverty represented, for example, by Michael Harrington’s The Other America. Eller (1982)
and Isenberg (2016) provide background on the economy and society of the Appalachian
region from the colonial period through Reconstruction and the present. More recently,
Vance (2016) provides an autobiographical account of Appalachian poverty since the 1980s.




                                                6
Commission, 1964; Pollard, 2003). Over the next several decades differences with the rest of

the country in terms of income, poverty, and unemployment narrowed. Despite these gains,

policymakers and scholars remained concerned about the weakness of the labor market, de-

teriorating infrastructure, the slow rate of structural transformation, and lack of opportunity

and mobility.

   To combat poverty in the region, individual states initially used their own welfare systems

to provide for displaced workers and promote growth. For example, Kentucky created the

Agricultural and Industrial Development Board in 1946.7 This and similar programs at

the state level attempted to promote local development and provide subsidies to recruit

industry from the North. In 1956, Kentucky created the Action Plan for Eastern Kentucky,

which emphasized the need for a regional development authority to improve infrastructure,

particularly through new highway construction (Eller, 2008, p. 47). In 1959, the same

group established Program 60 to provide education, job training, health, and transportation

investments, although the proposal failed to receive support from the state legislature.

   In 1960, governors from several Appalachian states attended the Conference of Ap-

palachian Governors, to develop strategies to lobby the federal government for assistance

and cooperate in setting their own development goals. In the same year, then Senator John

F. Kennedy visited West Virginia during a campaign stop and witnessed the poverty of the

region first hand. This led to campaign promises to revitalize and invigorate Appalachia.
   7
       This program was modeled after Mississippi’s Balance Agriculture with Industry pro-
gram established in 1936. Cobb (1982) provides an excellent overview of state-level policies
for industrial recruitment starting during the Great Depression.



                                              7
After his election, Kennedy promoted the passage of the Area Redevelopment Act in 1961,

which promised relief funds for distressed regions. While the Conference of Appalachian

Governors was eager to receive some funding, it became apparent these funds would not

reach Appalachia due weak public finances at the state level and strict federal matching

requirements. This was true even though 76 percent of Appalachian counties qualified as

“distressed.”

   The Conference of Appalachian Governors continued to lobby President Kennedy and,

following severe flooding in the region in 1963, the President’s Appalachian Regional Com-

mission (PARC) was created.8 The commission was to provide recommendations to develop

and integrate the region with the nation by January 1, 1964. The PARC report highlighted

the lack of transportation infrastructure within the region as well as the absence of educa-

tion and health services. Following Kennedy’s assassination, Johnson promised to continue

efforts begun under the previous administration. In the spring of 1964, the Appalachian

Regional Development Act (ARDA) was proposed in Congress. At first the ARDA failed to

receive sufficient support, however, the bill was resubmitted to Congress in 1965 following

a few changes, the addition of Ohio and South Carolina as beneficiaries, and promises to

Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York to add 13 counties in New York at a later date.

The modified ARDA was signed into law on March 9, 1965.9

   The Act created the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) and initially designated
   8
       The US Geological Survey estimated that the damages associated with the flood totaled
$755 million in real 2015 dollars (USGS, 1968 p. B-56).
   9
     In 1967, the ARC boundary expanded to include additional counties in Mississippi, New
York, and others in states already in the program area.


                                              8
counties in Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania,

South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia to receive $1.1 billion in federal

grants. Panel A of Figure A1 shows the program area of the ARC, including counties in

Mississippi and New York that were added in 1967. The largest portion of funds, $840

million, was earmarked to create the Appalachian Development Highway System (ADHS)

and the remainder was to be spent on education, health, and job training programs. The

new highway system was intended to complement the expansion of the Interstate Highway

System by providing connections to major population centers outside the region. Panel B

of Figure A1 shows the aggregate federal ARC spending separately for highway and non-

highway programs. By 2010, over $34 billion had been spent on ARC projects with $23

billion going to highways.

   The initial PARC report highlighted the perceived importance of new transportation

infrastructure: “Developmental activity in Appalachia cannot proceed until the regional

isolation has been overcome. Its cities and towns, its areas of natural wealth and its areas of

recreations and industrial potential must be penetrated by a transportation network which

provides access to and from the rest of the Nation and within the region itself” (President’s

Appalachian Regional Commission, 1964, p. 32). In the initial authorization, over $489,000

per mile was authorized to transform steep, winding, narrow two-lane roads into highways

with a straight alignment, low grade, additional lanes, and average travel speeds of 50 miles

per hour or more. Many of the proposed segments were four lane roads that could handle

vehicle speeds of up to 70 miles per hour (E.S. Preston & Associates, 1965).10
  10
       Ultimately, improvements were substantial enough that three of the ADHS corridors



                                              9
    In the remainder of this paper, we use detailed data to document the growth of the US

highway network and the specific contribution of the Appalachian Development Highway

System to improved trading opportunities after 1965. We then quantify the impact of high-

way expansion on income and use these estimates to assess the aggregate impact of removing

the ADHS. In addition, we ask how the impact of removing the ADHS was distributed across

different US regions. In particular, we are interested in the extent to which gains were con-

centrated within the counties targeted by the Appalachian Regional Commission. This is

important for understanding the specific impact of this policy as well as assessing the efficacy

of using transportation infrastructure to facilitate regional development.

3   Data

    The data for the empirical analysis are drawn from several sources. We use newly digitized

maps of the highway network in 1960, 1985, and 2010 to compute the travel time between

all county pairs in the contiguous United States in each year. In this section we discuss our

representation of the highway network using geographic information system software and the

details of calculating travel time. In the empirical analysis we combine the information on

travel times with county-level data on income, population, and employment to examine the

impact of the ADHS.

    We use county-level data on total income, population, and employment in 1960, 1985, and

2010 from Haines (2010) and Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce
were fully integrated as part of the Interstate Highway System: Corridor T in New York (I-
86), Corridor E in Maryland and West Virginia (I-68), and Corridor X traversing Alabama
and Mississippi (I-22).



                                              10
(2015). We adjust county-level variables to reflect county boundaries in 2010 following the

procedure in Hornbeck (2010) and merge independent cities in Virginia with the surrounding

county to give a total of 3,080 observations in each year.

   To calculate travel times we start by identifying each county as a point in space using the

latitude and longitude of the county centroid. We then create a set of access roads that link

the county centroids to neighboring counties with straight line connections. These two parts

of the network are fixed in 1960, 1985, and 2010 and a constant speed of 10 miles per hour is

assigned to all travel on access roads in each year.11 Next, we overlay the highway network–

including the Appalachian, interstate, national, and state highway systems–corresponding

to 1960, 1985, or 2010.12 The relative importance of each portion of the network for a given

route will depend on the distance to be travelled and the assigned speed on each road type.

In the online appendix, Figure A2 shows the extent of the highway system in 1960, 1985,

and 2010. For each year, the panels of Figure A2 show the Interstate Highway System as

thick black lines and the other portions of the highway network as thin gray lines.

   To construct the network for 1960 shown in Panel A of Figure A2, we digitized state level

maps from the 1959 Rand McNally Road Atlas. In particular, we digitize state highways, US

Highways, and Interstate Highways. For both state and US Highways, we separately code

three road surfaces; unimproved, improved, and paved. To obtain travel speeds, we refer to
  11
       Using population-weighted county centroids does not lead to significant differences in
county-to-county travel times because of the slow speed assigned to the “access road” network
relative to other portions of the highway network.
   12
      In 1960 we also include toll roads that were later incorporated into the Interstate Highway
System.


                                               11
a map circulated by Shell Oil Company and produced by Rand McNally in 1956 that reports

both the distance and approximate travel times between points of interest and we use these

to assign speeds to different road types. The 1985 map in Panel B of Figure A2 is based on

the Rand McNally Atlas for 1985, which we traced from the detailed maps for each state.

For 2010, we use a shapefile obtained by the National Transportation and Highway Safety

Administration.13 Panel C of Figure A2 shows the highway network in 2010.

   In each year, the highway network consists of a combination of roads to which we assign

different speeds based on historical sources. In our baseline highway network, we assign

the actual legislated travel speeds for each class of road in the highway network (e.g., state

highway, national highway, Interstate) in each year. For example, in 2010, the Interstate

Highway System has a speed of 70 miles per hour, paved segments of the U.S. Highway

system has a speed of 55 miles per hour, and paved state highways has a speed of 45 miles

per hour. As robustness, we consider the sensitivity of our results to assigning alternative

speeds to each portion of the network.

   Finally, Figure A3 shows progress on the Appalachian Development Highway System in

1985 and 2010 digitized from the annual reports of the Appalachian Regional Commission.

For our baseline travel time calculation we assign a speed of 55 miles per hour. Our main

empirical analysis combines the network of time invariant access roads together with the

highway network in each year to calculate the county-to-county travel times for all counties

in the contiguous United States.14 Ultimately, we are left with over 4 million unique pairwise
  13
     Download the shapefile at http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/processes/tools/nhpn/2011/.
  14
     The time involved in so many routes is reduced by applying Dijkstra (1959)’s algorithm,
which we implement using the network analyst tool in ArcGIS.

                                             12
travel times, which we convert to trade costs using information on the cost of inputs for a

typical freight shipment following Combes and Lafourcade (2005).

   Specifically, to convert travel times to monetary costs, we use the hourly wage for a truck

driver as well as the cost of diesel per mile, which is based on the cost per gallon and the

number of miles traveled per gallon. Hourly wages in trucking are set equal to $18.59 in

1960, $19.87 in 1985, and $18.87 in 2010 (in 2015 dollars) taken from the decennial census

and the Current Population Survey. We obtain the fuel cost per mile by multiplying the

miles per gallon from the Historical Statistics of the United States and US Department of

Transportation with the per gallon cost of diesel from the US Department of Energy. We

then combine this information to reflect the monetary cost, τcdt , of moving between any c-d

county pair in year t according to:



               τcdt =distance in milescdt × cost per milet

                     + travel time in hourscdt × hourly wage of truck drivert



This measure of trade costs may exclude other costs (e.g., depreciation, insurance, mainte-

nance, taxes, and tolls). Due to data availability we use labor and fuel costs, which Combes

and Lafourcade (2005) find account for nearly half of total costs in French data in 1978 and

1998. The theory outlined in the next section uses the “iceberg form” of trade costs, which

we obtain by dividing τcdt by the average value of a freight shipment in 2010 and adding one.




                                             13
4     Theoretical Framework

      We use a model of inter-regional trade to derive our main estimating equation, inform

identification, and carry out counterfactual exercises. This model produces a relationship

between total income and access to markets. In this context, market access provides a

straightforward way to summarize the impact of a change in transportation costs anywhere

in the highway network on total income. The model in the remainder of this section follows

the exposition in Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) and Baum-Snow, Brandt, Henderson,

Turner, and Zhang (2017).

4.1    Model Setup

      In the model counties are indexed by c if they are the origin of trade and d if they

are the destination. Consumers have CES preferences over a continuum of differentiated

goods varieties, where the elasticity of substitution between varieties is given by σ, an a

local amenity denoted by Ac . Producers in each county combine a fixed factor land (Lc )

and mobile factors labor (Nc ) and capital (Kc ) using a Cobb-Douglas technology to produce

varieties. The marginal cost of each variety j is:


                                                  qcα wcγ rc1−α−γ
                                     M Cc (j) =
                                                       zc (j)


where qc is the land rental rate, wc is the wage, rc is the interest rate, and zc (j) is local

productivity shifter drawn from a Fréchet distribution with CDF Fc (z) = exp(−Tc z −θ ). We

assume that output markets are perfectly competitive.

      Trade costs between c and d take the “iceberg” form: for each unit to arrive at d from c,

                                                  14
τcd ≥ 1 must be shipped. That is, if a variety is produced and sold in the same county the

price is pcc (j), while the same variety sold in a different county has price pcd (j) = τcd pcc (j).

In equilibrium, consumers in counties that are farther away from producers will pay higher

prices and, in turn, producers that are farther away from consumers will charge lower prices.

Empirically, we measure bilateral travel costs in terms of fuel costs and wages along the

fastest route (in hours) between c and d.

      The land available for production is assumed to be constant in each year. Capital is

purchased in national, perfectly competitive markets so the returns on capital are the same

in all counties with rc = r. To the extent that this assumption is violated in our setting,

our empirical analysis controls for state-year fixed effects to adjust for variation over time

at the state level as well as additional county-level variables that capture within-state vari-

ation in geography, climate, etc. Finally, workers are perfectly mobile and reallocate across

counties until nominal wages and utility (adjusted for the local price index and amenities)

                      Ū
are equalized: wc =   Ac
                           × Pc .

4.2    Prices and the Gravity Equation

      Assuming perfect competition so that prices and marginal costs (including trade costs)

are equal and letting consumers buy from the cheapest origin county, Eaton and Kortum

(2002) give an expression for the price index at d:


                                         X                           − 1
                                Pd = µ     Tc (τcd qcα wcγ rc1−α−γ )−θ θ
                                          c




                                                    15
                       1
with µ = [Γ( θ+1−σ
               θ
                   )] 1−σ , where Γ is the Gamma function. Using the assumption that rc = r,

Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) define κ1 = µ−θ r(1−α−γ)θ . We can then use the expression

for the price index above to write:


                                                X
                                   Pd−θ = κ1                       −θ
                                                  Tc (qcα wcγ )−θ τcd
                                                                      
                                                                                           (1)
                                                 c



which is the trade cost-weighted sum of consumers’ access in d to the technology and inputs

of other counties. This is referred to as “consumer market access.”

      Eaton and Kortum (2002) also give the following expression for the value of exports from

c to d:



                                                         −θ
                             Xcd = Tc (qcα wcγ )−θ × Yd τcd × κ CM A−1
                                   | {z } | {z } | 1 {z d }
                                          (i)             (ii)        (iii)



This expression says that trade flows from c to d are increasing in (i) local productivity of c

weighted by input costs, (ii) market size of d weighted by trade costs, and (iii) competition

from firms with access to d.

4.3    Total Income and Market Access

      To derive a relationship between total income and market access we assume total income

in c is equal to the sum of all expenditures purchased from d:


                             X                                   X
                                                                    −θ
                                 Xcd = κ1 Tc (qcα wcγ )−θ ×            CM A−1
                                                                                 
                      Yc =                                         τcd     d  Yd           (2)
                             d                                    d




                                                     16
The interpretation of the final term on the right-hand side, called “firm market access,” is

the access of firms at c to all consumers in the economy. We define M Ac ≡ F M Ac = ρCM Ac

for use in our empirical work.15 Starting with equation (2), the next steps are to replace

        −θ
           CM A−1
P                    
  d    τcd     d  Y d   with M Ac and substitute the income share for the immobile factor land.

Then we apply the condition that real wage is equalized across locations; formally, workers

                          Ū           −1/θ
move to satisfy wc =      Ac
                               × M Ac         . Finally, we take logs and rearrange to obtain:


                                       γθ              γθ             1+γ
                  log Yc = ξc +             log Ac −        log Ū +        log M Ac                    (3)
                                     1 + αθ          1 + αθ          1 + αθ


                1                     αθ
where ξc =    1+αθ
                     log(κ1 Tc ) +   1+αθ
                                            log( Lαc ). We compute market access by solving the system

                                                            −θ    −1     16
                                                     P
of non-linear equations given by M Ac = ρ                d τcd M Ad Yd .      Panel A of Figure 1 shows the

change in the log of market access for each US county between 1960 and 2010.

      Equation (3) says that income will be higher if a county has higher productivity, more

land, more attractive amenities, or better market access. The increase in total income due to

changes in market access may reflect firms’ improved access to large markets or consumers

with more access to low-cost producers. The relationship between total income and market

access may also reflect effects outside of the model, for example, due to existing agglomeration

economies that are reinforced by lower trade costs. In the next section, we present several

approaches to alleviate concerns about endogeneity arising from unobserved factors that may
  15
       With the assumption that trade costs are symmetric (i.e., τcd = τdc ) the relationship
between consumer and firm market access at c must satisfy F M Ac = ρCM Ac .
  16
     In practice, we set ρ equal to 1 when calculating the market access variable used in the
empirical analysis described in the next section.



                                                        17
be correlated with both income and changes in trade costs.

5     Results

      In this section, we discuss the results of empirical analysis motivated by the theoretical

model outlined in the previous section. First, drawing on equation (3) we estimate the rela-

tionship between income and market access and use the estimated coefficient to assess the

reduced-form impact of removing the ADHS. Second, using the full structure of the theoret-

ical model, we present several counterfactuals taking into account the general equilibrium

effects of alternative trade cost configurations. In particular, using the model allows us to

take into account the endogenous population responses from removing or adding highway

segments. We contrast the results for removing the ADHS using model-based and reduced-

form approaches. We also consider several additional counterfactuals, including a smaller

Appalachian highway network under an earlier plan, a more recent highway-building project

around the Lower Mississippi River Valley, as well as potential extensions of the Interstate

Highway System.

5.1    Empirical Analysis

      To understand the impact of improvements in market access on income, as well as the

specific impact of the ADHS, we start by estimating the following regression based on the

relationship in equation (3):



                            log Yct = β log M Act + φc + φst + Xc δt + ct                   (4)




                                                 18
where Yct is the income in county c and year t. The main variable of interest is the log

of market access, which summarizes the proximity of a county to all other markets in the

United States weighted by trade costs. Again, we solve the system of non-linear equations

                             −θ    −1
                      P
given by M Ac = ρ         d τcd M Ad Yd   to obtain our measure of market access. For the trade

elasticity, θ, we assume a value of 8 in our baseline results.17 Standard errors are clustered

at the state level to allow correlation across counties in the same state over time.

   In Table 1, Panel A presents the results for ordinary least squares estimates of the rela-

tionship between income and market access from equation (4). These estimates are based on

using the first difference of equation (4); estimates using fixed effects are qualitatively similar

and reported in the appendix. Column 1, which only controls for county and year effects,

gives an estimated coefficient of 1.067. Column 2 adds state-year fixed effects and Column

3 controls for polynomials for latitude and longitude, which gives estimated coefficients of

1.298 and 1.521, respectively. The interpretation is straightforward and suggests that a 1

percent increase in market access increases income by 1 to 1.5 percent.

   Following the results presented in columns 1 through 3, the main concern with our

empirical approach is that the placement of the highway network is not exogenous to local

productivity (or amenities). Improvements in infrastructure may be targeted to places with

substantial growth potential–leading to positive bias of β–or to lagging regions–leading to
  17
       This is within the range reported in the international trade literature (Head and Mayer,
2014) and close to the value of 8.22 reported in Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), the preferred
estimate in Eaton and Kortum (2002) of 8.28, and the average across 22 industries in Caliendo
and Parro (2015) of 8.64.



                                                  19
negative bias. To address this concern we follow Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) and use

additional controls to focus variation in market access coming from non-local improvements.

Column 4 adds controls for the mileage of the Interstate Highway System, Appalachian

Development Highway System, and other highways as well as distance to the nearest major

port, and railroad mileage in 1911 and 2010, all interacted with year fixed effects. The

estimated coefficient increases to 1.375.

   There is potential for market access to interact with local availability of natural resources

(Black, Daniel, and Sanders, 2002; Black and Sanders, 2004, 2007; Glaeser, Kerr, and Kerr,

2015) or the sectoral specialization of employment of employment across sectors (Duran-

ton, Morrow, and Turner, 2014). To address this issue, column 5 controls for estimated

coal reserves and historical employment in manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, trans-

portation, construction, finance, and government, which gives a market access coefficient

of 1.021.18 Finally, in column 6, we examine whether regional income growth is driven by

increasing urbanization over time (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008, 2009). To do this we include

an indicator for whether a county belongs to a Standard Metropolitan Area, which gives an

estimated coefficient of 1.049.19

   Up to this point our identification strategy has focused on controlling for additional

variables that may be correlated with the potential for income growth at the county level.
  18
       Data on coal reserves is drawn from Palmer, Oman, Park, and Luppens (2015).
  19
       The indicator variable for a Standard Metropolitan Area is based on an older concept
related to the more recent concept of a Metropolitan Statistical Area. We use the older
concept based on 1950 county characteristics, which is prior to the major highway-building
projects of the second half of the twentieth century.


                                              20
As alternative to this approach, we also consider an instrumental variables strategy that

focuses on plausibly exogenous variation in market access. To do this we exploit variation

due to the change in travel time from a given county c to all other counties. In particular,

we compute the predicted average travel time from county c to all other counties using:



                           \                1        X physical distance
                                                                         cd
                        travel timect =                                                    (5)
                                          Nd∈S(c)
                                            /           average speedcdt
                                                    d∈S(c)
                                                     /



This variable focuses on changes in travel time due to connections between counties not

in the same state. In particular, the instrument exploits non-local highway improvements

that translate into increased average speed holding the straight-line distance between two

locations constant. Importantly, we use no information on market size to construct the

instrument since the relocation of economic activity (or population) may be endogenous.

We also exclude counties within the same state because highway construction decisions were

administered at the state level.20 We use the first-difference of equation (5) to instrument

for the first-difference of market access in our main estimating equation.

   To satisfy the criteria for a valid instrument the variable in equation (5) must be corre-

lated with market access and be uncorrelated with the error term in equation (4). For the

first-stage relationship, a county with a higher average travel time will have lower market

access. Indeed, consistent with this intuition the estimated first-stage coefficient is -1.699

and the first-stage F -statistic is 95.73. For the exclusion restriction, the theory suggests

that endogeneity may arise due to a correlation between change in market access and unob-
  20
       Even national plans, such as the Interstate Highway System, were routed (i.e., purchase
of rights of way), constructed, and maintained by state highway departments.

                                                    21
served productivity growth. Although we cannot directly test this assumption, Figure A4

presents a placebo test showing no significant relationship between changes in the instrument,

   \
travel timect , and a potential correlate of productivity growth (i.e., historical population

growth).21 In Panel A of Table 1, column 7 gives the estimated coefficient on market access

using our instrumental variable strategy. The estimate of 0.656 is smaller than coefficients

reported in columns 1 through 6, which suggests that at the national level infrastructure im-

provements were targeted at high income or high growth potential regions. From equation
                                                     1+γ
(3), the coefficient on market access is equal to   1+αθ
                                                         .   If we calibrate the α and γ with our

preferred values from Caselli and Coleman (2001) of 0.19 and 0.60, respectively, and solve

for θ we obtain a value of 7.5. This is close to our assumed value for θ of 8.22

   Finally, given our focus on Appalachia, before moving on to discuss our counterfactual

results we examine whether the response to changes in market access is different between

ARC and non-ARC counties. In particular the market access coefficient may not be uniform

across regions in the United States, which would not be consistent with the theory and has

important implications for understanding the impact of removing or augmenting transporta-

tion infrastructure in and around the region. To examine this possibility, we include an
  21
       The estimated slope coefficient for the relationship shown in Figure A4 is 0.023 (s.e. =
0.023) for the left panel and -0.062 (s.e. = 0.051) for the right panel.
   22
      The relationship between the log of population and market access predicted by the
model is given by: log Nc = ξc + 1+θ(α+γ)
                                   1+αθ
                                          [log Ū − log Ac ] + 1+θ(1+α+γ)
                                                                 θ(1+αθ)
                                                                          log M Ac . Replacing the
outcome variable with the log of population and reestimating equation (3) gives an estimated
coefficient on market access of 0.65. Again, solving for the implied value of θ we obtain a
value of approximately 10.



                                               22
interaction between the log of market access and an indicator for whether a county belonged

to the Appalachian Regional Commission (i.e., log M Act ×ARC) in equation (4). The results

using instrumental variables are reported in column 1 of Table A3 in the online appendix;

the estimated coefficient on the interaction is small and statistically insignificant.

      While there is no significant difference in the estimated coefficients between income and

market access across ARC and non-ARC counties, there may be changes in other outcomes

that reflect changes in long-run trends in regional specialization from improvements in trans-

portation. Columns 2 through 7 of Table A3 show results replacing the outcome variable

with employment in manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, transportation, construction,

finance, and government. Except for manufacturing, which decreases in ARC counties rel-

ative to the rest of the country, employment in other sectors shows no differential response

inside and outside of Appalachia.

      Overall, our results so far suggest that our theoretical approach is reasonable. The esti-

mated coefficient on market access implies a plausible range of values for the trade elasticity,

θ. Next, we turn to our counterfactual results, which focus on aggregate impacts and effects

on the spatial distribution of economic activity from removing highways built as part of the

Appalachian Regional Commission. In the final sub-section, we examine the sensitivity of

our counterfactuals.

5.2    Counterfactuals

      To understand the aggregate impact of changes in the highway network, our first approach

is to use the estimated coefficients on market access from Panel A of Table 1 together with

counterfactual changes in market access to evaluate the effect of changes in the highway

                                                23
network. In particular, in the case of the Appalachian Development Highway System, Panel

B of Figure 1 shows the difference between actual market access and counterfactual market

access in 2010 after removing the ADHS from the highway network and recomputing trade

costs. Importantly, removing the ADHS reduces market access both inside and outside of the

ARC program area. Thus, some of the gains associated with the ADHS spillover to counties

that were not initially targeted, although the benefits are still quite regionally concentrated.

   To quantify the aggregate impact of this change, we take the coefficients estimated in

Panel A multiplied by the losses depicted in Figure 1B and then sum over all counties. The

results of this exercise are shown in Panel C of Table 1, which gives counterfactual losses

between $58 and $88 billion (in 2015 dollars) using ordinary least squares or $36 billion using

instrument variables. This approach fixes income in year t so that national income and its

spatial distribution across counties do not change in response to counterfactual changes in

trade costs. That is, the estimated aggregate impacts do not allow for endogenous changes

in market size with the reduction in trade costs.

   The second approach we use exploits the structure of the model outlined in Section 4.

The equilibrium in each year is given by the following system of equations:


                           X
                                    −θ
                M Ac = ρ           τcd M A−1
                                          d Yd
                               d

                               γθ               γθ            1+γ
                log Yc = ξc +        log Ac −        log U +        log M Ac
                             1 + αθ           1 + αθ         1 + αθ
                        γAc Yc     1
                   Ū =        M Acθ
                         Nc
                        X
                   N̄ =    Nc
                           c



                                                 24
which describes the relationship between market access, total income, and population hold-

ing fixed local productivities, amenities, utility, and total population (N̄ ).23 Using assumed

values for the land share of income, labor share of income, and trade elasticity, as well as in-

formation on actual trade costs, total income, and population, we can solve the above system

of equations for equilibrium values of ξc , Ac , and M Ac . Then, using the equilibrium values

of ξc and Ac combined with counterfactual trade costs, we can solve for the counterfactual

income and population for different two scenarios.

   To start, we ask: what is the change in income and population associated with removing

the ADHS and fixing utility? This captures the idea that because counterfactual trade costs

are higher after removing the ADHS, income and population need to fall in order for utility

to be constant. As a benchmark, we begin by using a value of θ equal to 8 and α and γ

equal to 0.19 and 0.60, respectively.24 In the first row of Table 2, column 1 reports a $53.7

billion loss in income or 0.40 percentage points of total income in column 2 from removing

the ADHS in 2010. This number captures the loss of income due to allowing people to leave

the economy aggregated across all US counties and also reflects the importance of allowing

for reallocation across space in response to changes in trade costs.25 Column 3 in the first
  23
       We suppress the t subscript to simplify notation and note the corresponding year for
each counterfactual.
  24
     The values of α, γ, and θ are drawn from the literature. We start with a value of θ
that is close to estimates reported in Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), Eaton and Kortum
(2002), and Caliendo and Parro (2015) in different contexts. For α and γ we use draw on
Caselli and Coleman (2001). After presenting our main counterfactual results we consider
the sensitivity of the results to alternative parameters values in Section 5.3.
  25
     Instead, if we follow the “social savings” approach commonly used in economic history


                                              25
row of Table 2 shows the corresponding absolute (1.64 million) and percentage point (0.53)

decrease in population in 2010.

   Alternatively, we can also use the model to ask: what is the decline in utility required

to satisfy the equilibrium system of equations holding population fixed? This captures the

idea that because population cannot decrease, utility must fall to account for the higher

costs of trading. In this case, the final column in the first row of Table 2 gives a decrease

in utility of 0.13 percentage points. This 0.13 percentage point decrease in utility comes in

the context of a complete migration response that best reflects “long-run” adjustments in

population. Focusing on the “short-run” case without population adjustments, we calculate

a 0.24 percentage point decrease in utility. This suggests an important role for migration in

responding to changes in trade costs.

   Moving back to the “long-run” case, we can also examine changes in total income and

population between ARC and non-ARC counties. That is, holding population constant, there

may still be movement of income and people between regions in response to the counterfactual

change in trade costs. Indeed, for 2010, we find that income and population in ARC counties

would have decreased by $19.13 billion and 618,821, respectively, in the absence of the ADHS.
(Fogel, 1964; Leunig, 2010), we estimate losses between 0.06 and 0.07 percentage points of
income. To do this calculation, we compute the average price of shipping one ton of freight
by truck across all routes using the actual highway network in 2010 and the counterfactual
highway network in 2010 after removing the ADHS. We then multiply the difference in
average prices under the scenarios by the total number of tons shipped and divide by income.
In the context of our model, we also calculate that the average increase in the price index
across all counties from removing the ADHS would have been 0.11 percentage points.


                                             26
The decrease in income is nearly compensated by an increase of income in non-ARC counties

of $18.48 billion, while the decrease in population in ARC counties is exactly offset of by an

increase in non-ARC counties by assumption.

    These two scenarios (i.e., fixing utility or fixing population) represent two paths for how

the economy might adjust to counterfactual changes in trade costs. In the first scenario,

worker utility is constant and so the margin of adjustment is a decrease in population; in the

second scenario, the total US population is constant and so utility must fall. In particular,

the similarity of the estimated coefficients on market access when income and population

are used as outcome variables suggests that population will be highly mobile in the face of

new economic circumstances brought about by higher trade costs, rather than suffering the

decline in utility that would come from remaining in place with fewer trading opportunities.

For this reason, in the remainder of the paper, we focus on the first scenario in which worker

utility is fixed.

    As highlighted by Figure 1B, the losses associated with removing the ADHS are not

restricted to counties targeted by the ARC. To quantify the effect on the spatial distribution

of economic activity, rows 2 and 3 of Table 3 report the loss income for counties inside and

outside of the Appalachian Regional Commission, holding utility constant. In this case, the

loss to counties included in the ARC would have $21.83 billion compared with $31.83 billion

for counties outside the ARC. Interestingly, this suggests that less than half of the benefits

of the ADHS accrued to counties initially targeted by the policy and, thus, leakage to non-

targeted counties was substantial. Figure 2 shows changes in the actual share of total income

in ARC counties and the counterfactual share after removing the ADHS. In 1960 the actual


                                              27
and counterfactual shares are the same and afterward the shares diverge to reflect the gains

in economic activity within the region stemming from lower trade costs. In the absence of

the ADHS, the share of income in the ARC decreased to 6.7 percent. This suggests that

better highways offset about 11.1 percent of the potential decline, but also that more of the

decline could have been mitigated in the absence of spatial leakage.

   As an alternative to simply removing the ADHS, we consider the effect of removing the

ADHS and replacing it with alternative highways.26 We start by replacing the 2,500-plus

mile highway network actually built with the smaller system initially planned under the

President’s Appalachian Regional Commission (PARC). The PARC plan was approximately

1,000 miles smaller than the ADHS and the difference in mileage between the two systems

arose from political concessions that were necessary to pass the enabling legislation. For ex-

ample, Senator Robert Kennedy added an amendment to include several New York counties

in the ARC.27 In 1973, Corridor V in Alabama and Mississippi was approved with additional

appropriations provided by Congress in 1969 and 1971. Following the re-authorization of

the ARC in 1976, Corridor X in Alabama and Mississippi was approved for construction.28

As reported in the second row of Table 3, replacing the ADHS with the PARC plan high-
  26
       The appendix provides maps showing the location of each of the project we examine
below.
  27
     This paved the way for the construction of Corridor T between Binghamton, NY, and
Erie, PA, and Corridor U between Elmira, NY, and Williamsport, PA, which added approx-
imately 280 miles to the ADHS.
  28
     Combined the construction of Corridors V, X, and X-1 in Alabama and Mississippi added
more than 400 miles, despite Alabama being purposefully excluded from the initial plan due
to substantial coverage within the Interstate Highway System.


                                             28
ways gives income losses of $25.2 billion (or 0.19 percent of income). This suggests that the

mileage added to the plan as part of political bargaining was not too costly.

   Next, we turn to other regionally targeted highways to assess the efficacy of the ADHS

against proposals under ongoing consideration. In 2000, the Delta Regional Authority (DRA)

was established under the Clinton administration to aid distressed counties in the Lower Mis-

sissippi River Valley. The DRA is a partnership between federal, state, and local governments

as well as business, with many features similar to the ARC.29 The DRA provides a special

designation for 252 counties in Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana Mississippi,

Missouri, and Tennessee, such as lower local matching requirements and a large focus on in-

frastructure investment. A key goal is to upgrade highways and intermodal transportation,

spearheaded by the Delta Development Highway System (DDHS). The proposed (and not

built as of 2010) highways total roughly 3,800 miles focused on upgrading to limited-access

highways, higher speeds, and more lanes. The third row of Table 3 shows the income loss

from replacing the ADHS with the DDHS gives income losses of $25.6 billion (or 0.19 per-

cent of income). The smaller effect is driven by the higher density of the Interstate Highway

System in the region as well as the lower incomes in the surrounding area. That is, the

ADHS connects Appalachia to the productive regions of the East Coast and Upper Midwest,

whereas the DDHS provides links within the Southeast and between the relatively poorer

surrounding areas to the Southwest and Lower Midwest.

   Finally, as an alternative to building regional highway systems, there are also proposals
  29
       The funding was initially proposed as an addition to the ARC, but a separate authority
was ultimately created due to concerns that this step would dilute funding to the ARC.



                                              29
to extend the Interstate Highway System. We consider three segments that are “high priority

corridors designated as future Interstates” by the Federal Highway Administration: I-9 in

California’s Central Valley along California State Route 99, I-11 between Phoenix, AZ, and

Reno, NV, and I-69 between South Texas and Indianapolis. These corridors are interesting

alternatives to the ADHS because they do not intersect counties or states covered by the

ARC and augment a national rather than regional highway system. The fourth and fifth

rows of Table 3 still show substantial losses from removing the ADHS and adding either I-9

($25.9 billion) or I-11 ($26.0 billion). In both cases, the new segments have close existing

substitutes and would only modestly increase graded speeds. In contrast, the sixth row of

Table 3 shows that the completion of I-69 would offset nearly two-thirds of the losses of the

ADHS. This suggests that substantial gains may be possible from constructing large arterial

highways that connect major cities and border crossings.

   Taken together, our findings point to three main conclusions. First, in the second half

of the twentieth century, the gains from the Appalachian Development Highway were larger

than other proposals for regionally-targeted highway construction or upgrading; removing

the ADHS and replacing it with any one of PARC, DDHS, I-9, or I-11 would have mitigated

less than half of the losses. At the aggregate level, the closest substitute to the ADHS is

I-69 and completing the mostly unfinished route would have offset roughly two-thirds of the

losses. Second, there was substantial leakage outside of the area targeted by ADHS: over

half the benefits accrued to counties outside of the ARC. Ultimately, this suggests it may

be difficult to achieve the spatially-targeted goals of many placed-based policies. Third,

comparing the results to Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) for railroads in the nineteenth


                                             30
century United States, Alder (2017) for highways in India, and Allen and Arkolakis (2014)

for the Interstate Highway System, our results suggest the effects of the ADHS were modest

relative to national infrastructure projects.

5.3    Robustness

      The results in the previous sub-section depend on several assumptions. First, the model-

based counterfactuals assume values of α, γ, and θ. The literature reports a range of values

for θ (Head and Mayer, 2014) and α (Valentinyi and Herrendorf, 2008). As robustness, in

Figure 3 we consider what counterfactual losses would be from removing the ADHS in 2010

for different values of α or θ and fixing γ at 0.60. In the extreme cases, losses from removing

the ADHS decrease to less than $40 billion (θ = 18, α = 0.19) and increase to roughly $125

billion (θ = 6, α = 0.05). Focusing on parameter values typically used in the literature, the

range of losses represents less than a percentage point of aggregate income in 2010.

      Second, to calculate market access we used only information on domestic market size,

which does not account for the potential role of international trade. Following Donaldson

and Hornbeck (2016), we use international imports and exports to inflate the income of each

county with a major international port-of-entry. We then recompute the loss associated with

removing the ADHS, which is equal to $61 billion.

      Third, to calculate trade costs we assumed actual legislated travel speeds for each class

of road in the highway network (e.g., state highway, national highway, Interstate) in each

year. This approach combines the growth in the overall network with the increase in speed

due better roads graded for higher speeds that also occurred over the sample period. As

robustness, we assign alternative speeds to each type of road. First, we fix the speed on each

                                                31
type of road as they were in 1960 to focus primarily on the growth in the highway network

over time. In this case, the income loss associated with removing the ADHS is $65.5 in 2010.

Second, because some segments of the ADHS have been incorporated into the Interstate

Highway System (e.g., I-22, I-68, and I-86), we also consider increasing the speed on the

ADHS. In this case, the income loss from removing the ADHS is $70.7 billion in 2010. These

losses are similar to but higher than the $53.7 billion estimated in the baseline scenario in

Section 5.2.

     Finally, in our main results each county was represented as a point in space based on

its geographic centroids. One concern is that it may place the center of activity far away

from population centers where highways are more likely to be routed. This problem may be

particularly problematic in Western states and areas with rugged terrain. To address this

concern, we in recalculated trade costs using the 2010 population centroids as reported by

the Census Bureau.30 Using the population weighted centroids, we estimate that income

losses due to removal of the ADHS would have been $51.0 billion in 2010.

6    Conclusion

     In 1965 President Johnson signed legislation creating the Appalachian Regional Commis-

sion, which aimed to reduce poverty in isolated pockets of West Virginia, Kentucky, and the

surrounding states. Central to the Commission’s approach to improving economic conditions

in the region was the construction of high quality highways to complement the Interstate

Highway System. Between 1965 and 2010 over 2,500 highway miles called the Appalachian
    30
         The 2010 population centroids are available and can be downloaded at the Census Bureau
website: https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/centersofpop.html.


                                                32
Development Highway System (ADHS) were built. As a result, over the last five decades

Appalachia experienced a substantial decline in transportation costs.

   In this paper, we use a model of interregional trade together with newly digitized data

of the Appalachian, Interstate, US, and state highway systems in 1960, 1985, and 2010 to

examine the impact of the ADHS on regional development. We quantify the impact of the

fall in trade costs associated on the region and find aggregate gains of $54 billion, or about 0.4

percent of national income, due to the ADHS. Roughly half of the losses are concentrated in

the counties designated by the Appalachian Regional Commission, which suggests substantial

leakage outside of the region directly targeted by the ADHS. We also find that the region’s

share of national income would have been 11 percent lower in the absence of the ADHS.

Thus, in the absence of the ADHS, more economic activity (and people) would have left

the region over the 50 years that we consider. Ultimately, the gains stemming from the

highway-building were not enough to overcome more fundamental changes in Appalachia.

   These findings contribute to an ongoing debate in urban and regional economics regard-

ing the impact of transportation infrastructure. In this paper, we are the first to address

the transportation portions of federal government spending on regional development in the

second half of the twentieth century. Moreover, the results are useful for understanding the

long-run implications of place-based policies in underdeveloped regions in the United States

and provide a starting point for further research evaluating the efficacy of ongoing policies.




                                               33
References

Alder, Simon. “Chinese Roads in India: The Effect of Transport Infrastructure on Economic

  Development.” Working Paper 2017.

Allen, Treb and Arkolakis, Costas. “Trade and Topography of the Spaital Economy.” Quar-

  terly Journal of Economics 129.3 (2014): 1085–1140.

———. “The Welfare Effects of Transportation Infrastructure Improvements.” Working

  Paper, 2016.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Duflo, Esther, and Qian, Nancy. “On the Road: Access to Transportation

  Infrastructure and Economic Growth in China.” Working Paper, 2012.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?”         Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 122.2 (2007): 775–805.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Brandt, Loren, Henderson, J. Vernon, Turner, Matthew A., and

  Zhang, Qinghua. “Highways, Market Access, and Urban Growth in China.” Working

  Paper, 2017.

Black, Dan A., Daniel, Kermit, and Sanders, Seth G. “The Impact of Economic Condi-

  tions on Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust.”

  American Economic Review 92.1 (2002): 27–50.

Black, Dan A. and Sanders, Seth G. Labor Market Performance, Poverty, and Income

  Inequality. Washington, DC: Appalachian Regional Commission, 2004.

———. Standards of Living in Appalachia, 1960-2000. Washington, DC: Population Refer-

  ence Bureau, 2007.



                                           34
Bradshaw, Michael. The Appalachian Regional Commission: Twenty-five years of govern-

  ment policy. University Press of Kentucky, 1992.

Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce. Regional Economic Accounts.

  2015.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Parro, Fernando. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of

  NAFTA.” The Review of Economic Studies 82.1 (2015): 1–44.

Caselli, Francesco and Coleman, Wilbur John. “The U.S. Structural Transformation and

  Regional Convergence: A Reinterpretation.” Journal of Political Economy 109.3 (2001):

  584–616.

Chandra, Amitabh and Thompson, Eric. “Does Public Infrastructure Affect Economic Ac-

  tivity?: Evidence from the Rural Interstate Highway System.” Regional Science and Urban

  Economics 30.4 (2000): 457–490.

Cobb, James C. The Selling of the South: The Southern Crusade for Industrial Development,

  1936-90. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1982.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe and Lafourcade, Miren. “Transport Costs: Measures, Determinants,

  and Regional Policy Implications for France.” Journal of Economic Geography 5.3 (2005):

  319–349.

Dijkstra, Edsger W. “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs.” Numerische

  mathematik 1.1 (1959): 269–271.

Donaldson, Dave. “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infras-

  tructure.” American Economic Review 108.4-5 (2018): 899–934.

Donaldson, Dave and Hornbeck, Richard. “Railroads and American Economic Growth: ‘A


                                           35
  Market Access’ Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131.2 (2016): 799–858.

Duranton, Gilles, Morrow, Peter M., and Turner, Matthew A. “Roads and Trade: Evidence

  from the US.” Review of Economic Studies 81.2 (2014): 681–724.

Duranton, Gilles and Turner, Matthew. “Urban Growth and Transportation.” Review of

  Economic Studies 79.4 (2012): 1407–1440.

Eaton, Jonathan and Kortum, Samuel. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica

  70.5 (2002): 1741–1779.

Eller, Ronald. Miners, Millhands, and Mountaineers: Industrialization of the Appalachian

  South, 1880-1930. University of Tennessee Press, 1982.

———. Uneven Ground: Appalachia since 1945. University Press of Kentucky, 2008.

E.S. Preston & Associates. Appalachian Highway Planning Report : Appalachian Develop-

  ment Highways and Access Roads as Authorized by the Appalachian Regional Development

  Act of 1965. Columbus, OH: E.S. Preston Associates, 1965.

Faber, Benjamin. “Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence from

  China’s National Trunk Highway System.” Review of Economic Studies 81.3 (2014): 1046–

  1070.

Fogel, Robert W. Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric His-

  tory. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1964.

Ghani, Ejaz, Goswami, Arti Grover, and Kerr, William R. “Highway to Success: The

  Impact of the Golden Quadrilateral Project for the Location and Performance of Indian

  Manufacturing.” The Economic Journal 126.591 (2016): 317–357.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Gottlieb, Joshua D. “The Economics of Place-Making Policies.”


                                           36
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39.1 (2008): 155–253.

———. “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the

  United States.” Journal of Economic Literature 47.2 (2009): 983–1028.

Glaeser, Edward L., Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and Kerr, William R. “Entrepreneurship and Urban

  Growth: An Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines.” Review of Economics and

  Statistics 97.2 (2015): 498–520.

Haaga, John. Educational Attainment in Appalachia. Washington, DC: Appalachian Re-

  gional Commission, 2004.

Haines, Michael R. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The united States,

  1790-2000, vol. ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political

  and Social Research [distributor], 2010.

Head, Keith and Mayer, Thierry. “Gravity Equations: Toolkit, Cookbook, and Workhorse.”

  vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics. Elsevier, 2014. 131–195.

Hornbeck, Richard. “Barbed Wire: Property Rights and Agricultural Development.” Quar-

  terly Journal of Economics 125.2 (2010): 767–810.

Isenberg, Nancy. White Trash: The 400-Year Untold History of Class in America. Penguin,

  2016.

Isserman, Andrew and Rephann, Terance. “New Highways as Economic Development Tools:

  An Evaluation using Quasi-Experimental Matching Methods.” Regional Science and Urban

  Economics 24.6 (1994): 723–751.

Jedwab, Rémi, Kerby, Edward, and Moradi, Alexander. “The Permanent Effects of Trans-

  portation Revolutions in Poor Countries: Evidence from Africa.” Review of Economics


                                             37
  and Statistics 98.2 (2016): 268–284.

Jedwab, Rémi and Moradi, Alexander. “History, Path Dependence and Development: Evi-

  dence from Colonial Railroads, Settlers and Cities in Kenya.” Economic Journal 127.603

  (2017): 1467–1494.

Jedwab, Rémi and Storeygard, Adam. “The Average and Heterogeneous Effects of Trans-

  portation Investments: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa 1960-2010.” Working Paper,

  2017.

Kline, Patrick and Moretti, Enrico. “People, Places, and Public Policy: Some Simple Wel-

  fare Economics of Local Economic Development Policies.” Annual Review of Economics

  6.August (2014): 629–662.

Leunig, Tim. “Social Savings.” Journal of Economic Surveys 24.5 (2010): 775–800.

Michaels, Guy. “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the Interstate

  Highway System.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90.4 (2008): 683–701.

Palmer, Curtis A., Oman, Charles L., Park, Andy J., and Luppens, James A. “US Geological

  Survey Coal Quality (COALQUAL) Database Version 3.0.” Tech. rep., US Geological

  Survey, 2015.

Pollard, Kelvin M. Appalachia at the Millennium: An Overview of Results from Census

  2000. Population Reference Bureau Washington, DC, 2003.

President’s Appalachian Regional Commission. Appalachia: A Report by the Presidents

  Appalachian Regional Commission. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,

  1964.

Redding, Stephen J. “Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare.” Journal of International


                                           38
  Economics 101: 148–167.

Storeygard, Adam. “Farther on Down the Road: Transport Costs, Trade and Urban Growth

  in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Review of Economic Studies 83.3 (2016): 1263–1295.

Valentinyi, Akos and Herrendorf, Berthold. “Measuring Factor Income Shares at the Sectoral

  Level.” Review of Economic Dynamics 11.4 (2008): 820–835.

Vance, J.D. Hillbilly Elegy: A Memoir of a Family and Culture in Crisis. Harper, 2016.

Widener, Ralph. “Appalachian Development after 25 Years: An Assessment.” Economic

  Development Quarterly 4.4 (1990): 291–312.

Ziliak, James P. Appalachian Legacy: Economic Opportunity after the War on Poverty.

  Brookings Institution Press, 2012.




                                           39
               Figure 1: Change in Market Access in US Counties, 1960-2010




                           A. Actual Change in Market Access, 1960-2010




                  B. Counterfactual Change in Market Access without ADHS, 2010

Notes: Panel A shows the difference between the log of market access in 2010 and 1960 for all US

counties. Panel B shows the difference between the log of actual and counterfactual market access

in the absence of the ADHS in 2010 for all US counties.

                                               40
  Figure 2: Actual and Counterfactual Share of Income in ARC and Non-ARC Counties
                                                         0.09
       percent income in ARC relative to rest of country
                                     0.08




                                                                                                  actual, w/ ADHS

                                                                       counterfactual, w/o ADHS
  0.06             0.07




                                                                1960                         1985                   2010



Notes: The figure shows the actual (solid line) and counterfactual (dashed line) share of income in

ARC and non-ARC counties between 1960 and 2010.




                                                                                           41
                                            Figure 3: Counterfactual Results with Alternative Parameter Values
                       125
   income loss in 2010 from removing ADHS
                                   100




                                                                                                                 α = 0.05
                           75




                                                                                                                 α = 0.10
                 50




                                                                                                                 α = 0.15

                                                                                                                 α = 0.19
       25              0




                                            2       4        6       8       10       12     14      16      18
                                                                            theta (θ)



Notes: The figure shows counterfactual results using alternative values of α and θ the value of γ

fixed at 0.60.




                                                                           42
                     Table 1: Relationship between Market Access and Income
                                                              Ordinary Least Squares                      IV
                                              (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)
          Panel A: ordinary least squares and second stage instrumental variables
          dependent variable is log of income
          log(market access)                  1.067  1.298   1.521   1.375   1.021             1.049     0.656
                                            (0.064) (0.153) (0.165) (0.160) (0.173)           (0.170)   (0.314)

          Panel B: first stage instrumental variables
          dependent variable is log of market access
                 \
          log(travel time)                                                                               -1.699
                                                                                                        (0.174)
          First Stage F -statistic                                                                        95.73

          Panel C: counterfactuals losses from removing the ADHS in 2010
          counterfactual loss (in billions) 60.7  74.4    87.8  79.0      58.0                 59.7      36.8
                                            (3.8) (9.1)  (10.0) (9.6)    (10.2)               (10.0)    (18.0)
          Included control variables (interacted with year effects in column 3 through 6):
           year fixed effects                  yes       yes         yes      yes       yes    yes       yes
           state-year fixed effects             no       yes         yes      yes       yes    yes       yes
           polynomial in lat. and long.         no        no         yes      yes       yes    yes       yes
           highway mileage                      no        no         no       yes       yes    yes       yes
           coal, sectoral employment            no        no         no        no       yes    yes       yes
           standard metropolitan area           no        no         no        no        no    yes       yes


Notes: The table shows the results from estimating equation (4) in first differences with the log

of income as the dependent variable. Panel A presents the estimated coefficient on market access.

Column 1 includes year fixed effects and column 2 includes state-year fixed effects. Column 3 adds

controls polynomials in latitude and longitude and the log of county area (interacted with year fixed

effects). Column 4 adds controls for the mileage of the Interstate Highway System, Appalachian

Development Highway System, and other highways, as well as distance to the nearest major port,

and railroad mileage in 1911 and 2010 (interacted with year fixed effects). Column 5 adds coal

reserves and historical employment by sector (interacted with year fixed effects); column 6 adds

an indicator for the Standard Metropolitan Area (interacted with year fixed effects). Column

7 gives the second-stage coefficient on market access using instrumental variables and including

all controls. Panel B presents the first stage coefficient and first stage F -statistic from using

instrumental variables. Panel C presents the counterfactuals losses in income from applying the

estimated coefficient in Panel A to the change in market access from removing the ADHS shown

in Figure ??. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the state-level. The number

of sample counties in each year is 3,080.



                                                              43
             Table 2: Counterfactuals Losses from Removing the ADHS in 2010
                                                                                        holding
                                          holding Ū fixed                             N̄ fixed
                   income loss     percent           population loss   percent          percent
                    in billions    of total             in millions    of total     utility decline
                        (1)          (2)                    (3)          (4)              (5)
1. All Counties       53.66          0.40                 1.64          0.53             0.13

2. ARC                21.83          0.16                 0.74          0.24
3. Non-ARC            31.83          0.24                 0.90          0.29

Notes: This figure shows counterfactual income losses in 2010 from removing the ADHS for all

counties (row 1) and separately for ARC (row 2) and non-ARC (row 3) counties. Column 1 gives

the income loss (in billions) in 2015 dollars and column 2 gives the income loss as a share of US

total income, holding utility fixed; column 3 gives the population loss (in millions) and column 4

gives the population loss as a share of US population, holding utility fixed. Column 5 gives the

percent decline in utility holding population fixed.




                                                 44
  Table 3: Counterfactuals Losses from Replacing the ADHS with Alternative Highways
                                                         income loss in 2010:
                                                      2015 dollars     percent
                                                       in billions   of US total
                                                           (1)           (2)
                        Remove
                        1. ADHS                          53.66          0.40

                        Replace with
                        2. PARC                          25.20          0.19
                        3. Delta Regional Authority      25.58          0.19
                        4. I-9                           25.92          0.19
                        5. I-11                          26.03          0.19
                        6. I-69                          15.13          0.11

Notes: This figure shows counterfactual income losses in 2010 from removing the ADHS (row 1)

and replacing the ADHS with PARC (row 2), Delta Regional Authority highways (row 3), and I-9

(row 4), I-11 (row 5), and I-69 (row 6). Column 1 gives the income loss in 2010 in 2015 dollars and

column 2 gives the income loss as a share of US total income.




                                                45
    text

A    Online Appendix for “National Policy for Regional Development”




                                      1
          Table A1: Summary Statistics for Income, Population, and Market Access
                                                    All                      ARC
                                                  Counties                  Counties
                                                    (1)                       (2)

         A. 1960
         labor income (in millions)                 862.5                     516.6
                                                  (3,872.3)                 (1,531.3)
         population (in thousands)                  58.2                       44.9
                                                   (205.0)                    (97.7)
         market access                            84,224.2                 130,743.3
                                                 (70,263.0)                (57,430.6)

         B. 1985
         labor income (in millions)                2,481.6                   1,334.8
                                                  (9,317.0)                 (2,975.5)
         population (in thousands)                   76.7                      51.4
                                                   (252.0)                    (91.0)
         market access                            292,820.3                 448,457.9
                                                 (191,166.5)               (132,519.9)

         C. 2010
         labor income (in millions)                4,362.8                   2,201.5
                                                  (15,267.4)                (4,430.0)
         population (in thousands)                   99.8                      60.7
                                                   (316.1)                    (98.6)
         market access                            378,367.8                 564,713.0
                                                 (248,617.4)               (159,765.5)

Notes: The table shows mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) for income, population,

market access in 1960, 1985, and 2010 for all sample counties in column 1)and counties in the

Appalachian Regional Commission in column 2. The number of sample counties in each year is

3,080.




                                             2
               Table A2: The Relationship Between Market Access and Income
                                     (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)

Panel A: ordinary least squares and second stage instrumental variables
dependent variable is log of income, independent variable is log of market access
market access                      1.051     1.453     1.702       1.645     1.290      1.306       0.832
                                  (0.059) (0.183) (0.214) (0.176) (0.187)              (0.185)     (0.279)

Panel B: first stage instrumental variables
dependent variable is log of market access, independent variable is log of predicted travel time
   \
travel time                                                                                         -1.839
                                                                                                   (0.186)
First Stage F -stat                                                                                 98.04

Panel C: counterfactuals losses from removing the ADHS in 2010
counterfactual loss (in billions) 59.7   83.7   98.9   95.3     73.9                     74.8       59.5
                                  (3.5) (11.1) (13.1) (10.7)   (11.2)                   (11.1)     (20.8)

Notes: The table shows the results from estimating equation (4) using fixed effects with the log

of income as the dependent variable. Panel A presents the estimated coefficient on market access.

Column 1 includes year fixed effects and column 2 includes state-year fixed effects. Column 3 adds

controls polynomials in latitude and longitude and the log of county area (interacted with year

fixed effects). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. Column 4 adds

controls for the mileage of the Interstate Highway System, Appalachian Development Highway

System, and other highways, as well as distance to the nearest major port, and railroad mileage

in 1911 and 2010 (interacted with year fixed effects). Column 5 adds coal reserves and historical

employment by sector (interacted with year fixed effects); column 6 adds an indicator for the

Standard Metropolitan Area (interacted with year fixed effects). Column 7 gives the second-

stage coefficient on market access using instrumental variables and including all controls. Panel

B presents the first stage coefficient and first stage F -statistic from using instrumental variables.

Panel C presents the counterfactuals losses in income from applying the estimated coefficient in

Panel A to the change in market access from removing the ADHS shown in Figure ??. Standard

errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the state-level. The number of sample counties used

is 3,080.


                                                     3
  Table A3: Relationship between Market Access and Income or Employment by Region
                                                                 Employment by Sector
                              Income         Mfg.       Trade      Trans.    Con.        Fin.      Gov.
                                (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)
dependent variable is log of income or employment by sector
log(market access)                0.675       1.251      1.538       1.606     1.433      1.534    1.485
                                (0.315)      (0.596)   (0.365)     (0.534)   (0.410)    (0.605)   (0.530)
log(market access) × ARC         -0.032       -0.093    -0.019      -0.001    -0.009     -0.029    0.010
                                (0.040)      (0.043)   (0.030)     (0.049)   (0.044)    (0.046)   (0.035)

Notes: The table shows the results from estimating equation (4) using instrumental variables with

the log of income (column 1) or employment by the sector manufacturing (column 2), wholesale

and retail trade (column 3), transportation (column 4), construction (column 5), finance and re-

lated industries (column 6), and government (column 7) as the outcome variable. Standard errors

reported in parentheses are clustered at the state-level. The number of sample counties in each

year is 3,080.




                                                    4
       Figure A1: Appalachian Regional Commission Program Area and Spending




                     A. Program Area                      B. Aggregate Spending

Notes: Panel A shows the counties included in the Appalachian Regional Commission. Panel B

shows aggregate spending by the Appalachian Regional Commission in 2015 dollars separately by

the highway (unshaded) and non-highway (shaded) components from 1965 to 2010.




                                             5
                      Figure A2: US Highways in 1960, 1985, and 2010




                                             A. 1960




                                             B. 1985




                                             C. 2010

Notes: The figure shows growth of the highway network between 1960 and 2010. In each panel the

solid black lines show progress on the Interstate Highway System in a given year and the gray lines

show the other portions of the highway network.6
                              Figure A3: Appalachian Development Highway System in 1985 and 2010
7




                                 A. 1985                                                         B. 2010

    Notes: The figure shows the Appalachian Development Highway System in 1985 and 2010. In each panel the solid black lines highlight

    the ADHS and gray lines show the remaining portions of the network.
                                               Figure A4: Placebo for Instrumental Variables Approach
                     9




                                                                                                    9
                     6




                                                                                                    6
    % change in population, 1910-1930




                                                                                   % change in population, 1910-1930
                               3




                                                                                                              3
                   0




                                                                                                  0
        -3




                                                                                       -3
                     -6




                                                                                                    -6
                     -9




                                                                                                    -9




                                        -10    -5        0          5     10                                           -10    -5         0         5     10
                                              % change in IV, 1960-1985                                                      % change in IV, 1985-2010




Notes: This figure shows the relationship between population growth from 1910 to 1930 and the

change in instrumental variable in equation (5) from 1960 to 1985 in the left panel and from 1985

to 2010 in the right panel. The estimated slope coefficients for the relationship are 0.023 (s.e. =

0.023) for the left panel and -0.062 (s.e. = 0.051), respectively, in the left and right panels.




                                                                               8
                      Figure A5: US Highways in 1960, 1985, and 2010




                    A. PARC                                 B. Delta Regional Authority




                     C. I-9                                           D. I-11




                                             E. I-69

Notes: The figure shows the location of alternative highway-building proposals that we consider as

counterfactuals in the main text.




                                                9
